+++
title = "Neanderthal Man In"
full_title = "Neanderthal Man In Search of Lost Genomes"
date = "2014-04-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/04/07/neanderthal-man-in-search-of-lost-genomes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/04/07/neanderthal-man-in-search-of-lost-genomes/).

Neanderthal Man: In Search of Lost Genomes

Svante Pääbo has a book out, Neanderthal Man, in which he recounts his
adventures sequencing ancient DNA. He has had three big successes: the
first successful sequencing of Neanderthal mtDNA in 1997, the first
sequencing of the Neanderthal nuclear genome, and later the first
Denisovan genome.

Ancient DNA is usually very degraded: short DNA sequences mixed with
bacterial DNA, and often contaminated by modern human DNA. Pääbo and
his team made major contributions in sample preparation and sequencing
methodology. The interpretation of that data has been performed by
people like David Reich, Nick Patterson, and Monty Slatkin – and a good
thing too, because Pääbo is no theorist. At each stage of his work, he
had certain expectations about the results, and those expectations were
nearly always wrong. He thought any Neanderthal genetic contribution to
modern humans was very unlikely – but it’s there. To be fair, that was
the case for many other people working in human genetics. I’ve never
really understood why.

Or later, after a few-percent Neanderthal admixture had been shown to
exist in people outside of sub-Saharan Africa, he at first thought that
it probably had no functional consequences. He believed that the
correct null hypothesis was that a genetic change would have no
consequences whatever: but that’s silly. The question wasn’t whether
one particular Neanderthal allele was advantageous, but whether *any* of
them were. In order for his null model to be correct, Neanderthals
would had to be inferior indeed, not better adapted to their home
territories in any way. Although again, to be fair, there are whole
branches of science in which the favorite null model is *always* wrong.

One interesting side point: by looking at the entrails of the online
supplement to the big Neanderthal paper in May 2010, it was possible to
see that there was something odd about Melanesians: they were
genetically more distant from Africans than other Eurasians. Which
implied another dose of archaic ancestry. Judging from this book (which
may not have the complete story) the people working that problem didn’t
notice that anomaly, but instead compared against the just-sequenced
Denisovan genome and noticed that Melanesians were significantly closer
to Denisovans than other Eurasians.

A good experimentalist can (sometimes) get to some reasonable
approximation of the truth even if he’s short on theory. Worth
remembering, particularly in the human sciences, where emotions make
theory gang aft a-gley.



