+++
title = "Foreign Drivers"
full_title = "Foreign Drivers"
date = "2012-08-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/15/foreign-drivers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/15/foreign-drivers/).

Foreign Drivers

Generally, a given nuclear allele has a 50% chance of showing up in an
offspring. But sometimes this is not the case – some cut in line, and
having a \>50% of transmission. Such an allele tends to increase, even
if it gives no advantage to the organism carrying it. In some case such
an allele can become common, or even go to fixation (100% frequency)
while reducing fitness.

The best-known example is the t-allele in mice. It is transmitted well
over 50% of the time, but never goes to fixation, because male mice
with two copies are sterile.

Sometimes driving genes involve the centromere, a region at the pinched
waist of each chromosome that plays an important role in directing
chromosomal movement in meiosis. The cheating opportunity results from
the fact that there are four cells produced in female meiosis – the egg
and three polar bodies that go nowhere. A change in the centromere that
increased its chance of ending up in the egg, rather than the polar
body, would give it a big transmission advantage. The rapid rate of
adaptive evolution seen in centromeres makes many suspect that
centromeric drive occurs fairly often.

There are probably associated costs in some cases. Meiosis might be
messed up to an extent in males, or a deleterious gene variant might
exist near the driving centromere and be carried along with it. Over
time, you would expect other genes to change in ways that minimized
those costs.

A driving centromere that hadn’t been around long would show the usual
signs of recent selection and might still be causing noticeable
trouble. One that been fixed for a long time would be hard to detect,
and probably wouldn’t cause much trouble.

This has all been an introduction – the question is, what would happen
if we admixed with a long-isolated group of archaic humans that had
their own driving genes? We were similar enough that such genes would
probably have succeeded on an AMH genetic background. If current
thinking is correct, and there were several such admixture events in the
last 50k years or so ( Neanderthals, Denisovans, and the unknown, highly
divergent group in Africa (Mangani !) ), such sweeps might be easy to
see, and negative effects might also still exist and be detectable – the
Revenge of the Neanderthals.

Partly I wonder about this because of the anomalously low success rate
of human fertilization. It’s very unusual and nobody yet has an any
explanation. Partly, also, because there is a version of 6.5 megabyte
stretch across the centromere of the X-chromosome that is common in
Africans and way more divergent than than any other large chunk of the
human genome. There have also been claims of sweeps in the centromeric
regions on several chromosomes in Eurasians.

If this happened to be true, it would also imply that gene flow between
the two groups question would have had to have been extremely low
\[zero, most likely\] for a long long time, since even a wee bit would
be enough to transmit something like this, whose success probably would
not depend much on local factors like climate or ecology.

