+++
title = "Dizzy with Success"
full_title = "Dizzy with Success"
date = "2012-08-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/05/dizzy-with-success/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/05/dizzy-with-success/).

Dizzy with Success

In the *Cities in Flight* science fiction novels, the US develops the
spindizzy, a faster-than-light drive that relies upon an obscure (and,
unfortunately, nonexistent) connection between electromagnetic and
gravitational forces. The drive had the nice property of working more
and more efficiently for larger masses, which led to it eventually being
applied to whole cities: New York, zooming through the Galaxy at warp 9.

As the story goes, the spindizzy is developed in the US in 2018, and
some people (without government permission) use it to leave an
increasingly-totalitarian society and settle habitable planets in the
stars around Sol. Shortly thereafter, a totalitarian government takes
over the entire Earth (The Bureaucratic State) and immediately bans
spindizzies, because they make escape all too easy.

In 2375, the spindizzy was independently rediscovered on Earth. This
must have happened because the ARM cops did a bad job. You can make
knowledge so forbidden that fewer and fewer censors actually understand
what they’re trying to suppress – which must eventually lead to failure.

In much the same way, we have arrived at the point where the typical
young informaticist working in human genetics does not even know that
there are between-group intelligence differences that his results might
explain. So he publishes – and nobody stops him, because even the
referees don’t know. Marcus Feldman and his flying squads would never
have made such a mistake.

I used to think that knowing more was the only path to progress, but
that ain’t necessarily so. When ignorance is Blish, ’tis folly to be
wise.

