+++
title = "Old and New Deleterious"
full_title = "Old and New Deleterious Mutations"
date = "2012-08-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/26/old-and-new-deleterious-mutations/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/26/old-and-new-deleterious-mutations/).

Old and New Deleterious Mutations

Here is another foray into simple quantitative analysis. My record with
quick and dirty models like this is like my experience doing algebra on
the blackboard in front of a class: miserable. I will proof this one and
I certainly hope that Anonymous is still hanging around to put things
right.

The number of deleterious dominant mutations depends on conditions (e.g.
paternal age) in recent generations, more so the more deleterious the
mutation is. If g is the mean age of fathers then, given the model we
have been discussing, there are 2g–20 mutations from the father each
generation. If the mutations are neutral or recessive or even mildly
deleterious they just accumulate for a long time.

Now let us think about deleterious dominant mutations that confer a
selective disadvantage s per generation. If u is the fraction of all
mutations that have selective disadvantage s, then in the most recent
generation the number of this class of mutations is (2g–20)(u), from the
last generation it is(2g–20)(1-s)(u), from the one previous to that it
is (2g–20)(1-s)^2(u), and so on. The ultimate equilibrium frequency is
u(2g–20)/s.

For example consider mutations with selective disadvantage s=0.01. The
equilibrium frequency of this is given by this formula, and only 4%
derive from the most recent 4 generations.

Now consider more serious mutations, those with selective disadvantage
of s=0.10. In this case the last 4 generations contribute 40% of the
total number, i.e. about ten times as many. For the even more bad class
in which s=0.20 the recent (4 generation) fraction is a whopping 60%.

This is, I believe, the basis of Greg’s remarks that for seriously bad
mutations only the mating system, i.e. paternal age, in the last few
hundred years matters while for neutral and recessive mutations the
numbers depend on a much longer history.

