+++
title = "Paternal Age"
full_title = "Paternal Age"
date = "2012-08-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/22/paternal-age/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/22/paternal-age/).

Paternal Age

Decode Genetics has a new report out in Nature that shows how mutations
increase with age, by sequencing family trios. They found that women
contribute about 15 de novo mutations, independent of age.

Men contribute more (55 on average) , and the number increases rapidly
with age. They found that the average 20-year old father passed on 25
mutations, while the average 40-year old passed on 65, an increase of
about two mutations per year of paternal age.

The researchers talked about the problems caused by these de novo
mutations – things like schizophrenia and autism. We already knew that
such risks increased with paternal age, but this work quantifies the
mutations responsible.

Stefánsson opines that the higher mutation rate with older fathers is
not that worrisome, since the absolute risk for schizophrenia and/or
autism is still small (\~2%) and since mutations are our friends: “You
could argue what is bad for the next generation is good for the future
of our species. ”

Well, not for the first time, Kari Stefánsson is wrong. If mutations
with large effects are more common with increased paternal age,
mutations with small effects must also be more common. Those
small-effect mutations are removed slowly by natural selection, and so
they accumulate with time. This eventually results in a population in
which *everyone* has a higher genetic load, not just a few unfortunate
kids out of each generation.

What this means is that modest differences in social structure,
differences that cause changes in the average paternal age, are likely
to have major effects on the mutation rate. If those differences are
maintained over time, say for a few thousand years, you would expect to
see significantly different levels of mutational load in different
populations. Genetic estimates of split times and such would also be
wrong, but that’s a nit.

What do I mean by a modest difference? Assume that population A has an
average paternal age of 25: then the average number of new mutations per
generation is 50. Assume that population B has an average paternal age
of 30: then the average number of new mutations per generation is 60, a
20% increase. As Kondrashov put it in his commentary, “It seems that
multifactorial disorders that result from impaired brain function, such
as autism, schizophrenia, dyslexia and reduced intelligence, are  
particularly susceptible to the paternal-age effect. This is consistent
with the fact that more genes are expressed in the brain than in any
other organ, meaning that the fraction of new  
mutations that will affect its functions is the highest. ”

So, what is the likely consequence of a higher paternal age?
Population B will eventually be significantly dumber and crazier than
population A.

I would guess that paternal age was not too high for most
hunter-gatherers. It should have been pretty low in Neanderthals, since
they don’t seem to have lived to be very old, probably as a consequence
of their high-risk hunting strategy. I would also guess that it can
sometimes be considerably higher in post-Neolithic societies with
greater inequality of wealth, which often leads to unequal reproduction.
I would guess that the average paternal age is generally higher in
strongly polygamous societies. But at this point I don’t have the
numbers. I think we can get some of them fairly soon.

Generally, analysts have treated the human mutation rate as if it were a
fundamental, unchanging physical quantity, something like the
gravitational constant. It appears that this can only be the case if
average paternal age never varies much. Since there may well be other
factors that can affect the human mutation rater, even that might not be
enough.

