+++
title = "AIDS follies"
full_title = "AIDS follies"
date = "2020-05-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/05/24/aids-follies/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/05/24/aids-follies/).

AIDS follies

Was thinking about similarities and differences between the reaction to
AIDS and to SARS-2. AIDS hit much more slowly, of course. It was way
more dangerous per customer, but it was obvious early on that it was
only spreading in a small fraction of the population.

The health authorities such as the CDC didn’t believe in quarantine
then, either, and they prevailed. They were
[wrong](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/09/28/forty-days/), of
course. They spent a lot of effort trying to convince the public that
HIV was a significant threat to straight men and women: that was a lie.
Presumably it was motivated by the probably-correct notion that people
wouldn’t give a shit unless they were personally threatened, or possibly
just because. Wiki is still doing its part to further nonsense on this
topic: ”Announcements by various celebrities that they had contracted
HIV (including actor[Rock
Hudson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rock_Hudson "Rock Hudson"),
basketball star[Magic
Johnson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_Johnson "Magic Johnson"),
tennis player[Arthur
Ashe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Ashe "Arthur Ashe")and
singer[Freddie
Mercury](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freddie_Mercury "Freddie Mercury"))
were significant in arousing media attention and making the general
public aware of the dangers of the disease to people of all sexual
orientations.” Arthur Ashe got a bad transfusion: as for the others,
what do you think?

Although it really did manage to spread in the general population in
Sub-Saharan Africa – but not much elsewhere.

I don’t remember if the CDC bought into this particular bit of madness,
but some local health types argued that gay bathhouses should be kept
open because it allowed efficient distribution of educational leaflets,
which presumably had an effect like saltpetre.

It took time for people to realize what was causing the disease: nobody
had much experience with retroviral infections, or with
immunosuppression caused by a contagious disease. Molecular biology was
much less advanced than it is today.

For a while, some suspected that it might be an effect of some newly
popular drug used by gay men – this never seemed likely to me, but in
the first few months, when information was scarce, the idea wasn’t
crazy. Peter Duesberg, noted virologist, bought into that and never let
go – but then, he *was* crazy. Still is.

Crazy, because after a while there were transfusion cases, which clearly
showed that AIDS was caused by a communicable agent. Some famous
people died that way, like Isaac Asimov and Arthur Ashe. These cases
were made more likely by blood banks that refused to ‘discriminate’
against homosexual donors – I understand they all went bankrupt after
being sued into oblivion, but the damage was already done. Political
correctness is triple-distilled foolishness. There oughta be a law.

The Duesberg story was a semi-interesting example of people being
confused by credentials – mostly people that already wanted to be
confused. I remember a friend asking why he should believe me, rather
than a a tenured expert that was member of the National Academy of
Sciences: answer, because of those transfusion cases, cases in
hemophiliacs, contact tracing, etc. Simple, clear evidence. As I recall,
my arguments didn’t have much effect. Now when the triple therapies
showed up and worked, that had an effect. It almost cured the disease,
and that did change people’s minds.

Were there ‘conspiracy theories’? Sure: but comical ones, that involved
the CIA having vast malice (probably not) and superhuman competence ( it
is to laugh !) used to invent a new supervirus aimed at killing off
various undesirables. I say comical, but not sure they can compete with
Bill Gates’ chunky-style COVID-19 vaccine, now with microchips !



































