+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-08-03"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/08/03/mahaprayoga-s-with-namaka/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/08/03/mahaprayoga-s-with-namaka/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## mahAprayoga-s with rudra-namakaM

![Picture Credit: The book Mahabhairavar in Tamil published by
Thiruvavaduthurai
Adheenam](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/bhairava-alternate.jpg?w=708)

These are some of the prayoga-s involving the namaka which were popular
in Andhra desha. They must be popular or known in other places too. Each
anuvAka has its prayoga details while for some anuvAka-s individual
mantra-s have their own. A selected few are noted here.

prayoga involving the fifth and sixth anuvAka-s:

Reciting these anuvAka-s one lakh times every month ensures that the
rAjan for which the rite is being done, is always victorious – jaya
prayoga.

Recite these anuvAka-s daily and perform homa with white lotus for every
namaH for about a month. Arrange brAhmaNa bhojana for 11 in
dakShiNAmUrti sannidhi for rAjyAshrI vardhana.

Near every namaskAra while uttering “parasenA staMbhanaM karomi svAhA”
perform homa with laxa arka samit-s for shatru senA stambhana.

In the middle of a river, with agni that is brought by a shUdra, give
laxa oblations of Deer, Pig and other animal meat separately i.e. one
lakh oblations with each kind of meat. This is to be followed up by a
laxa ApUpa homa all the while uttering “para rAShTra prajA shoShaNaM
karomi svAhA” to make people of an enemy nation/rAjya suffer.

Another detailed prayoga with the same mantra-s which involves a homa,
abhiSheka to mahAdeva, pradakShiNa, shamI patra arpaNa and eating of
abhimantrita flour piNDa-s, is said to grant a putra who is verily like
rudra himself even for those aged 48. Such a son would be shivaMkara and
shiva bhakta and endowed with shulA rekha-s on his palms.

With the 13th, 14th and 15th mantra-s of the first anuvAka:

When a great war is impending, one is to collect taila enough for 11,000
lamps and place it in one container. AvAhana of rudra is to be performed
into this great container filled with oil along with dikpAla AvAhana and
perform ArAdhana. The siddha mantrin then is to touch the taila and
utter the mantra-s for 8000 times daily for a period of 7 days. When the
enemy army is near, after lighting 11,000 lamps with this siddha taila
prepared earlier the senApati is to proceed along with the sena, with
the dIpa-s (carried on their heads?). The enemy will flee seeing the
jvAla-s from these dIpa-s.

brAhmaNa-s who achieved mantra siddhi with the above three mantra-s,
should enter the enemy city disguised as siddha-s(presumably in the
disguise of a shaiva siddha). Now the brAhmaNa-s are to acquire objects
which belong to the enemy king and utter the above mantra-s touching and
seeing these vastu-s. They should utter “abhichArostu” towards the end
of these mantra-s while uttering them. Or alternately the siddha mantrin
is to utter the mantra-s on a kIla for a thousand times and bury it at
the cross roads, a devAlaya, a devodyAna or near the compound wall (of
the enemy city). Such an enemy city will get destroyed due to various
diseases within a span of three years due to influence of rudra.

With the first mantra of the dashama anuvAka:

After attaining siddhi with this mantra, in the middle of the grAma or
nagara, establish agni and give 10,000 oblations with powdered tila
mixed with goghR^itaM. This is to be followed up by the offering of bali
in ashvattha patra-s. Mantra should be uttered 8000 times before the
homa and another 8000 after the homa. By doing this, it is said that
rudra will appear before the siddha mantrin along with bhUta-s in the
form of the great bhairava. However, if the mantrin is overcome by fear
on seeing rudra-bhairava he will turn mad/unmatta but if he stays
fearless, he attains great siddhi/mahAsiddhi. Remembering the form of
such mahAbhairava eradicates disasters/Apada-shamana. The dhyAna for
this mantra is:

AgulphAsita ka\~nchuko DamarukAshliShTo lasatkuntala

shUlI kuNDalita shravAH satilako maMdaM kvaNannUpuraH

shrImannirmala danta pa\~nkti kiraNaH shevAtAyamAnano

devo bhairava veShabhUShita vaspuH dhyeyo mR^iDAnI patiH

He is wearing a long black gown extending upto the ankles and is
carrying a Damaruka. His hair/jaTA is touching the Damaruka (as the
Damaruka is being sounded). His other hand is adorned with a shUla, his
forehead with a tilaka and ears with kuNDala-s. His anklets are making a
slight sound as he walks. His teeth are clear, white and emitting a
bright light/rays. pArvatI pati /mR^iDAnI pati is to be meditated in
this endearing bhairava form. Not exact but an approximate form can be
seen towards the end of the post.

With the 12th mantra of dashama anuvAka:

When there is maraNa bhaya due to a rAjan to the pradhAna
puruSha/yajamAna, one is to perform this mantra japa for one lakh.
Alternately, make a li\~Nga using mud acquired from a termite hill and
perform abhiSheka to the same till it dissolves in the water. Now this
dissolved mud is to be collected and mixed in a river and establish agni
on the river bank to offer 10,000 oblations of shuddha taNDula mixed
with goghR^itaM. This prakriya eradicates maraNa bhaya due to rAjan.

If a King is facing daiva-upadrava (either due to abhichAra or apachAra)
a siddha mantrin intent on saving the rAjan is to make 8000 oblations
with this mantra in the sannidhi of mahAshAsta or in rudra sannidhi
according to revised publication. A bali with kukkuTa mAMsa\*\* is to be
offered after the homa. The rAjan is to reward the siddha mantrin in a
grand manner.

On a kR^iShNa chaturdashi night in the shmashAna, offering bali of
cooked rice mixed with cat meat to rAkShasa-s, while uttering
“rAkShasebhyo balimupahArAmi” is said to remove fear due to rAkShasa-s.

Another prayoga associated with the ninth anuvAka:

manojava and adR^ishya siddhi: One who seeks manojava (ability to travel
to any place of interest – perhaps with unusual ease & speed), should
purify himself by performing 30 kR^ichChra-s. By surviving only on
charu, vegetables and roots as the only food he should constantly
perform the japa for 18 days. During this time he should not
intentionally/knowingly sleep. If slept, sAdhaka should perform snAna
(jala snAna accompanied by appropriate mantra-s) as prAyashchitta. After
eighteen days, for mantra-vashya (mantra siddhi is probably meant), five
svarNa-s (coins perhaps) should be given to the guru. After this either
in guru sannidhi or rudra sannidhi, 50,000 japa is to be performed. It
is said that this will make umAsahita-rudra/umAmaheshvara appear before
the sAdhaka, by whose anugraha the siddhi of manojava is attained. Now
the siddha can travel to any place he wishes, by remembering his guru
and by performing 8x japa of the mantra.

For adR^ishya siddhi, purashcharaNa is to be performed as above. sAdhaka
should mix rakta chandana with milk from kapila cow and place this
mixture in an ashvattha patra. Japa of 8000 is to be performed by
touching this mixture. Smearing this mixture onto the body and touching
the deva (a shiva/rudra li\~Nga) and remembering the mantra with
prANAyAma & dhAraNa is said to make the sAdhaka adR^ishya (invisible).

rAja-puruSha-s who attained siddhi with the mantra-s in this anuvAka,
should along with their brAhmaNa helpers enter the shatru-rAjya (enemy
kingdom). Under disguise they are to enter the water bodies, chaitya-s,
devAlaya-s, rAja-sabha, rAja-dvAra and perform abhimantraNa of black
colored metal kIla-s for one lakh and hide them. Likewise, bhasma on
which the mantra is uttered should be sprinkled in water bodies. Doing
this it is said destroys teh enemy kingdom in three years. Also, by
standing in the water bodies in the shatru rAjya, till the water is upto
the neck, facing the sun, 800 japa is to be done for a number of days.
During the japa, the siddha mantrin should be imagining the hAlAhala
from nIlakaNTha mahArudra as entering the water body. The result of this
being that those who drink from these water bodies will be destroyed as
if effected by viSha.++

For the mantra 11.11 namo rudrebhyo ye pR^ithivyAM…

The procedure given by shrI chadalavADa sundara rAma shAstrin: The one
who attained siddhi in this mantra should on an amAvAsya perform 8000
homa in svAgni with ghee from a black cow. The remaining should be
smeared onto the hair (of the performer) and perform another 800
oblations (?). rudrArchana is to be done after this as per atharva
shiraH prokta vidhAna. Doing so is said will make a kR^itya appear with
red colored body, hair and eyes. As soon as it appears, it should be
satisfied by offering four kuMbha-s of goat blood. Not offering the
blood is said to destroy both the performer and the yajamAna instantly.
If satisfied with the mentioned offering the kR^itya will grant abhIShTa
siddhi. Performing 10,000 homa with ghee is said, grants kAlaGYAna.

\*\* Even in the shaivAgamokta shAstA pratiShThA vidhi, kukkuTa and
meSha mAmsa-s are utilized.

++ This should be seen as the reverse of what is normally understood by
the term viSha-mantravAda. An aspect less known, and there are one or
two more places where poisoning someone through means of mantra is
discussed. Alternatively one could just mix viSha in the water body.
Perhaps this procedure is suggested so that one does not get caught
possessing viSha in an enemy kingdom, which could get them executed
instantly.

![Picture Credit: The book Mahabhairavar in Tamil published by
Thiruvavaduthurai
Adheenam](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/image.png?w=452)

This entry was posted on August 3, 2021 at 4:12 pm and is filed under
[shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/). You can
follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/08/03/mahaprayoga-s-with-namaka/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/08/03/mahaprayoga-s-with-namaka/trackback/)
from your own site.

