+++
title = "Neurodiversity"
full_title = "Neurodiversity"
date = "2017-02-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/02/22/neurodiversity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/02/22/neurodiversity/).

Neurodiversity

There is a range of psyches that has been favored by natural selection,
maybe somewhat different in different parts of the world. Some people
are outside that set: their minds are different, different in ways that
were never favored by Darwinian selection\*. Now some traits we don’t
like are probably in the set favored by natural selection: some kinds of
unpleasantness probably work, at least at low frequencies. Sociopaths
might fall in this category. There certainly are species with adaptive
genetic behavioral variation – alternate male morphs, for example.

Moreover, standard psyches have their limitations. There are tasks that
normal humans are bad at – think of optical illusions, or the Monte Hall
problem. Or making sense.

Then there are special cases where people with psyches that clearly are
out of whack are particularly good at some task, like bipolar poets.

Does this mean that we should say that having a Darwinian mental disease
is hunky-dory? Should we refrain from trying to develop treatments or
cures? Should we consider all possible mental states equally ‘valid’ (
whatever that means) ?

Of course not: only a loon would believe that. Being a normal human
being isn’t a panacea, but adding gobs of genetic noise (or
environmental insults like prenatal rubella or cytomegalovirus) isn’t
going to make things better. That pattern at least survived all the
tests of the past.

Having an accurate evaluation of a syndrome as a generally bad thing
isn’t equivalent to attacking those with that syndrome. Being a leper is
a bad thing, not just another wonderful flavor of humanity \[insert hot
tub joke\] , but that doesn’t mean that we have to spend our spare time
playing practical jokes on lepers, tempting though that is.. Leper
hockey. We can cure leprosy, and we are right to do so. Preventing
deafness through rubella vaccination was the right thing too – deafness
sucks. And so on. As we get better at treating and preventing, humans
are going to get more uniform – and that’s a good thing. Back to
normalcy!

\* Their minds ain’t right.

