+++
title = "Spinoffs"
full_title = "Spinoffs"
date = "2017-02-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/02/05/spinoffs/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/02/05/spinoffs/).

Spinoffs

Once upon a time, very substantial spinoffs from investments in military
technology were fairly common. This trend is not new: for example, John
Wilkinson developed a technique for boring iron guns from guns from a
solid piece, which led directly to boring precision cylinders for James
Watt’s steam engines.

In WWII and the Cold War generated many spinoffs. The cavity magnetron
was developed for centimetric radar, but later made an even greater
contribution by warming up pizza \[microwave ovens\]. The
diesel-electric transmission used for US submarines also had an
application in locomotives. The development of military rockery and
ICBMs led to civilian applications such as comsats and weather
satellites.

Work in military jet engine technology has often had civilian payoffs.

Integrated circuits were not at first cost-competitive in most
commercial applications, but the Air Force wanted them, for Minuteman
guidance systems, where reliability and miniaturization were of utmost
value: that market helped them get started.

One of the more famous and lucrative spinoffs was the KC-135. The Air
Force wanted long-range bombers, and the RAND corporation showed that
this could be done more efficiently using aerial refueling \[ saved
something like $20 billion\]. The 707 was a derivative of the KC-135
design, and made Boeing gobs and gobs of money.

Packet switching was developed by the USAF, in search of a system that
might survive a nuclear attack.

In the past few decades such spinoffs have become less common. Around
1980, people began to notice that military semiconductor technology was
slipping behind civilian semiconductor technology – in part because DOD
is bureaucratic and slow, partly because of specialized miltech
requirement \[radhard\] , but for other reasons as well. There were some
effort to catch up \[VHSIC, the NSA’s support of a
superconducting-switch computer\] but it didn’t happen. Although if
someone gets a quantum computer working, the NSA will have come through.

Today, cutting edge computing technology builds on devices whose
original purpose satisfied gamer lust for high-resolution depictions of
exploding zombies \[GPUs\], people searching for porn, and viewing
gossip. Nothing wrong with that. Still, it would be nice if we got more
civ value out of military research, the way we once did, since we’re
going to be doing a lot of military research in any event. Twofers like
the KC-135 would be good for the US economy. And unless I’m mistaken,
there was a certain tendency for the spinoffs of military R&D to be more
‘real’ than today’s porn&gaming spinoffs.

How can we produce more cool civilian spinoffs from military research?

