+++
title = "Charm Offensive"
full_title = "Charm Offensive"
date = "2017-02-27"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/02/27/charm-offensive/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/02/27/charm-offensive/).

Charm Offensive

There was a
[paper](http://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/09/30/078360) out late
last year that discussed sex ratio effects in the population of Europe.
They found that the Neolithic farming immigrants apparently settled as
whole families, and were more likely to incorporate females than males
from the pre-existing hunter-gatherers. Which sounds reasonable. The
analysis looked at the X chromosome, which will have different levels of
ancestry from the autosomes if there is sex-biased gene flow. Seems to
me that the authors \[Amy Goldberg, first author\] should have included
stats on uniparental markers \[mtDNA and Y-chromosomes\] as a sanity
check, but they did not, for some reason.

They found that the later gene flow from the Pontic Steppes was large
and overwhelmingly male, so much so that it couldn’t be modeled by a
single event in which the Steppe men complete replaced the local men –
no, there had to be further steppe male inflow after that. Interesting,
sufficiently so that I wonder whether it’s correct.

The authors suggested this might have involved chariot-borne warriors,
but that’s wrong – way too early for chariots. Wagons, men on horseback,
possible and likely: no chariots. But when someone says something lie
that, you wonder about their general knowledge of prehistoric
archaeology – relevant in figuring this out. Actually you don’t wonder.

In an interview, Rasmus Nielsen (not part of the study) said that the
Yamnaya men might have spread because they were “more focused on
warfare, with faster dispersal because of technological inventions”.
Which isn’t crazy. Amy Goldberg suggested that there were other possible
explanations – the Yamnaya men could have been more attractive mates
than European farmers because they had horses and new technologies, such
as copper hammers. Now that *is* crazy.

First, to be boring about it, copper metallurgy had already been
developed \[in the Balkans\] by the early farmers – they may have done
so earlier than in the Middle East. Certainly long before the Yamnaya
invasions.The Iceman had a copper axe. Second, the idea that a complete
replacement of y chromosomes could be driven by female choice –
presumably while the local men stand aside and play video games – is
nuts. Sure, it might happen today, but it’s the sort of complex nonsense
that could only be embraced by college graduates. Back in the day, the
only way those Yamnaya men scooped up the local sheilas was over the
dead bodies of the local G2A farmers.

