+++
title = "IndoEuropean Worship Of"
full_title = "IndoEuropean Worship Of The God As Guest – A Ritual Primer Overview"
date = "2021-12-06"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/06/indo-european-worship-of-the-god-as-guest-a-ritual-primer-overview/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/06/indo-european-worship-of-the-god-as-guest-a-ritual-primer-overview/).

Indo-European Worship Of The God As Guest – A Ritual Primer Overview

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/arya-akasha-guest-worship-rite-overview.png?w=706)

‘Dost thou know how to ask, dost thou know how to offer,  
dost thou know how to send, dost thou know how to spend?”  
– Havamal, verse 143

Something we have often been asked for is a simple ‘how-to’ for regular
devotional offerings / observances. There are certainly a few of these
out there for various Indo-European religions – but some of them are …
rather arcane, and others seem to have been put together in a
questionable manner. Often we are looking at conjecture that is
academically intriguing – but rather lacking in terms of what an
ordinary devotee might be able (or advised) to do in their own life and
home.

Now, I am a Hindu – and so of course I am a bit ‘biased’ by familiarity
and experience here. But it would seem to me that as the elements
involved in a very basic Hindu worship have been demonstrably working
for us for thousands of years, are significantly clearly resonant with
particular practices we find attested elsewhere in the Indo-European
sphere, and – at least in my personal experience – are indeed positively
received by The Gods … this constitutes a logical place for us to begin.
It is possible that we may look at more direct correlations between what
follows and other Indo-European spheres’ ‘home piety’ approaches or
‘reverse engineer’ these for, say, Hellenic or Nordic use in the
appropriate liturgical languages at some future point. I shall, however,
include a few brief annotations to demonstrate the essential
(pan-)Indo-European character of various elements.

For reasons of length, this outlining is going to be in several parts.
This, the first one, looks at some of the ‘foundational’ elements and
the broad overarching structure. Think of it as an outline or an
overview rather than an instruction manual. Explaining what things are
and \*why\* they are in our ritualine context. As it is my belief that
once people understand \*why\* it is that we do various things, they’ll
be much more likely to actually give them a go. And it’ll all make much
more insta-intuitive sense when it comes to the actual ritual
instruction itself.

Subsequent installments shall look in greater detail at particular
components and provide a hopefully easy-to-follow walkthrough of how to
actually perform the rite in question replete with the actual liturgical
elements (mantras, verses, operative phrases etc.) required to do so. I
initially had these included in this piece itself, but especially once
translation and commentary on them was added, it … got a bit unwieldy.

One important observation to be made here is that this rite I am
describing the fundaments of is a ‘Guest Worship’ approach – wherein the
God is Invited to come to our home (or ritual site) and treated
accordingly. In situations wherein, for instance, one is going to a
Temple (i.e. one is being a guest in the \*Gods’\* House) various
elements may be rather different.

It is also perhaps rather important to note that even though we may lack
\*direct\* attestation for Guest-Worship as a ritual of this type in
some other Indo-European spheres – we \*can\* still reasonably infer it
from those clades’ accompanying mythological canons. Which tend to
feature as a fairly universal thing, the notion of a God or Gods turning
up (often in disguise) and partaking of the Sacred Hospitality … and,
because that is the nature of these myths (particularly for the Greeks),
finding it wanting in some particular, following by Doom (in the old
sense – Judgement) being unfurled upon the improper host. A grand
example of this being the course of the Grimnismal – wherein Odin comes
in the guise of a wanderer to the court of Geirroth … who promptly
imprisons Him between two fires (we might be tempted to presume an
archaic Indo-European version of the tale wherein He was in fact
\*invoked\* from a fire, as would be entirely logical for the relevant
Indo-European religious metaphysics) and denies Him the proper service
and sustenance for a number of nights running – even torturing Him!
Young Agnarr, however, does the opposite – and earns quite the boons for
his contribution of a horn of mead to the mighty God. Which leads to
Agnarr being taught by the High One Himself various secrets and given
God-granted mantle of rulership over the Goths … whilst Geirroth dies by
‘mysteriously’ tripping and falling upon his own sword just as soon as
Odin reveals His true identity at the very end of the poem.

As the verses themselves put it:

“Heill skaltu, Agnarr, alls þik heilan biðr  
Veratýr vera;  
eins drykkjar þú skalt aldrigi  
betri gjöld geta.”

“Hail to thee, Agnar! \| for hailed thou art  
By the voice of Veratyr;  
For a single drink \| shalt thou never receive  
A greater gift as reward.”

Proper treatment of one’s (God-)Guest, it seems, can have life-changing
consequences !

**The Most Important Consideration:  
**  
The first thing we must discuss is the ‘mindset’ involved in even these
simple acts. You are not simply putting some substances in a spot,
saying some ‘magic words’, and hoping for the best. Piety, as I have
often observed, is not some kind of ‘cosmic vending machine’. Instead,
the best way to think of it is that you are entertaining visiting
Royalty. Because that is, quite literally, how we do things – even the
term for the individual ritual act, Upachara, effectively means
‘entertaining’, ‘attending to’ in the sense of looking after one’s
Guest(s).

Provided that this essential understanding is kept in mind – much of the
rest, I suspect, can intuitively flow from same.

**Set & Setting:  
**  
Prior to the beginning of the ritual it is necessary to prepare a space
within which to conduct it. This should be a clean environment (the
local Indo-European sphere’s perceptions of what counts as ‘clean’ may
vary somewhat – but there are some pretty foundationally consistent
elements around this, many of which are just simply plain common sense);
and ideally one where one will not be disturbed. I would also recommend
that if one is going to be burning things, that awareness is maintained
about smoke alarms etc. – and the risk of singeing one’s carpet if
embers or sparks go in unpredictable directions. Ideally, there would be
a raised flat surface – a shelf, a table, a pedestal – upon which one
can place the representation(s) that shall be standing for the Deity or
Deities; and with this being clear of any other elements.

In terms of the representations themselves, I am aware that not
everybody has an elaborate home collection of statuettes. Simple ones
are not hard to find online or even in local Indian grocers (here in New
Zealand, at least – it may be different overseas); for other
Indo-European traditions, I have no doubt that it is reasonably
straightforward to find iconographic depictions of varying quality with
the click of a mouse – although how \*accurate\* some of these are, is
another matter. In a pinch, it is \*also\* possible to print out an
image of the Deity and laminate the paper (this is important both to
give it a certain ‘permanence’ beyond mere paper printout; and also
because in more involved ritual application we do, in fact, wind up
directly applying particular pastes or powders to the image).

**Purification & Cleanliness:  
**  
Now, the absolute first step (once a ritual space, a home shrine is set
up) is the Purification. Of you. So have a shower – and, in the Hindu
understanding, pay particular attention to washing your hair (it’s where
‘sin’ or ‘impurity’ is supposed to build up).

This is not merely a Hindu belief – we find quite pointed commentary
upon this matter in archaic Ancient Greek texts.

Per Hesiod: “Never pour a libation of sparkling wine to Zeus after dawn
with unwashen hands, nor to others of the deathless Gods; else They do
not hear your prayers but spit them back.” \[from ‘Works And Days’\]

Or, per Homer: “I dare not make a drink-offering to Zeus with unwashed
hands; one who is bespattered with blood and filth may not pray to the
son of Kronos.”

There is quite a bit which could be said upon how to do ritual purity
for its greatest and most proper attainment in a Hindu context … but as
we’re just doing a \*brief\* guide here, we’ll stick to the absolute
basics.

Having had your shower, do a check to make sure the ritual space is also
clean; and that any physical implements you’ll be utilizing are likewise
clean – it is also a good idea to check any substances (particularly
foodstuffs) that you are going to be making offerings with, likewise.

The next step is to wash your hands, and to take a handful of water in
your right hand. This begins the Achamana – ‘Rinsing’. This may also be
preceded via an invocation of the Sacred Rivers – which, as bathing in
these can wash away all manner of impurities (a situation also somewhat
visible There are various traditions about what comes next – in some,
the water is drunk; in others, it is dispersed onto the ground. In both
cases, chanting of a purificationary verse is undertaken concurrent with
this.

The purpose of this is not merely to cleanse / clean / purify the body –
and the right hand that shall be doing much of the operative work ; but
also to facilitate cleaning the \*mind\* as well. Some effort should be
undertaken to recall why you’re doing what you’re doing (that is to say
– active piety as Divine Service; and, where applicable, focus upon a
particular objective for the rite) and Whom you are doing these things
for.

**Purity & Purification Of Purpose:  
**  
This ‘purpose-orientation’ \[ Sankalpa \] is a necessary ‘centering’ of
your mind – and carries forward the work of physical purification into
the mental sphere. After all, distracting thoughts may cause obstacles
to the proper performance of the rite ; and in order to maintain
appropriate composure and focus, having a clear (i.e. un-cluttered /
contaminated / obscurated) sense of what you are doing is an eminently
good call. Think of it like ‘meditation’ – except with the acts that
you’ll be undertaking being how the meditation is actualized rather than
closing your eyes and focusing upon breath (although in a more elaborate
Puja, there is also a stage of breath-control as part of this).

In terms of that ‘purpose’ approach – there is something of a spectrum
between the more pure ‘Bhakti’ devotion, and what we might term the ‘Do
Ut Des’ \[‘I Give So That You Might Give’\] ‘ritual exchange’
undertaking. Although both have their place, and it is rarely completely
either one or the other. The Sanskrit formulation of that Latin ‘Do Ut
Des’, as a point of interest, is ‘Dehi Me, Dadami Te’ – and may be found
in direct quotation in, for instance, both major recensions of the
Yajurveda. As I say, the apt understanding for Indo-European ritual here
is that of Visiting Royalty. We pay homage to the Royals \[and I must
emphasize that I do not mean of the human kind – but rather, the Rulers
of the Universe\] because They are indeed … well, Royal. Responsible in
the general sense for all and everything and the preservation and
maintenance of our (somewhat precarious) place within That. We offer our
offerings and our mental acuity precisely because we know that we are
contributing to the overarching and collective ‘common good’ of the
Worlds. And yet, at the same time, a part and parcel of various ‘feudal’
understandings is that when the Lord is coming on a tour through your
village, it is partially expected that particularly pressing matters be
brought to His or Her attention – after all, above a certain threshold,
your problems are, indeed, Their Problems too. And, to take the ‘feudal’
parallel further – with a ‘client’ relationship, there is an even more
direct approach-way for engaging with the powerful Patrons of existence
upon such matters as might be necessary to raise. Which is also
partially why we constantly endorse the role of Priests – because you
are, in effect, employing a ‘professional communicator’ and somebody
skilled in the proper and appropriate arts of Divine liaison and
etiquette. But I digress.

**Welcoming With The Mind:  
**  
The next step is the Dhyana – ‘Visualization’. This is customarily
accompanied by a particular mantra for the deific that is being invoked;
the idea being that the enumeration of various key identifying
characteristics of the deific is useful both for your own sense of
connection with Them, as well as ensuring that They know They are
supposed to be turning up where you are Inviting Them (and in what
manner). So, for example, in a Hindu context we would be looking at
particular attributes that are immediately distinguishing of the deity
in general terms – wielding the Thunderbolt, for instance – as well as,
in more elaborate efforts, more specific traits that tell us which
particular Aspect of a God or Goddess we might be hailing : things like
the number of arms and a panoply of weapons. Traits that are immediately
relevant for the purposes of our ritual undertaking – the absolution of
sins, compassionate hearing, avenging of attacks against the Devotee,
the smashing apart of obstacles faced by us, etc. – are also potentially
included.

This Dhyana process is, of course, greatly facilitated not only via the
relevant invocationary phrases (which help to set \*our\* mind in the
right way), but also via having an appropriate ‘physical embodiment’ as
part of our ritual setup. I have earlier mentioned the possibility for
using a printed image of decent quality and iconographic aptness,
although of course, physical representations that are better quality
still and less two-dimensional are better again.

**Attendances Upon The Divine Guest:  
**  
Following this is the Avahana – ‘invocation’, or ‘invitation’.
Basically, we are asking the Deity to ‘move toward’ (A+Vahana) us and
our rite. They are our Guest, so we are ‘inviting’ Them.

They are then offered a seat via Asana – and there is, predictably,
quite some citation for the results of this concept in the ‘feast’
renditions of the Vedas : the Deity being given the Honour Seat, as
befits Their attendance at an occasion in Their Honour.

And this is followed by the further Upachara \[‘service’ / ‘attendance
upon’\] acts that we have aforementioned. Which, in more elaborate
ritual undertakings, will be quite ‘full scale’ – featuring the
provision of refreshment for the Deity after Their journey to be here
with us, the supply of water not only for drinking (later) but also for
Them to wash after the dust of the metaphysical road.

A more ‘cut down’ version of this is the Panchopachar form of the rite –
‘Pancha’ meaning ‘Five’, so ‘Five Upachars’ – wherein five forms of
offering keyed to the five elements are made. These include, in Hindu
reckoning, sandalwood paste or akshat (‘unbroken’ rice with kumkum) and
flowers, incense, the flame of burning ghee in a Diya lamp, and
‘sustenance’ of an edible form. We shall be looking more at these in the
next installment of this series.

Now I have not looked in any great depth nor detail as to the extent to
which ‘Manner Elemental’ sacrifices are offered in other IE traditions.
We can say with certainty that certain elements and understandings are
indeed present – the issue is whether it’s all five in succession or
combination, or just some on a somewhat individualized basis (and this
is before we get into whether ‘five elements’ or ‘four’ would be the
expected local formatting).

Nevertheless, Hesiod again provides some potentially rather ‘resemblant’
conceptry:

“But do you turn your foolish heart altogether away from these things,
and, as far as you are able, sacrifice to the deathless gods purely and
cleanly, and burn rich meats also, and at other times propitiate them
with libations and incense, both when you go to bed and when the holy
light has come back, that they may be gracious to you in heart and
spirit, and so you may buy another’s holding and not another yours.”

**Circumambulation & Bowing**

In Sanskrit, these are Pradakshina or Parikrama and Namaskara. The
former is a symbolic gesture which orients that which is worshipped as
the center of our world – we are literally going around Them.
Pradakshina – the ‘dakshina’ means ‘right’ or ‘right conduct’ (from same
root as ‘Dexter’, perhaps unsurprisingly) and ‘Pra’ here is ‘moving
forward’ : so ‘moving to the right’. Parikrama means something along the
lines of ‘moving around’ (although I have also once seen it rendered as
‘marching forth in righteousness’) – ‘Pari’ here being like ‘Peri’ of
‘Perimeter’ in Western IE languages, and ‘Krama’ similarly referring to
the act of doing something.

An easy way to remember the purpose behind this act is the well-known
tale of Skanda and Ganesha as children having a race around the world.
Skanda, mounted upon a bird, seemed at first to have the clear advantage
– and moved with incredible swiftness as befits His Name and Nature
seeking to circumambulate the world. Ganesha, meanwhile, acting with
wisdom (and the celerity of the mind – as well as Piety, both filial and
general), simply circumambulated His Parents – it being declared that to
Him, His Parents were the World. One could also, potentially, reason
that due to Lady Parvati \*being\* the World in various senses (and
similar resonancies for Lord Shiva being findable in various ways in the
scriptural canon), that this might have additional layers of essential
theological and metaphysical correctness to it as a dictum. But more
upon that, perhaps, some other time.

As applies the Bowing – this is Namaskara. And yes, it is very much
something that is resonant with practices elsewhere in the IE Sphere. We
have previously taken a look at this in a piece looking specifically at
the Greek occurrences of such a practice (which, to be sure, can entail
some rather specific understandings – at least some of the time) ;
however there is also ample evidence for it in the Germanic sphere (as
reported upon both by Germanic perspectives in the Saga corpus (there’s
a particularly interesting occurrence in the Kjalnesinga Saga, as well
as by foreign and external observers such as Tacitus and Ibn Fadlan).

The Greek circumstance is perhaps rather important to consider directly
– as what we find there has often been misinterpreted. Insofar as while
we \*do\* have Classical Greeks talking about the inappropriateness of
bowing in particular manners to \*human\* rulers (at least, outside of
exceptional circumstances and dire supplication) – in at least one of
the major exemplars (that of Xenophon’s Anabasis), the literal next few
words of the same line point out that it \*is\* appropriate to do so for
the Gods (Alone).

There are, of course, various forms of bowing practiced in just about
any culture which has come up with it as a tradition for human
interrelations in a decidedly uneven power dynamic – let alone when we
are dealing with interrelations between humans and the Divine.  
I was rather interested, for example, when a formerly Hare Krishna
associate of mine whom I’d brought along to my local Mandir to
experience ‘proper Hinduism’ – not only had a quite different (and far
more … full-scale) form of bow that would perhaps be closer in spirit to
near total prostration, but also commented upon my own form of bow (on
one knee) as in his eyes connoting a rather more ‘martial’ relationship.
Usually, the forms of bow in observance in one of our Temples would be
some ways between the two – with the greater ardency being correlated
with the more full-scale virtually lying face down; and others, more
usually simply bending forward whilst on two knees with hands met in the
appropriate posing – although with a simple bending forward at the hips
whilst standing and with hands together (and thumbs to the brow)
occasionally also being in evidence.

Now I have emphasized this point because I am keenly aware that a fair
few people beset by Modernity and some rather … ‘egalitarian’ attitudes
toward certain things, tend to be vigorously opposed to actually
engaging in the bowing component in particular.  
You can find significant swathes of very online neo-pagans up in arms
about the practice – although when I was doing a brief google to get a
feel for some of the ‘arguments’ against bowing, I found it rather
telling that one of the first things to come up was what appeared to be
a Loki worship effort which opposed the entire concept on general point
of self-aggrandizing ‘principle’.

A significant component, as we have continually stated, in the realms of
Piety is quite simply Respect. You are carrying out acts of Respect –
literal Worship – of Beings Who are not so much ‘exponentially more
powerful than you’ as the Powers Themselves. There are no two ways about
it. You can have your conversation about why you wouldn’t wish to bow to
your President in a modern Republic – and you know what? I might agree
with you. You can talk about how you view this or that human monarchy as
hopelessly bereft as an institution or simply in terms of its
current-day inheritors, therefore justifying you breaking with centuries
of tradition when treating with them … and again, I may or may not agree
with you (contingent upon which monarchy we’re talking about, for
starters) – although that said, while I am not necessarily hugely in
favour of human royalty I technically live under today … you can bet
that were I somehow in Buckingham Palace, I’d \*not\* be making a scene
by obnoxiously refusing to engage in a slight bow to Her Majesty.
Particularly if, for some reason, I was seeking to enlist Royal aid and
agency to assist with some vitally important undertaking.

And now, we recollect that as applies the Gods we are worshipping –
there is no scope for approaching the engagement as “oh, I don’t feel
that the institution or its current (mortal) occupants are worthy of my
homage”, or “I bow to no man because then I feel like I’m declaring
they’re better than me”. Nobody can say that Ishvara & Ishvari – the God
Emperor & God Empress of the Universe – are lacklustre and undeserving
of such respect in its more overt forms. You are also not a God, and
yes, They Who Rule the Cosmos are indeed very much “better than you”.
There is no shame in that whatsoever. The only ‘shame’ would be in
choosing not to acknowledge this through the proper and appropriate
actions when the time comes because you are prioritizing your indelibly
human feelings and pretensions over … well .. Reality Itself.

And if you are ‘uncomfortable’ with things – well, that, we can work
upon. And there are likely ways that are less immediately ‘strange’
feeling yet still authentic(ish) that can be engaged in. But to be
seriously pious – rather than piteously solipsistic – is to acknowledge
that you are not the center of the universe (ref. the Parikrama point
from earlier), and that entails ‘moving toward the Divine’ (i.e. on Its
/ Their Terms) rather than expecting it to do all the work and come to
you.

**Chanting & Song:**

Following the Upachara segment, there is more ‘conventional’ religious
expression (from a Western religious perspective, at least – which, post
Christianization, has lost a lot of these more nuanced understandings
around Gods turning up as Guests, etc.) – Japa (the chanting of mantras
if one has been initiated into one relevant for the Deific in question),
and Stotram (Hymnal) singing.

There are several ways to view this portion of the Rite. One of which
being the obvious – the regaling with performance of the visiting
Royalties. It is a common enough spectacle when an important person even
in the human realm goes somewhere – they are met by a performance in
their honour. Except here, there is an additional level of saliency. The
performance is part-supplication, part ‘resculpting of reality’. Our
reality. Us.

In terms of the utilization of mantras for Japa – we are effectively
benefitting from the immediate presence and saliency of the Divine Who
empowers and lords the mantra in question, and we are acting in harmony
with that to engage in this oral ‘resculpting’ utilizing the empowered
language of creation that is the fabric of the metaphysical universe :
Speech (in Sanskrit) and Thought (Intent, Understanding). We are likely
asking to ‘become more like That which we meditate upon’ – whether that
simply means the aspiration to become in greater control of faculties,
or to be able to smite a particularly troublesome foe, or to ask to
borrow some measure of the Deity’s Power to support, strengthen, and
‘charge’ some (to) be(ing) acted-upon operation of ours which falls
within Their mythic purview (i.e. we are acting in an ‘enhanced’,
guided, and supported ’emulation’ of They).

In part, therefore, it is an intrinsic element of ‘Making The Request’;
and also the Glorification of the God(s) Who are in attendance as
Guests.

In terms of the singing of the Stotrams – it is not dissimilar. The
words of the Hymnals are to be pleasing to the Ear of the Divinities.
And are also often reasonably direct in terms of various forms of aid
and availment that are being requested by the individual Devotee.

It would be tempting to think of these as something along the lines of
the pageantry which accompanies a conventional and mundane visitation by
important peoples. When Prince Charles (or, before him, Prince Albert)
goes to one of the (British) Crown’s Colonies, there would be such a
performance – and there is nothing wrong with that. We are Honouring the
Gods through our efforts and our activities to breathe some beauty into
the world in Their august presence.

However, as aforementioned, there is another dimension to it – that of
the asking of the feudal lord Who has come amongst us, for the aid that
is needed. It is that ‘client relationship’ we have spoken of afore.

And all of this is done in a manner that acts as another form of
meditation. Insofar as the repetition of highly rhythmic and
aesthetically pleasing verse does indeed have quite the effect upon the
conscious mind. I, myself, have found that particular Hymnals in our
ecclesiastical language – Sanskrit – they have a sort of ‘march of the
mind’ tempo to them with their rolling steps that powers one ever on.
And certainly, the immense feeling of pious zeal in their energized
evocation does wonders as well.

Piety felt is merely felt. Piety actively \*Expressed\* and
\*Externalized\*, we hear it and we see it with our own ears and eyes
and it seems to echo and resound even within the small confines of our
shrine-room about us. Particularly when, as with various Vedic origin
verses, there is the implicit sense that one is part of an unbroken
chain of these expressions passing right the way back through three and
a half thousand years or more of history. A truly immense choir,
indeed!

Through Song, one really does ‘illuminate’ and add joyous life to the
worship-space and its active proceedings. It brings things beyond (still
vitally necessary) ‘contemplation’ and out into much more active
engagement. And that is, as ever, a proverbial ‘two way street’.

Another, and perhaps more sardonic take on the whole thing which has
some relevancy for this part of proceedings was provided by the late
Terry Pratchett:

“The prayers of most religions generally praise and thank the gods
involved, either out of general piety or in the hope that he or she will
take the hint and start acting responsibly.”

And, even though it might at first seem rather cynical – it’s actually a
not entirely inaccurate description of how an array of entirely
authentic Indo-European liturgy works. These being in particular the
sorts of Hymnals and verses wherein the wrathful and destructive
attentions of particular God(s) are asked not to be visited upon the
worshipper. And often, for eminently understandable reasons, it is
advised that these Forms of both Deity and Devotional not be engaged
with by the inexperienced – this is, after all, partially Why We Have
Priest Caste.

In any case, the contents of various lengthier Hymnals containing
various mentions of prior great deeds by the God in question – serve as
both inspiration to the worshipper, as well as that ‘hint’ to the
Worshipped as to what it is we’re hoping for to happen. Whether
literally (in the case of, say, the provision of vital medicine or
healing – if that is what we are praying for, and there is some mention
of it in the relevant verses summarizing a mythic episode featuring
same); or somewhat more figuratively (as in cases wherein we may not,
ourselves, be literally (nor mytho-literally) confronted by an immense
demon-dragon that’s stolen the Sun and/or world’s water-supply … but the
notion of ‘barriers’ and ‘impediments’ in our path which must be rent
asunder is still pertinent to what we’re asking for).

**AskingForbearance:**

In Sanskrit, this is Kshamapana – and it effectively refers to asking
for the Deity’s ‘patience’ (Ksama / Kshama) and ‘forgiveness’ for any
errors that have been committed in the course of the preceding
proceedings.

This is partially something which pertains to our earlier analogy of a
‘royal visit’ – the idea being that the proper etiquette is to be
observed, and just as one would (for example) apologize for egregiously
mispronouncing somebody’s name, so too are breaches of that etiquette
apologized for lest the Deity be offended through incautious approach
and an effective ‘taking for granted’ of Their Presence.

However, it is \*also\* something rather more metaphysically charged.
For in the course of utilizing Sanskrit mantras and liturgy – as we have
earlier also maintained – one is engaged with a foundational sphere for
shaping the cosmos. This is being done under the Divine aegis of a
ritual worship in part because there is significant power and potency
involved in this approach: you are asking a God to help with things,
rather than attempting to utilize entirely your own will and faculties,
after all. It is \*also\* being done in this way because precisely
because there is a Higher Being overseeing proceedings, things are under
greater control than they might otherwise be. They are only likely to
get as ‘out of hand’ due to something going awry as the Deity in
question is inclined to let them. Which, to be sure, may be … quite awry
contingent upon how wrathful said Deity is, generally speaking. Hence
the additional vital importance of this phase of proceedings especially
in those instances – and, if we were talking about a full-scale Vedic
rite of the ‘high religion’ tier, the potential employment of a
specialist Priest whose entire role in proceedings was to be on the
watch-out for errors in liturgical recitation or other ritual
performance to be able to correct them as they occurred.

In essence, therefore, an important point to the Ksamapana is that it is
partially there to ask the Deity to ‘smooth things over’ so that the
consequences of our mistakes making use of these metaphysical elements
don’t bind us to their consequences. Whether we are taking a
‘functionalist’ perspective on the words themselves that we have uttered
having the power – or the ‘intentionalist’ one wherein it’s the Deity’s
power that is the prime mover that we are calling upon in the preceding
spans of the rite.

**Farewell (Until Next Time):  
**  
This is ‘Visarjana’ in Sanskrit – which, predictably, refers to a
‘Valediction’, a ‘sending away’. There are various elements to this
contingent upon how the God has been invoked and into what ‘body’ –
indeed it can itself become quite an elaborate fixture in the more
large-scale and formalized observances wherein an impressive Murti has
been made specifically for the festival in question. However, for the
smaller-scale and more regular household prayer-rites, no trekking to
the nearest river to immerse the sculpture fully shall be required.
Instead, more simple means are employed to bring things to a close.

At which point, it is OK to begin ‘packing down’ the ritual space for
those elements which require it. In my case, because I am living in a
household which also cooks meat with some frequency – this entails the
Durga Murti being wrapped up in a veiling, and then placed inside an
airtight container, for example. Other points to attend to may include
anything which either is currently or has been on fire during the course
of your observance – ensuring that it’s properly out before you leave
the room. And, of course, ensuring that any food offerings are not going
to attract vermin.

There is, obviously, an immense amount more that I can and almost
certainly should say about just about everything we’ve but incredibly
briefly parsed above. And in subsequent installments of this series we
do intend to look in specific detail as to more of the ‘how’ to do
things rather than the ‘why’ – as well as producing an easy-to-follow
set of instructions for a simple home rite.

But for now, I suspect, it is enough.

Until next time !

And Hail To The Welcome Guest (स्वाति – Svati )

\[-C.A.R.\]
