+++
title = "Pradosha Vrat – The"
full_title = "Pradosha Vrat – The Fortnightly Evening Observance For Lord Shiva"
date = "2021-12-16"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/16/pradosha-vrat-the-fortnightly-evening-observance-for-lord-shiva/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/16/pradosha-vrat-the-fortnightly-evening-observance-for-lord-shiva/).

Pradosha Vrat – The Fortnightly Evening Observance For Lord Shiva

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/fglaljcxma4jwbw-1.jpg?w=640)

Pradosha Vrat tonight … so here’s a pretty aesthetic shot of the Shiva
Temple at Kedarnath

Pradosh Vrat \[literally ‘Evening Observance’ – ‘Vrata’, from the same
root as our English ‘Word’, communicates the sense of a ‘Vow’, giving
somebody your Word\] is hailed as an ideal time to approach the Lord in
supplication.

This is, we may say, an act of mythic emulation – as numerous are the
occurrences within the canon of The Gods Themselves, both jointly or
singly, carrying out such observances in the bids to win the Great God
(Mahadeva)’s Favour and beseech Him for a Boon.

It occurs twice a (Lunar) month – on the Thirteenth (Trayodashi) Night
of the cycle of each of the waxing and the waning phases of the Moon.

Upon these occasions, it is held to be highly auspicious to engage in
pious conduct for Lord Shiva during the relevant Sunset phase of the
evening. Here in New Zealand, that’s from roughly 20:51 to 22:37 \[Other
parts of the world shall have different timings based on when Sunset is
wherever you are – you can check this via a Hindu astrological
calendrical site like Drik Panchang\]

I myself will be endeavouring to put that fine Bana-Lingam to use \[a
Shaivite altar-stone of meteoric iron and river-carved rock that has
both Shiva and His Shakti, His Wife\], conducting the Milk libations in
a basic format whilst chanting mantras, and accompanying this by singing
appropriate Shaivite Hymnals.

There is also a quantity of Coconut Barfi that shall be being offered
(as Naivedyam – Food Offering), and of course we shall be lighting Dhupa
(Incense) and Diya (Lights / Lamps – from same root as ‘Dyaus’, ‘Day’) –
I may even finally get the hang of the Sandalwood paste offering !

If you don’t have these elements – a ShivLing, a Murti of Mahadev, etc.
and other ritual accompaniments aforementioned – then it is still
possible to carry out smaller acts of piety which might find some favour
with the Lord.

After all – He is Bholenath \[‘Natha’ – Lord; ‘Bhole’ – ‘Simple /
Innocent’\] : a theonymic which directly connotes His being pleased with
even the ‘simpler’ acts of devotion.

ॐ नमः शिवाय
