+++
title = "On The Bharat Mata Of"
full_title = "On The Bharat Mata Of Kashi Vishwanath Temple – And Some Curiously Modern Objections To Same"
date = "2021-12-15"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/15/on-the-bharat-mata-of-kashi-vishwanath-temple-and-some-curiously-modern-objections-to-same/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/15/on-the-bharat-mata-of-kashi-vishwanath-temple-and-some-curiously-modern-objections-to-same/).

On The Bharat Mata Of Kashi Vishwanath Temple – And Some Curiously Modern Objections To Same

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/kashi-bharat-mata.png?w=606)

There is currently some controversy about installation of a Bharat Mata
murti at Kashi Vishwanath Temple. The claim is that this is installing
‘fake & modern political deity’ – something with no connection to the
authentic religious sphere.

This is false.

Bharat Mata is ‘recent’, in the sense that this form of the deific
appears more than a century ago and in context of political struggle.
But is an expression of an undying essence.

We can directly link this to, of course, understandings for Devi – the
theology fits admirably.

We can *also* link this to another familiar ancient concept – that of
the Nagara Devata, the Deific of the City. Something that is quite well
attested in various places – I am mostly familiar with NW and Central
Asian examples, due to the nature of my work.

Now there is no contradiction between the Protector / Patron (Matron?)
of the City being, well, just exactly that – and also an expression of a
more broadly engaged with deific. Indeed, quite the opposite. We
frequently find specific prominent Gods in such ‘loka-lized’ expression.

To the point that when it comes to the archaeological side of things, we
actually have significant difficulty some of the time telling whether a
Goddess representation is this or that Goddess ‘generally’, or is
actually the specific Goddess of the City.

The ‘Protector of the People’ understanding is, of course, pretty
prominent running right back into the Vedas for Devi; and we can
demonstrate via the quite directly parallel understandings to Bharat
Mata right across the IE sphere that it is not a ‘modern innovation’ –

even if this *specific* occurrence is modern-prominent; and the last
such deific expression to actually be remembered *consciously* to be a
Goddess rather than, say, a ‘mascot’ or whatever we want to think of
Mother Svea, Britannia, or the way Madrid feels about its Cybele statue.

The *best* example, of course, is Athena – of Athens. Her City. This
does not vitiate Athena being worshipped elsewhere – but that ‘special
connection’ is quite iconic.

We similarly find the theonymics, the titles, the epithets – Πολιας
(Polias), Πολιουχος (Polioukhos), Πολιατις (Poliatis), all effectively
meaning ‘Of the City’, ‘Protector of the City’; and there are many other
“City-of” theonyms out there as well.

All that has happened viz. Bharat Mata – all that is “modern” – is that
instead of the ‘People’ being a rather narrow thing.. the inhabitants of
a single city, or the people of a single small tribe of the earlier Iron
Age or later Bronze.. the Goddess is encompassing a country.

A modern nation-state, sure – with more than a billion inhabitants, and
stretching out across a pretty immense territory not only of earth but
of mind as well.

Ancient (indeed, Eternal) concept – Modern times, therefore Modern
expression. Easy.

Now if people want to get up in arms about alterations to the Kashi
Vishwanath precinct being ‘political’ – then that is something they are
going to do. If they want to say that adding such a Murti to the
precinct is an ‘innovation’ – then ok, sure, perhaps it is.

But it is not the case that Bharat Mata is ‘fake’ or purely ‘political’
, simply because She is ‘recent’ in expression.

One might as well say that Bhavani was somehow ‘fake’ because She
appeared to ShivaJi in order to energize a ‘political’ project called
the Marathas.

Or, as I have said – insist that the Goddess expressions that cities and
nations of antiquity hailed as Protectress of the City, of the Nation ,
were somehow “fake” because of that fact.

Funnily enough, something kinda like that actually happened once. Some
years after Cybele \[‘Great Mother’, ‘Mountain Mother’\] was brought to
Rome at the height of the Second Punic War in order to empower the
Romans to victory over the hated Carthage – a Tribune of the Plebs
objected.

This did not derail the military victory which She gave to the Romans,
however said Tribune wound up mysteriously dying of illness shortly
following his objection to the ‘political’ engagement of the Great
Goddess.

In 2018, [I wrote an (A)Arti-cle for Indian Independence Day looking at
the broad Indo-European expressions of this National Deific concept and
showing that Bharat Mata is not some threadbare “innovation” of
‘branding’](https://aryaakasha.com/2018/08/15/bharat-mata-and-the-indo-european-deific-of-national-identity/).

But instead an ancient, vital and quite definitely Divine figure that is
simply experiencing a modern saliency.

Given the ‘symbolism’ at play in the Kashi Vishwanath restoration effort
– it is not out of keeping that an ancient Deific in modern expression
be found there.

After all – some Flames are truly eternal !
