+++
title = "The Eddic Mead of Poetry"
full_title = "The Eddic Mead of Poetry & Vedic ‘Fire Bird’ Agnicayana Soma Rite"
date = "2021-12-29"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/29/the-eddic-mead-of-poetry-vedic-fire-bird-agnicayana-soma-rite/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/29/the-eddic-mead-of-poetry-vedic-fire-bird-agnicayana-soma-rite/).

The Eddic Mead of Poetry & Vedic ‘Fire Bird’ Agnicayana Soma Rite

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/agnicayana-meath-it-is-meme-finalized.png?w=960)

Now, to explain what’s going on here … This is one of those Vedic –
Eddic strong concordancies.

Concerning the Mead of Poetry, and Soma: what Griffith translated in RV
I 14 as ‘Meath’ (the actual word he’d rendered thus appears to be
Sanskrit ‘Madhu’ – Sweet – being used as a noun. Which is a direct both
functional and linguistic cognate for ‘Mead’ – from PIE \*médʰu, meaning
‘Sweet’, ‘Honey’) … the ‘-th’ and ‘-d’ being two ways to represent the
older Germanic ‘ð’.

In the Nordic mythology, we find that Odin brings the Mead of Poetry
(Kvasir – ‘That Which Is Pressed’), coming in the form of an Eagle. He
sources it from inside the Hnitbjorg \[the ‘Clashing Rocks’\] thanks to
the engagement with a female figure \[Gunnlod\], and His Flight produces
three Vessels of the Mead – plus a fourth Drop that had fallen to earth
mid-route.

In the Hindu understanding, the Empowering Elixir (Soma – ‘That Which Is
Pressed’) is delivered by Agni(-Rudra) in the form of Shyena – a Falcon
or Hawk: a Raptor. This is sourced from inside the ‘Press-Stones’
\[‘Adri’ or ‘Gravan’ – both of which can also mean ‘Mountain’; ‘Adri’
also occurs in slightly differing inflection as a verb meaning ‘To
Crush’, ‘To Reveal’\], obtained via Devi’s (Vak Saraswati) engagement,
and produces three Vessels of the Elixir – plus a situation of spillage
onto the earth per other mythology.

That is the mythological side of things – the story which we find
repeated across various Vedic verses. Yet there is also a *ritual*
understanding (something which I suspect very strongly that the Nordic
Indo-European sphere *also* must once have had – at least, in certain
form).

On one level, it is straightforward. Agni, as the Living Fire that is
the Conduit to the Divine and Supernal is vitally necessary to hallow
and empower (and thence obtain) the Empowering Elixir in question. Any
Soma rite, therefore, can be thought of as ‘drawing from’ this mythology
for its essential mechanism of action.

Yet we also find the mythology ‘operationalized’ in much more expansive
depth via the Agnicayana ‘Fire Bird’ rite – wherein literally hundreds
(some sources have 10,800) bricks are arranged in the shape of the
aforementioned Raptor \[although variations on the ritual have other
forms possible\].

An Altar is thus constructed, wherein Agni – and, pointedly, Rudra (i.e.
Agni in Terrifying facing) – can be invoked to re-carry out,
re-immanentize His Mythic Deed.

This is not merely placing a bunch of bricks in the rough shape of a
bird of prey. Rather, each individual brick is a specifically shaped and
blessed / empowered ritual instrument. Each one is intended to be
correlated exactly both in size and in placement with specific
macrocosmic elements out there in the universe. And this is carried out
across multiple layerings, all of which are required to conform to these
precise dimensions, these precise shapes, even despite being comprised
of differently-shaped bricks.

Hence, you see, the imperative demands for advanced mathematical
understandings in the fields of geometry and trigonometry.

A ‘resonancy’ is therefore constructed – not merely of Myth and Ritual
Re-Enactment (Mythic Recurrence / Eternal Return) by having Agni in the
form of a Raptor bestow the Empowering Elixir – but between the ritual
space and the Cosmos Itself.

The intense intricacies entailed in this process and its finalized state
– which can take up to a year to practice and prepare for for the entire
*team* of *seventeen* Vedic Priests engaged for the purpose, followed by
twelve days for the enaction of the Rite itself – is partially why it
has such great power. Even over and above various other Soma-pressing
rituals. Because the ‘Force of the Universe’ is ‘Anchored’ very
comprehensively via these complex (meta-)physical structures and
ritualized undertakings.

Of course, such incredible steps render it an incredibly rare and
storied operation. Indeed, it was thought that the proper knowledge for
how to actually (let alone ‘adequately’) perform the Rite had
effectively died out at some point well before the modern era.

This turned out not to be the case, however, when in 1975 a rather
remarkable performance of the Agnicayana in Fire-Bird format took place.
As it turned out, certain of the highly conservative Nambudiri Brahmin
clans of South India had kept the traditional knowledge alive.

One of an array of archaic Vedic rituals or liturgies which, in order to
experience as anything other than words upon a page, one must venture
deep into ostensibly “Dravidian” territory to seek out. I mention this
as part of my ongoing demonstration that the so-called ‘Arya – Dravida’
\[or ‘Aryan – Dravidian’\] hard ‘divide’ we often hear of online in
certain circles when discussing our religion is fundamentally
misinformed.

There was, however, a certain difference in proceedings in 1975 from the
more archaic performance – although not due to any deficiency on the
part of the Nambudiris. Rather, a sustained public outcry about the
notion of animal sacrifice being carried out in the course of the Rite’s
enaction forced the Priests to substitute this element for something
less ‘controversial’. \[I am not given to understand that human
sacrifice, as seemingly attested in at least one – rare – archaeological
find associated with the rite, was brooched\]

Instead of killing the goats which had been gathered for the purpose,
the presiding Priests offered what we would term ‘Pistapasu’ – an effigy
of the animal to be sacrificed made out of dough \[‘Pasu’ as in
‘Animal’, ‘Pista’ here referring to the ground flour involved\].

This proved controversial with some other Brahmin clans at the time; and
curiously was labelled by some academic commentators as being an
‘innovation’ developed for the modern performance. Yet we find
discussion for the potential of such an occurrence in the Manusmriti
(where it is, to be sure, seemingly uncondoned for serious Vedic
operations by at least one commentary); and, more intriguingly, the
Shatapatha Brahmana’s explication of the (potentially greater) efficacy
of substituted offerings made of rice-meal (and barley) … the latter
being of particular interest as it comes to us from a direct and archaic
Vedic ritual context (indeed, the very same text which contains the
large array of instruction for the Agnicayana’s performance).

Yet let us return to the Meath in question:

As Griffith’s rendering of RV VIII 48 3 puts it, concerning the effects
of the Brew:

“We have drunk Soma and become immortal; we have attained the light, the
Gods discovered.  
Now what may foeman’s malice do to harm us? What, O Immortal, mortal
man’s deception?”

Although I must clarify that “Not Even Once”, here, should be
interpreted to mean Thrice. Daily. Not for the full Agnicayana Rite,
obviously – but the Vedic Soma Pressing in more general terms, upon
those points where it was to be observed.

तान्यज॑त्राँ ऋता॒वृधोऽग्ने॒ पत्नी॑वतस्कृधि ।  
मध्व॑: सुजिह्व पायय ॥

tān yajatrān ṛtā-vṛdho \[A\]ghne patnī-vatas kṛdhi \|  
madhvaḥ sujihva pāyaya \|\|

These Renowned / Hallowed Exalters Of Cosmic Order, Agni / Sacred Flame,
Unite \[Them\] With Their Wives \|  
Of \[Immortalizing\] Sweetness, Beautiful Flame-Tongue, \[Them To\] Kiss
! \|\|

Oh yes. Most *definitely* more than Once.
