+++
title = "Two Operations For"
full_title = "Two Operations For Ritual Purification – The Invocation Of The Seven Rivers & The AllConditions Purification Mantra"
date = "2021-12-18"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/18/two-operations-for-ritual-purification-the-invocation-of-the-seven-rivers-the-all-conditions-purification-mantra/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/12/18/two-operations-for-ritual-purification-the-invocation-of-the-seven-rivers-the-all-conditions-purification-mantra/).

Two Operations For Ritual Purification – The Invocation Of The Seven Rivers & The All-Conditions Purification Mantra

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/img_2878.jpg?w=1024)

As we have often observed, purity is a foundation for good piety. By
which we (also) mean – the acts of purification are a necessary
predicate for engaging in proper formalized ritual worship.  
After all, one would hardly seek to petition and to honourthe rulers of
the cosmos in a manner that might seem ‘lacking in effort’ – or, worse,
outright offending.

Now there are multiple dimensions to purity – some ‘outer’ (for example,
having a shower and removing your shoes before embarkingupon a ritual),
some ‘inner’ (like focusing your mind and leaving ‘at the door’ various
distasteful thoughts or imprecations).  
  
There are similarly many approachestoward that attainment of the
necessary purity via active endeavours of purification. One frequent
motif we encounter in various corners of the Indo-European sphere is the
immersion in (or drinking of) particular liquids bestowing the requisite
state. Which is fine if one just so happens to have one of the storied
Sacred Rivers flowing through one’s back-garden, or a vial brought by
some Emissary of the Gods on-hand … but less immediately useful if, like
many of us, one is living far away from the traditional and sacred sites
of the archaic past. Then we must turn to other mechanisms. Of a sort,
anyway.

As part of our ongoing Ritual Manual series, we therefore present a
relatively short Hindu purification operation. There are other ways one
can do this (as with many things in the Hindusphere), but this combines
both significant potency and versatility.  
  
For example – the Seven Rivers Invocation we provide below is useful not
only for producing Holy Waters that can be utilized to bless and hallow
your hands and mouth before these engage in ritual acts and speech … but
also to bless and empower water that is going to be used as part of your
ritual offerings themselves – like in ShivLing Puja (the pouring of
libations of water and milk upon the Shaivite Altar-Stone).

A more simplified approach would use just the ‘All-Purpose’ Purification
mantra which comprises the second component to this pairing. Although as
we say – for better results, it is advised to do both in succession.
You’ll see why in a moment.

As with everything else in this series, when it comes to the ‘active
components’ we have taken pains to try and render things as simply and
as clearly as possible for a non-Indian / not-(necessarily-)Hindu
audience – \*without\* compromising on the essence-tial content and the
actual elements that are integral to making the whole thing
(metaphysically) work.

However, because actual understanding of the processes rather than
merely ‘going through the motions’ is key to both people grasping ‘why’
we do things (and if things are rendered intuitive, then they are more
easy to actually stick to) as well as the successful empowerment of our
actions in this ritualized context, we have also indulged in our
customary depth in explaining some of the things \*around\* these
simple, straightforward ‘operative phrases’ / actions.

Rest assured, we shall produce a quick-summary for actual day-to-day use
which simply has the relevant bullet-points.

**The Invocation Of The Seven Rivers**

The first component to the pairing is the Invocation of the Seven
Rivers. This is exactly what it sounds like. A swift mechanism for
producing water which is ‘imprinted’ with the holiness of all Seven of
the Sacred Rivers of Hinduism. Without necessarily having to source
physical water from all of these in preparation first.

Now you will often see on Hindu ritual component lists an item called
‘GangaJal’ – ‘Ganges Water’. This is, again, exactly what it sounds like
– actual water from the Ganges, a small amount of which is added to
proceedings in order to provide the purity and sanctity which only She
can confer. You can often buy this in certain Indian grocers. Although
while it \*is\* necessary for the more complex and involved rites
carried out at a Temple and by a presiding Priest due to the ‘higher
energy’ entailed (and therefore, greater risks in things going sideways
– hence why you have a competent professional involved, in a
well-prepared and shielded setting), for the less ‘high-power’ household
rites of the sort one might perform day-to-day it is more acceptable to
use just such a substitute as we are going to prepare herein.

First, obtain a vessel of water. Then, pour said water into a clean
ritual vessel (also referred to as an Achamani). This ritual vessel is
traditionally metallic – made of copper or brass.

The next step is to make a particular pose with your right hand. With
the palm facing downward, the fist is clenched, thumb on the outside
pressing in … and the middle finger is straight out.

Except whereas if we were making a profane gesture at somebody in
Western culture, the whole thing would be raised up ‘pointing’ to the
sky … here, it is pointing out in front of us.

This is calledAnkusha Mudra. (For those unaware, a Mudra – in this
context, it is a hand-posing, a ‘Sign’)

Now ‘Ankusha’ is often translated in the modern era as
‘\[Elephant-\]Goad’ or ‘Hook’.  
  
However, while we do not dispute that it has come to refer to these
things, in the more archaic Vedic Sanskrit, it has a somewhat different
understanding (and I am, as per usual, indebted to the modern sage
Manasataramgini for his elucidations upon the matter – all of these
immediately following citations are his).

There (in this case, RV X 44 9), we find it as a Weapon of the Divine
Indra (and invoked by the Priest in mythic resonancyor emulation of He)
– employed by a chariot-warrior or horseman to bring down his foeman so
that he may be trampled under the horse’s hooves. However, we \*also\*
find it spoken of as a tool in other contexts – utilized to draw in or
draw down something that we want. Whether that be Wealth (obtained in
the manner of pulling fruit off a tree per RV III 45 4), or the Woman we
long to have as our Wife (per AV VI 82 2). As M. has further pointed
out, there even appears to be mention for the utilization of an Ankusha
as a surgical instrument to ‘draw out’ something in the body which
should not be there and which causes us harmful disability.

The understanding of the term, then, is quite simple. It is a tool with
which force is channeled to act upon another object or being. Whether
that means ‘pulling down’ the foeman in front of your chariot, or
whether that means ‘pulling in’ the woman you wish to wed, or whether
that means ‘pulling out’ a cataract in order to overcome blindness.

It is an instrument, an implement of Will. Hence why it is also
conceptually translated as ‘Restraint’ or ‘Control’ (or, we might
suggest, contingent upon context – ‘Binding’).  
  
It is not hard to see how a ‘Hook’ has become the standard
interpretation for this concept – even though the actual device(s) in
question may have been rather different in actual form than what we
think of with the term today.

An elephant goad is, understandably, just such an instrument – it
channels force into getting a very mighty creature indeed to move
according to one’s will. It is therefore eminently appropriate for this
style of metaphysical operation we are undertaking herein.

Why do I suggest that this is apt for our purposes ? Because what one
\*does\* with the Ankusha that is comprised of one’s right hand in this
particular posture – is a channeling of the immense force and energy of
not just one but \*seven\* mighty rivers into the ritual vessel sitting
there before you.

How is this done? First, the Ankush is steadied – or, if you like,
‘wielded’ – by placing one’s left hand on top of the right hand’s fist.

Then, the extended middle finger’s tip is lowered until it just barely
grazes the surface of the water held within the ritual vessel.\[N.b.:
if you’re looking at the image that heads this piece … there’s a trick
of the light going on – My finger *isn’t* actually immersed into the
water. Rather, the lip of the vessel has blocked the light – so the
shadow upon my finger makes it look like it’s a lot deeper than it is.\]

We then recite the following verse:

Gangge Cha Yamune Chai-(e )va Godaavari Sarasvati \|  
Narmade Sindhu Kaaveri Jale-\[A\]smin Sannidhim Kuru \|\|

Some of these names ought look familiar.

They are the Seven Holy Rivers of Hinduism – what you are doing with
this mantra and mudra is quite simple. You are asking the ‘Essences’ of
the Seven Holy Rivers to ‘project’ and ’embody’ into the water in the
ritual vessel in front of you; so that you may have the benefit of Their
innately purifying essence for you and your rite.

To translate with reasonable directness:

‘Ganges and (Cha) Yamuna and (Cha) verily (Eva) Godavari \[and\]
Saraswati \[too\]  
Narmada, Sindhu, Kaveri – Please (Kuru) \[let Your Holy Essence\] be
imparted (Sam-Nidhi – ‘Same Dwelling’) into this (Asmin) Water (Jala)’.

As you are doing this, with your fingertip upon the water in the ritual
vessel and your mouth reciting the Sanskrit verse aforementioned, it is
very useful to think of – to picture with one’s mind’s eye – the
‘essence’ of the operation which is unfolding through you.  
  
This helps to potentiate and to actualize the process. Speech is grand,
Speech plus Action is even more powerful – but it is Speech, Action, and
active \*Intent\* along with \*Understanding\* which truly empowers the
metaphysical operation. All together. The ‘envisioning’ being a focal
for your will and channel for your intent.

What is it that you are picturing ? The Great Waters, Their Holiness
flowing down into the ritual vessel which is in front of you. ‘Drawn
down’ via the ‘Goad’ or ‘Hook’ or however one wishes to think of it that
is your right hand in Ankusha Mudra – with the tip of your middle finger
forming the focal of the stream, its director and channeler : working
along with your mouth and its invocation which have carved the channels
with all the plenipotentiary force of Words upon the Supernal.

Now, as we have just said – Understanding is important in terms of
unlocking the greater empowerment and efficacy to what you are
endeavouring to do here.

The way that this process works is, at its root, the incredible potency
of Sanskrit as the ‘language of the universe’. Simply speaking the right
words causes things to ‘resonate’ in tune with their concepts – more so
if you actually know what these concepts are, and are engaging in their
invocation with the appropriate ‘contextualizing’ ritual actions etc.
Where something is ‘harmonious’ and conducive to the foundational,
fundamental ‘purpose’ of the thing in question – it becomes like adding
sparks to tinder-dry kindling.

The Names of the Sapta Sindhava (‘Seven Rivers’) speak, quite literally,
to Their Essences and Essential Qualities. So, in just the similar
manner to how the ‘Bear Taboo’ is supposed to have worked in Germanic
languages (i.e. ‘don’t use the actual proper name for ‘Bear’, because
you might attract the Bear’s attention and summon Him accordingly’),
uttering the name of one of these Seven, particularly alongside the
other Six, and especially when actively enjoining These to then impart
an energy (again, utilizing the metaphysically Empowered Speech with
which reality itself was originally sculpted) – well, it is going to
have this kind of ‘summoning’ effect.

Once the Energies are Invoked via that vocalization – then as we have
aforementioned, these are ‘directed’ via our utilization of the Ankusha
Mudra alongside our utilization of a Sanskrit directive (‘Jale Asmin
SamnidhiKuru’ – ‘Please Co-HabitIn This Water’, to render each of
those Sanskrit words in reverse order for a more ‘natural’ English
sentence). An operation made possible not only via the voicing of words
or the holding of hands in particular postures – but via our Mind and
our Will being given potent, powerful and active expression through
these tools of ours.

Everything ‘fits together’. It is not truly us making some form of
radical departure through what we are doing. We are just ‘opening the
floodgates’ (and providing the channel) for something which already,
effectively, ‘wants’ to happen as quite a natural thing.

‘Like’ can more easily cohabitate with ‘like’ – and so we are requesting
that the ‘essences’ of several bodies of water come and invest in this
other water. The Rivers in question are adroit at Purification – we are
both conducting a purification of the contents of our ritual vessel, and
producing a reservoir of ritual substance that shall, itself, be
utilized to produce further purity. Hence, we are in essence simply
asking these most mighty Rivers to act in accordance to Their natural
character and disposition. It should prove quite different were we
attempting to conjure the essences of the Rivers to somewhere They were
\*not\* already ‘fitted’ to go. Much like getting a vast and powerful
river to flow uphill – possible to do with phenomenal willpower and
investiture of resources to ‘force’ it to happen .. but, really, why
would you.

In any case, now that the water has become ‘imprinted’ with the essences
of these Seven Holy Rivers, it is time for us to begin to make active
use of it in the purification of \*ourselves\*.

This entails a ritualized ‘washing of hands’ first and foremost. We
start in the order of what shall come into contact with the water that
we are handling, first.

We take the ritual spoon (‘Udharani’) with our left forefinger and
thumb, take water into the spoon’s head, and then we upend the spoon’s
contents over our left hand – while holding the spoon only with our left
hand. Don’t worry, it’s easier than it sounds.

Having purified the left hand, we then again pick up the ritual spoon
between left forefinger and thumb, get water from the ritual vessel into
the spoon’s head, and this time upend it over our right hand –
specifically over the palm.

Now it is time to purify the mouth. This entails cupping your right
hand, pouring empowered water into it using the ritual spoon, reciting a
mantra, and then upending the palm of your right so that the water flows
down across the central heel of your palm and into your mouth.

This is done three times in total, each mantra being said once.  
The first time, with the mantra – oṃ keśavāya namaḥ .  
The second time, with the mantra – oṃ nārāyaṇāya namaḥ .  
The third time – oṃ mādhavāya namaḥ .

The next step is to now wash both hands. Water is once more placed
within the cupped right palm, the ritual spoon is placed back down by
the left hand, and the left and right hands are wrung together in a
manner that spreads the water (or, at least, its residue – and the
corresponding residue of purity and purification) all over the two
hands. As this is being done, a fourth mantra is recited – oṃ govindāya
namaḥ.

Now it may have occurred to some more experienced observers that all
four of those mantras have a unifying characteristic – they’re each
built around a Vishnu theonymic. Keshava, Narayana, Madhava, and
Govinda.  
  
This might at first appear to be a sectarian flourish – however it
isn’t. It’s instead an entirely standard conceptual understanding found
across denominations in the Hindusphere. Vishnu is invoked for
Purification. We shall be seeing another example of this in the ‘All
Conditions’ purification mantra later on.

In fact, it is to that most illustrious staging step that we shall now
turn:

**The All-Condition Purification Mantra:  
**  
This represents the actual ‘main’ Achmaniya itself – wherein, utilizing
this Holy Water that we have thus created, the purified Hands that we
have obtained and the purified Mouth with which we may speak the
reverent utterances … we carry out the metaphysical operation via which
not just brief and exterior ‘skin-deep’ cleansing, but more
comprehensive cleanliness for ritual purposes may be obtained.

The formula for this is as follows:

oṃ apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṃ gato’pi vā ।  
yaḥ smaretpuṇḍarīkākṣaṃ sa bāhyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ ॥

Aum, we have already met, and is an ‘energization’ and ‘source’. Pavitra
means ‘Purity’ (with ‘Apavitrah’ being the opposite).  
‘Sarva’, here, is ‘All’ – Avastham, ‘Conditions’; Gato and Api, together
mean ‘Even \[having\] Gone Into / Fallen Into’.

Hence, the first line effectively reads:  
“Whether Impure \[Apavitrah\] or Pure \[Pavitro\], or \[Va\] All
\[Sarva\] Conditions \[Avastham\] Gone Into \[Gato\], Even \[Api\]”.

Within the next line, the key terms of focus are ‘Smaret’ and
‘Pundarikaksha’. The former, ‘Smara’, refers to the act of ‘Remembering’
(compare ‘Smriti’ – ‘That Which Is Remembered’) – what is being
remembered, here, is Pundarikaksham… that is to say, Lord Vishnu as the
(White) Lotus-Eyed One.Given the symbolic connotations of the Lotus,
the reasoning for this particular theonym’s involvement ought be readily
apparent – even afore we consider the array of Vedic and other, later
sources wherein Vishnu acts as just such a Purifier.

This is followed up by what is bestowed via such Remembrance –
Cleanliness or Purity (Shuchih) that is both Outer (Bahya) and Inner
(Abhyantarah) in its tangible manifestation.

The second line therefore reads:

“He Who (Yah) Remembers (Smaret) \[Lord Vishnu the White\] Lotus-Eyed
(Pundarikaksha) – He (Sa) \[Becomes Both\] Outer (Bahya) and Inner
(Abhyantarah) Purified”.

Putting all together, and with slight re-ordering to ‘translate’ to
English syntax:

“Whether Impure or Pure, or Even having fallen into Any \[other – i.e.
All\] Conditions :  
He Who Remembers The White Lotus-Eyed Lord (Vishnu) \[Attains\] Outer
and Inner Purity.”

It is recited once we have placed water from our ritual vessel, once
again, in our right cupped palm.  
Once the above mantra is recited, we raise our right hand and throw the
water, thrice, up and over our backs of the right shoulder. Whilst doing
this, we recite “Aum śrī viṣṇu, śrī viṣṇu , śrī viṣṇu”. One ‘Sri Vishnu’
per throw.

Following all of this, the Purification stage of the rite – for us, our
bodies, anyway – is complete. Another form of ‘purification’ is to
follow via the Sankalpa stage of the rite – which helps to hone and
focus the mind and its Purpose, as well as ‘tuning the antenna’ to get
better ‘reception’ on our transmission as well as our receipt. But we
shall cover that in a future installment of the Ritual Manual series.

**Addendum & Concluding Remarks – For Now:**

Now, of course, it is necessary to note that there are quite the broad
array of purification processes and mini-rites out there in the
Hindusphere. Some of them will use the above afore-outlined elements.
Others will not.  
  
Various of the ones which \*do\* employ at least some of what we have
just outlined, may do so in ways which diverge from what we have set out
– sometimes in small ways, other times in rather more overt fashion.

As always – understanding is key. If somebody who is a proper religious
authority is telling you to do things a particular way – it is probably
good to go along with what they are recommending.  
Some symbolic actions are going to be meaningfully different – as in,
the way of doing things being different actually has substantive impact
upon what is being done. Others are just ‘generally equivalent’ and
local regional variations.

It is not, strictly speaking, necessary to have \*both\* elements to
this purification process – the Invocation of the Seven Rivers \*and\*
the All-Conditions Purification Mantra – however, as per usual, ‘the
more you put in, the more you get out’.

It is also good to recall that these each do ‘separate’ yet strongly
coterminous and synergistic things.

The All-Conditions Purification Mantra is there to purify \*you\*, and
it is more efficacious when it is also drawing from the incredible
energy of the Holy Rivers in order to do so.

The Invocation of the Seven Rivers is there to purify the \*water\* in
your ritual vessel.  
  
And this is not only something positive for utilization in your own
purification so that you may begin the rites – but, as we have briefly
mentioned above, is importantly useful for those circumstances wherein
water is being used in a rite which would benefit from being those of
the Seven Holy Rivers (or one in particular thereof).

We may explore other forms of Purification rite in the not-too-distant
future, and those utilized for more particular and specific
applications. We shall also, as aforementioned, be producing a \*much
briefer\* ‘summary / synopsis’ suitable for quick-referencing in your
actual day-to-day ritual practice. We had felt that it was important to
set out things more comprehensively first – and \*then\* move into the
brief more ‘script’ like approach.

After all, if the Words of the Invocations are the Bricks – then the
Knowledge and Understanding of what these do is the Mortar that Binds
Them together. And it is the \*both\* rather than the \*either\* that
enable something enduring to be congealed.

Will, too, is vitally important – with the ‘purification’ of mind and of
intent presented via the Sankalpa stage of the rite continuing the
‘honing’ and ‘hallowing’ that we have begun here.  
  
Various material actions and components may also contribute to the
benediction of purity – the burning of Camphor being an excellent
example due to its both spiritual and scientifically-attested saliencies
in this regard (it’s a longstanding anti-microbial).

There is much more we can and must say upon all of this.

But for now, it is enough.

Hail to the Seven Rivers, and to the Purifiers of both Body and Spirit.
