+++
title = "A common variant linked"
full_title = "A common variant linked to chromosomal errors"
date = "2015-04-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/09/a-common-variant-linked-to-chromosomal-errors/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/09/a-common-variant-linked-to-chromosomal-errors/).

A common variant linked to chromosomal errors

A new paper in Science (Rajiv McCoy as main author) says that there’s a
genetic variant, probably in the gene PLK4, that substantially increases
the fraction of embryos with screwed-up chromosomes. Mothers with the
high-risk genotypes apparently have fewer embryos that survive to 5
days. And, oddly enough, the variant causing this is quite common –
spread all over the world, in the 20-45% frequency range. It looks as
if it’s the product of a old partial selective sweep in humans (
Neanderthals don’t seem to have had it). PLK4 regulates centriole
duplication, a key component of the centrosome cycle.

So far so good – a nice piece of work. But then they try to explain it.

Their idea is that reducing fecundability was itself advantageous,
because it obscured paternity. I don’t believe a word of it.

First realize that the selective cost isn’t as high as you might think:
generally people could only feed a couple of kids anyhow. Taking an
extra month or two to start that kid is a cost, but not as big as the
fraction of embryos lost might make you think. On the other hand, there
would be a big selective advantage for a genotype that was resistant to
these pro-aneuploidy alleles..

I’d bet on meiotic drive. Intragenomic conflict. Not crazy for a gene
involved in the centrosome: centrosome genes associated with meiotic
drive have been seen in Drosophila.

If the aneuploidy allele was transmitted to, say, 54% of the offspring
of a heterozygote mother, it could work.

There would of course be a net disadvantage in homozygotes, because A.
the aneuploidy is worse and B. the allele is competing with itself – so
winning is impossible.

With a net disadvantage in homozygotes, the sweep never reaches 100%.

