+++
title = "The Lottery"
full_title = "The Lottery"
date = "2015-04-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/22/the-lottery/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/22/the-lottery/).

The Lottery

Lotteries can be useful natural experiments; we can use them to test the
accuracy of standard sociological theories, in which rich people buy
their kids extra smarts, bigger brains, better health, etc.

David Cesarini, who I met at that Chicago meeting, has looked at the
effect of winning the lottery in Sweden. He found that the “effects of
parental wealth on infant health, drug consumption, scholastic
performance and cognitive and non-cognitive skills can be bounded to a
tight interval around zero.”

As I once mentioned, there was an important land lottery in Georgia in
1832. The winners received an 160-acre farm. But by 1880, their
descendants were no more literate, their occupational status no higher.
The families in the top 2/3rds of income managed to hang on to some of
their windfall, but lower-income families did not.

This remind of a story by Gerald Kersh, “Whatever Happened to Corporal
Cuckoo? ” – about a medieval soldier who stumbled into immortality.
Someone asks him (in 1945) – why hadn’t he saved his pay? With compound
interest, yaddaa yadda.

” Why didn’t I save my pay? Because I’m what I *am*, you mug! Hell, once
upon a time, if I’d stayed away from cards, I could’ve bought Manhattan
Island for less than what I lost to a Dutchman called Bruncker drawing
ace-high for English guineas! Save my pay! If it wasn’t one thing it
was another. I lay off liquor. Okay. So if it’s not liquor, it’s a
woman. I lay off women. Okay. Then it’s cards or dice. I always *meant*
to save my pay; but I never had it *in* me to save my pay! Doctor
Paré’s stuff fixed me–and when I say it fixed me, I mean, it fixed me,
just like I was, and am, and always will be. ”

Low leverage of wealth on your children’s traits is something that
exists in a particular society, with a particular kind of technology.
Back in medieval times, a windfall could have kept your kids alive in a
famine, and that certainly had a long-term positive effect on their
cognitive skills. Dead men take no tests. The most effective medical
interventions today are cheap – everyone in Sweden and the US already
has them – but there are places where those interventions are not
universally available. Some families in Mozambique can afford
artemisin, some can’t – this must make a difference.

Suppose we had a method of dramatically improving a kid’s genetic
potential for intelligence and success, one that cost five million
dollars a pop: then wealth could influence the next generation in ways
that it can’t today. In other words, Cesarini’s conclusions are
correct for Sweden-now (but not for Sweden in 1700), probably correct
for the US today, but maybe not true tomorrow.

It is not just wealth that has a small effect on your kid’s potential:
playing Mozart doesn’t help either. Other than locking away the
ball-peen hammers, it’s hard to think of any known approach that does
have much effect – although we don’t know everything, and maybe there
are undiscovered effective approaches (other than genetic engineering).
For example, iodine supplements have a good effect in areas that are
iodine-deficient. We now know (since 2014) that bromine is an
essential trace element – maybe people in some parts of the world would
benefit from bromine supplementation.

What about the social interventions that people are advocating, like
Pre-K ? Since shared family effects (family environment surely matters
more than some external social program) are small by adulthood, I think
they’re unlikely to have any lasting effect. We might also note that
the track record isn’t exactly encouraging. If there was a known and
feasible way of boosting academic performance, you’d think that those
teachers in Atlanta would have tried it. Sure beats prison.

Maybe there’s an effective approach using fmri and biofeedback –
wouldn’t hurt to take a look. But even if it did work, it might simply
boost everyone equally, and obviously nobody gives a shit about *that*.

