+++
title = "Roland Fryer wins the"
full_title = "Roland Fryer wins the John Bates Clark medal"
date = "2015-04-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/26/roland-fryer-wins-the-john-bates-clark-medal/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/26/roland-fryer-wins-the-john-bates-clark-medal/).

Roland Fryer wins the John Bates Clark medal

Roland Fryer has won the John Bates Clark medal for the top economist
under 40.

I’ve paid attention to some of his papers that impinge on biology, even
corresponded with him. In
[one](http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic98848.files/salt_science_submission_3-01.pdf),
he argued that higher risk for cardiovascular disease among American
blacks was due to genetic factors, those resulting from selection for
salt-sensitivity in the Middle Passage, the risky journey to America.

There’s nothing wrong with looking for genetic factors as a possible
explanation (or partial explanation) of such health differences, but
it’s not necessarily easy to come up with correct answers, least of all
when you don’t know anything about the subject – don’t know anything
about biochemistry or medicine or natural selection. Which is the
default state of humanity, of course – and of economists.

There are black-white genetic differences in genes involved in holding
onto salt and water, and that’s undoubtedly a product of selection – but
you see those same variants in Africans. It’s not something that showed
up in 1750.

The death rate in the Middle Passage was about 15%, during the period
that most of the ancestors of American blacks came across. A lot of
those deaths were due to diarrheal disease, but there is no reason to
think salt-sensitivity is the overwhelmingly dominant factor that
determines survival in such cases – obviously the immune system must
also matter, for example. There is certainly no evidence that
salt-sensitivity is even the main factor in determining survival in such
cases, although it might be. And since there were other causes of death
there, such as scurvy and smallpox, it couldn’t have been all-important.

Moreover, it is almost impossible to cause a significant genetic change
in one generation\*, unless the selective factor wipes out something
like the least resistant 95% of the population. I told Fryer this –
worked out an example using the breeder’s equation, plausible values of
heritability, a favorable (and unrealistic) estimate of the importance
of salt retention, reasonable estimates of mortality on those ships –
there was no way anything significant would happen. He didn’t make use
of the breeder’s equation, but it can’t be that he never heard of it,
***because I told him***.

He mentioned a case in which researchers successfully bred
salt-sensitive rats in three generations, with noticeable change by the
second generation – but with this was done by founding one line with
the two most salt-sensitive rats (2 out of 47) and the other with the
two least salt-sensitive rats. That rat experiment was the equivalent
of 95% casualties for three generations , all strictly due to salt
sensitivity – pretty different from 15% casualties for one generation
that are maybe kind-sorta influenced by salt sensitivity. Consider also
that they are comparing one line strongly selected for salt-sensitivity
with another strongly selected for salt-insensitivity, selection was a
minimum of 60 times stronger in the rat experiment than in the Middle
Passage.

There’s no chance that salt-sensitivity in African-Americans is a
product of selection in the Middle Passage.

In another
[paper](http://pricetheory.uchicago.edu/levitt/Papers/fryer-levitt%20infant%20mental%20function.pdf),
Fryer and Leavitt looked at intelligence in children aged 8 to 12
months. They find only minor racial differences in test outcomes. which
proves..??? At that point you’re testing motor skills or something –
anything like an IQ test is impossible. Black kids are somewhat
precocious in motor skills compared to whites: on average they walk
about a month earlier, East Asians about a month later. But chimps at
age one will outperform all humans, while gazelles can run 15 minutes
after birth. All which proves nothing at all. That first paper is
wrong. This paper is … not even wrong.

Well, maybe the papers I have not read are high-quality. There’s a
rule, I think: when someone is egregiously wrong on all the things you
know anything about, he must be damn good on everything else.

\* the next person who talks about how much people living in slum
conditions in the US over the last couple of generations must have been
selected for X, where X is anything at all, WILL BE BANNED



