+++
title = "Literature as"
full_title = "Literature as representation and rasa"
date = "2021-02-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/21/literature-as-representation-and-rasa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/21/literature-as-representation-and-rasa/).

Literature as representation and rasa

Sumana Roy, a professor of literature at Ashoka University near Delhi,
wrote a [wonderful recent
essay](https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-problem-with-the-postcolonial-syllabus)
in the Chronicle of Higher Education identifying significant problems
with the way Indian literature is taught, in both American and Indian
universities. In American universities Indian literature is expected to
*represent India*, to provide a moral or political message about the
country and its political life –and, Roy thinks, this American
understanding has then been imported into India itself. When Indian
universities teach English-language Indian literature, they are asked
questions like “Analyze Amitav Ghosh’s The Shadow Lines as a critique of
the nation-state” and “Write a note on Velutha as a Dalit character in
Arundhati Roy’s The God of Small Things”. Yet in the same departments
John Donne is studied as “a metaphysical poet”, Virginia Woolf as “a
stream-of-consciousness novelist” and so on. European and American
writers, Roy thinks, can be appreciated and enjoyed for their aesthetic
qualities; Indian writers are supposed to send a *message*.

What is this message? Roy notes, “Postcolonial texts seem to have two
jobs in these syllabi: They either negatively illustrate some form of
moral or social misconduct, or they positively represent a
‘marginalized’ culture or geography. Ideally, they do both at once,
often in the manner of a Live Aid concert. ” Such a view is suggested by
the very term *postcolonial*, which implicitly takes colonialism and its
aftermath as the defining fact in contemporary Indian thought. And while
of course colonialism did make massive changes to Indian thought, works
like [Andrew
Nicholson’s](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/01/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/)
remind us that its impact was not as all-encompassing as is sometimes
assumed. Roy reminds us in turn that there is a wealth of modern Indian
literature that does not suit the postcolonialists’ political project:

> What else explains the utter absence of comic novels in the
> postcolonial course? How else to explain why Bibhutibhushan
> Bandyopadhyay’s novels, particularly Aranyak, are not taught? Or why
> Amit Chaudhuri’s novels, with their life-loving energy, do not find a
> place here? Or why stories and novellas about provincial life, such as
> we find in the magical writing of R.K. Narayan, have not yet been
> included? Literature about the moment, about the everyday, is
> rejected: Comedy, laughter, pleasure — the postcolonial subject must
> not be seen partaking of these contraband things.

Why is this? Roy claims that in Indian academia “an American
understanding of Indian writing has been imported without any skepticism
or unease — this despite professors teaching courses on power and
imperialism.” There is no doubt in my mind that such an understanding
has been prevalent in American academia for many decades, and especially
in literature departments: everything should be viewed through lenses of
power and oppression, rather than of enjoyment and edification. (Thus
Matt Wilkens’s [matter-of-fact
aside](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/digital-philosophy/) that
in the humanities “We long ago gave up the idea that our task was to
appreciate and explain a handful of great texts, replacing that goal
with a much more important and ambitious one: to understand cultural
production as a whole by way of the aesthetic objects it creates.”) And
it seems quite plausible for Roy to claim that such an understanding has
now been imported wholesale to the former colony by those very
professors teaching about power and imperialism.

For Roy reminds us of a very different and indisputably Indian way of
understanding literature, one framed many centuries before any European
(let alone American) ever set foot on the subcontinent. That is *rasa*
theory, the underappreciated [classical Indian aesthetic
theory](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/08/the-indian-theory-of-taste/)
formed with explicit reference to narrative literature, which teaches us
to appreciate the emotions that literary texts produce. In the
postcolonialist paradigm of literature, Roy notes, the only *rasa*s
allowed are *raudra* (angry), *kāruṇya* (compassionate) and maybe
*bibhātsa* (disgusted): there is no room for the *hāsya* (comedic) or
*adbhūta* (wonder). Perhaps, she suggests, Indian literature is better
studied through its own indigenous theory than through the standard
postcolonial lens.

Turning to areas of philosophy beyond aesthetics: Roy’s article reminds
me of the [misgivings I
had](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/why-philosophy-departments-have-focused-on-the-west/)
around [the famous Garfield-Van Norden
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html)
on diversifying philosophy. The APA’s committee for “Asian and
Asian-American” philosophy suggests it is structured around a roughly
postcolonial lens: that Asian philosophies are there *for
representation*, to have marginalized groups speak as marginalized
groups. (In Roy’s words, “Like the soldier fighting for the country,
these writers are seen as fighting for their culture.”) Garfield and Van
Norden’s article tells us almost nothing about the merits of non-Western
philosophers’ ideas: there, too, the philosophers seem to be there to
represent their cultures to students, rather than to have students
appreciate their ideas. This approach is in sharp contrast to Van
Norden’s [much superior later
book](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/05/making-the-case-for-non-western-philosophy/),
which takes its readers on a deep dive into Mencius, Fazang and the
Milindapañhā and shows us how they can help us understand the world and
our place in it, in ways that Western philosophers cannot. In the book,
the Asian thinkers are there for their good ideas about the world, not
just to represent Asia and Asians. In a very similar vein, it might just
turn out that rasa theory is better than postcolonial theory at helping
us understand literatures both inside and outside India.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/02/literature-as-representation-and-rasa)
