+++
title = "Answering the"
full_title = "Answering the contemptible consequence problem"
date = "2021-02-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/23/answering-the-contemptible-consequence-problem/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/23/answering-the-contemptible-consequence-problem/).

Answering the contemptible consequence problem

Hi all, this is [Szymon](http://szymonbogacz.com). In previous posts, I
presented [the Dharmakīrtian approach to the liar
paradox](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/08/dharmakirti-and-liar-paradox/)
and introduced [the contemptible consequence
problem](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/16/the-contemptible-consequence-problem/).
Today, I will give five answers to this problem and tell you what I plan
to do next in my research.

My answers to the contemptible consequence problem will be sketchy. I
want to give you a general picture of my project without boring you with
too many details. I’m happy to tell more in comments. (It’s a good
moment for a big shoutout to all great comments I get thus far, thank
you!) I will end each answer with some questions I’m working on right
now. As always, I’m very curious what you think.

Let’s start with recalling what’s the problem. I think that
Dharmakīrtian philosophy gives us resources to devise an epistemic
approach to the liar paradox. According to this approach, even though
the liar sentence implies that it is false and that it is true, we
cannot know that the liar sentence is true or that it is false.

However, there’s a logical problem with this view. If we reasoned
following the contemptible consequence rules of classical logic
((*A*→¬*A*)→¬*A*), we could know that the liar sentence is false
because it implies its negation and every sentence that implies its
negation has to be false.

My first answer to the contemptible consequence problem is that the
problem arises insofar as we represent the fact that the liar sentence
implies its negation as a material implication from the liar sentence to
its negation. However, there are reasons to be sceptical whether
material implication adequately represents what we mean when we say that
one sentence implies some other sentence. For example, when I say,
‘There are pistachios in the cupboard’, I imply that ‘You may have
some’. We can represent this implication as a conditional expression ‘If
there are pistachios in the cupboard, you may have some’ and interpret
it as a material implication. Then, this conditional is false if ‘there
are pistachios in the cupboard’ is true and ‘You may have some’ is
false, and otherwise it is true. For example, it is true if there
are*no*pistachios in the cupboard and you*cannot*have them. However,
this is not what I meant.

Consequently, why to think that material implication adequately
represents the fact the liar sentence implies its negation? Dharmakīrti
and his commentators say that a contradiction with own words expresses
(*abhidhāya*,*vācinā*) two opposing sentences or a contradictory state
of affairs. What it means? What, if anything, Buddhist epistemology has
to say about meaning of conditional expressions?

Here’s my second and my third answer. The contemptible consequence
problem arises insofar as deference to logical rules generates
knowledge. For Dharmakīrti, there are only two ways in which knowledge
can be generated: through perception and through valid inference. We
clearly don’t perceive that the liar sentence is false because it
implies its own negation.

Is there a valid inference establishing that the liar sentence is false?
This is how this inference could look like:

1.  The liar sentence**is false because it**implies its negation, and
    whatever implies its negation is false.

I have two problems with this inference. Firstly, I have a problem with
its subject: the liar sentence. If the liar sentence is unthinkable and
is a contradiction with own words, then it cannot be a subject of a
valid inference. However, if that’s the case, how can we reason with the
liar sentence at all? Especially, how do we know that if it is false,
then it is true and*vice versa*?

Secondly, how to establish that whatever implies its negation is false?
Buddhist epistemology offers us some tools to answer this question.
Firstly, 1. could be valid if its inferential mark had the so-called
triple characteristic. It means that a property designated in the middle
part of the inference—the property that the liar sentence implies its
negation—is present in the subject of the inference—in the liar
sentence—and in similar cases, but it is absent in dissimilar cases.
Does the property ‘implies its negation’ has the triple characteristic?

Alternatively, we can ask what’s the relationship between the reason and
the property designated in the first part of the inference, that is,
falsity. To use Dharmakīrtian terminology, is 1. true in virtue of the
force of real entities (*vastubalapravṛtta*)? What that could mean in
our context? Does the fact that the liar sentence implies its
negation*cause* that the liar sentence is false in the same way as fire
causes smoke? Are these two facts*identical*like the fact that some
plant is an Indian rosewood is identical with the fact that it is a
tree?

Two more brief points. Fourthly, what about an inference deferring to
the admirable consequence rule ((¬*A*→*A*)→*A*)? Could it establish
that the lair sentence is true because whatever is implied by its
negation has to be true? Does it make us know that the liar sentence is
both true and false?

Fifthly, maybe, what establishes the conclusion of the contemptible
consequence argument is not a valid inference (*anumāna*) but a
hypothetical reasoning (*tarka*,*prasaṅga*)? If so, how this reasoning
looks like? Does it produce knowledge?

These five sketchy answers to the contemptible consequence problem
invite further research. They span over a host of topics within the
history of Buddhist philosophy, philosophy of language, philosophy of
mind, epistemology, and logic. This is where my research is going next.

In [my first
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/01/my-project-on-buddhist-epistemology-of-logic-first-guest-post-by-szymon-bogacz/)
I said that I aim at providing my own philosophical arguments
originating from Buddhists views. Dharmakīrti’s ideas about
contradictions with own words gave me an opportunity to look at the old
paradox from a new angle. Now, I take up this opportunity and develop my
own philosophical position. I learn a lot from studying Buddhist
epistemology, but I’m not interested in it as a thing of the past. I’m
interested in it as a promising and fruitful avenue for philosophical
research here-and-now.

Thank you so much for reading up to this point and I hope you had some
fun along the way. I want to thank the Indian Philosophy blog team
again. It was a pleasure writing for you. Last but not least, thanks to
my supervisors Bronwyn Finnigan, Al Hájek, Koji Tanaka and Tom Tillemans
for all their continuous help.
