+++
title = "In praise of cultural"
full_title = "In praise of cultural appropriation"
date = "2021-02-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/28/in-praise-of-cultural-appropriation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/28/in-praise-of-cultural-appropriation/).

In praise of cultural appropriation

[Jay
Garfield](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html),
[Bryan Van
Norden](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/05/making-the-case-for-non-western-philosophy/),
and most of my colleagues here on the Indian Philosophy Blog are
shamelessly committing massive acts of cultural appropriation. Perhaps I
am too. And that’s a wonderful thing.

The concept of “cultural appropriation” has gained massive popularity
over the past several years, in this time of renewed radicalism on the
left and right. It refers to the phenomenon of people from one culture
taking up or making use of ideas or practices from another culture. What
startles me is that those who use the concept typically treat such
cultural borrowing as a *bad thing.* A typical example of the idea of
“cultural appropriation” was a [2019 tweet by Kassy
Cho](https://web.archive.org/web/20190208035720/https://twitter.com/kassy/status/1093235338686984192)
proclaiming: “friendly reminder that you don’t get to celebrate lunar
new year unless you’re literally from a country that does or if you are
invited by someone who is from a country that does”.

So why don’t you “get to” celebrate lunar new year? What is so wrong
with “cultural appropriation”? The most commonly cited definition of
cultural appropriation, from Susan Scafidi, is “Taking intellectual
property, traditional knowledge, cultural expressions, or artefacts from
someone else’s culture without permission.” The caveat is bizarre. How
can “a culture” give permission? Do you just need the permission of *one
person* from that culture? If so, when there are thousands or more of
such people, there is nearly always someone happy to “give permission” –
often someone like me who believes permission shouldn’t be necessary in
the first place – so the idea of cultural appropriation disappears
entirely. ([Andy Wang brilliantly
responded](https://web.archive.org/web/20190210211002/https://twitter.com/AdequateAndy/status/1093557630675681281)
to Cho’s tweet by declaring “I hereby formally invite everyone to
celebrate lunar new year”.)

Or, conversely, does the entire culture need to get together, form some
sort of legal entity that does not yet exist, and provide the culture’s
official seal of approval? Since such a seal doesn’t exist and that
there is therefore no way for “a culture” to get together and give
permission, such a view effectively means that *all* “taking
intellectual property, traditional knowledge, cultural expressions, or
artefacts from someone else’s culture” is wrong. So the medieval Muslims
should not have “taken” Aristotle from the Greeks, the Chinese should
not have “taken” Buddhism from India, modern Indians should not have
“taken” cricket and afternoon tea from the English. For that matter,
we’d all better stop listening to the Beatles – and the Clash and U2 and
Nirvana and the White Stripes and Imagine Dragons and every other white
act that “took” the African-American art form of rock’n’roll.

All of this should suggest why there is something off about the very
idea of knowledge or cultural expressions being “taken from” another
culture. The very idea of treating cultural expressions as a culture’s
*property*, which can be taken, seems to extend the capitalist logic of
private property into ever further spheres:to use the currently popular
jargon, this idea seems a quintessentially *neoliberal* one. As good
capitalists, we all know everything comes down to private property, and
private property must be respected. Learning from other cultures is a
form of stealing, just like progressive taxation and sharing PDF
articles. When did leftists start thinking that this was an idea they
wanted to embrace?

There is one case where I think “cultural appropriation” genuinely *is*
appropriation and is a genuine problem. That is when a culture’s ability
to use a cultural product is actually *taken away* from it – as when
Disney [trademarks “hakuna
matata”](https://www.cnn.com/2018/12/19/africa/africans-petition-disney-over-hakuna-matata-trademark-intl/)
or pharmaceutical companies get patents for medicines used traditionally
in the Amazon for years. *That* is a crime and a theft, from the people
of the originating culture and from human patrimony. But such cases are
not what “cultural appropriation” is most commonly used to mean. Too
often, the term “cultural apropriation” is *itself* used to take away –
take away the supposedly dominant culture’s ability to use something,
just as Disney takes away a marginalized culture’s. Either of these is a
*loss*, a depriving humanity of its cultural potential, for reasons that
do not justify that depriving.

I’ve sometimes heard the argument that it is bad that Westerners can
adopt foreign symbols and be viewed as cool when Asians have been looked
down upon for doing the same thing – for example in [this article by
Jaya
Sundaresh](http://theaerogram.com/beyond-bindis-why-cultural-appropriation-matters/).
Sundaresh says “If the use of the bindi by mainstream pop stars made it
easier for South Asian women to wear it, I’d be all for its
proliferation — but it doesn’t. They lend the bindi an aura of cool that
a desi woman simply can’t compete with, often with the privilege of
automatic acceptance in a society when many non-white women must fight
for it.”

But Sundaresh’s case seems nonsensical to me. If the bindi is being lent
“an aura of cool”, how is “a desi woman” then “competing with” that aura
– rather than *benefitting* from it? The problem in those situations is
not at all that white people can wear these items without social
disapproval; the problem is when nonwhite people *can’t!* I see no
evidence to indicate that white people’s wearing Asian styles makes it
any more difficult for nonwhite people to do so. It would seem to me
that it makes the wearing of these items *less* weird and *more*
socially acceptable in general.

Cultures have always borrowed freely from one another, changing the
meaning of objects in the process – without “permission” – and the
process is never unidirectional. I remember once being in a restaurant
in Phnom Penh that displayed a video of Cambodian women in scanty Santa
outfits singing “Jingle Bells” – in August. So too, Christmas is now one
of the [most popular holidays in
Japan](https://www.timeout.com/tokyo/things-to-do/tokyo-q-a-how-does-japan-celebrate-christmas)
–as a day when couples go out to celebrate their romantic relationships
by eating at KFC. The process of cultural borrowing is often funny and
sometimes awkward, and it leaves humanity all the richer for it. Western
Buddhism is very different from original Buddhism – [just as Chinese
Buddhism
is](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/05/on-the-genealogy-of-buddhism-and-science/).
But the world would be much poorer without Chinese Buddhism or East
African Islam, and it frightens and saddens me to imagine a world where
such cultural mixing is prohibited.

As someone who is racially mixed myself, I hope I can be excused for
worrying that such prohibitions on cultural mixing feel dangerously
close to [still more problematic
ideologies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miscegenation) that say I
should not exist. It does not bother me in the least when a white woman
wears a [sari](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sari). Rather, what offends
me, and even scares me, is when someone tells white women – women like
my mother – that they should *not* wear a sari.

The idea of “cultural appropriation” is directly antithetical to all the
work that cross-cultural philosophers have done so hard to get accepted.
Because if we accept that it is possible and illegitimate to “take”
traditional knowledge or cultural expressions from “someone else’s”
culture, well, again, that is exactly what Van Norden and Garfield have
advocated for, and what most of the philosophers here on the IPB are
doing. White people thinking constructively with non-Western philosophy
is exactly that “taking” of traditional knowledge from another culture.
(So, for that matter, is people of Indian origin “taking” philosophy
from China.) And it is never clear how exactly they were supposed to get
“permission”. To treat “cultural appropriation” as a bad thing is to say
to the likes of Garfield and Van Norden: how dare you white people take
Chinese philosophy from China or Indian philosophy from India? It is not
your *property*. Stay in your lane. Philosophy departments in the West
*should* remain departments of Western philosophy as they always have,
because their white professors have no right to teach non-Western
thought.

If the ideology of “cultural appropriation” were correct, it would mean
that traditionally white-dominated philosophy departments have been
*entirely right* in their long avoidance and ignoring of non-Western
philosophy. It would mean white people *shouldn’t* be studying the
philosophies that “belong to” people from other cultures. They shouldn’t
be “taking” and “appropriating” this property, they should stay in their
lanes and remain as narrow and parochial and hidebound and Eurocentric
as they always have been. The idea of cultural appropriation effectively
tells white people to be *more* Eurocentric – to drop even that
far-too-limited exploration of other cultures that they have already
engaged in. Intellectual diversity, learning from other cultures and
their ideas, is – according to cultural-appropriation ideology –a bad
thing. The ideology of cultural appropriation is a way of telling white
people to make their culture even whiter.

Fortunately for those of us who *do* study other cultures, this ideology
is entirely wrong. Cultures are not property. Humanity’s cultural
heritage belongs to humanity. The acts named by the phrase “cultural
appropriation” are things we human beings need more of. It is a joyous
and wonderful thing when cultures make creative new use of other
cultures’ ideas for their own needs and purposes. Let us celebrate it.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/02/in-praise-of-cultural-appropriation)
