+++
title = "My project on Buddhist"
full_title = "My project on Buddhist epistemology of logic—First guest post by Szymon Bogacz"
date = "2021-02-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/01/my-project-on-buddhist-epistemology-of-logic-first-guest-post-by-szymon-bogacz/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/02/01/my-project-on-buddhist-epistemology-of-logic-first-guest-post-by-szymon-bogacz/).

My project on Buddhist epistemology of logic—First guest post by Szymon Bogacz

Note by EF: This post is part of our series dedicated to younger
colleagues presenting themselves and their research, like Manasicha
Akepiyapornchai did
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/author/manasicha/) and Anusha Rao
did [here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/author/anusha/). For more on
Szymon, see [here](https://szymonbogacz.com/).

Hello everyone, my name is Szymon and I’m a PhD student in the School of
Philosophy at the Australian National University (ANU) in Canberra,
Australia. Thanks to Elisa and the rest of the blog’s editorial team for
giving me a platform to say a few things about my research.

My PhD project is about the nature of logical knowledge and the liar
paradox. What makes us justified to believe that ‘This sentence is
false’ is true if and only if it is false? How do we know that if
someone has a cat, we can validly infer that they have a cat or a dog?
In my project, I look at these and similar questions from the angle of
Buddhist epistemology.

In this first post, I want to do two things. Firstly, I want to tell you
a bit about my academic background, so you will know where my project is
coming from. Secondly, I will describe a change of my thinking about the
role of Buddhist texts in my philosophical work. In next posts, I will
talk about more specific topics: the Dharmakīrtian view on the liar
paradox, believing contradictions, and a logical rule saying that if a
sentence implies its negation, then this sentence has to be false.

I graduated from a philosophy program at the Jagiellonian University in
Kraków, Poland. I’ve learned some Sanskrit and rudimentary Buddhist
Chinese on the way. My MA thesis was about the concept of own nature
(svabhāva) in pre-Nāgārjuna Mahāyāna and Sarvāstivāda. After getting my
MA, I spent three more years at the same university working towards a
PhD. I was focused primarily on the history of Buddhist philosophy.

In 2018, I withdrew my candidacy from the Jagiellonian and started the
PhD program at the ANU. At the beginning, I thought I will keep working
on Nāgārjuna, Mahāyāna, and Sarvāstivāda. After several months, I’ve
changed my way of thinking about what I should be doing with Buddhist
texts.

The change was a bit drastic. After around 5 years of studying early
Buddhist religion and philosophy and trying to figure out how
all-things-svabhāva hang together, I started reading some Dharmakīrti,
Mokṣākaragupta and heaps of contemporary, heavyweight analytic
philosophy and logic. Now I think about myself more like an aspiring
philosopher of logic than a historian of Buddhist philosophy. What has
changed?

Firstly, I realised that my svabhāva project was not especially
promising. (I’m happy to tell you why but that’s a different story!)
Secondly, and more importantly, no philosopher cared about my work.
Okay, I might be exaggerating. I have met some great philosophers and
buddhologists, some of them readers of this blog, who are interested in
svabhāva. However, philosophers generally don’t care about Nāgārjuna and
what he says. They care about something else. They care about what’s
true, not what someone said.

Let me give you an example. Nāgārjuna in the Ratnāvalī says that causes
and effects are like long and short. My work, as a historian of
philosophy, was to figure out what that could mean. Nāgārjuna thinks
that, I believe, because he thinks that causes and effects are relative
to each other and, consequently, they are unreal and imagined. So far,
so good.

However, there is a problem with Nāgārjuna’s view. He doesn’t give any
compelling arguments to support it, at least not in the Ratnāvalī. All
he does is state that causes and effects are like long and short and it
means that they are unreal. But are causes and effects actually unreal?
Why would they be? Even if we were successful at unpacking what he says,
we would still be left with wondering why he would say that and whether
what he says is plausible. Consequently, explaining what Nāgārjuna
thinks is not in itself showing that he is, or might be, right.

Many philosophers I’ve met are mostly interested in assessing and giving
reasons for various philosophical positions. In my first months at the
ANU, I realised that my job shouldn’t be to figure out what Buddhist
philosophers say or think, but rather to find out whether what they say
might be right.

In my project, I focus on providing my own philosophical arguments
originating from Buddhists views. Surely, I reconstruct these views in
the process—most often piggybacking on work of others—but my
reconstructions are merely instrumental for my philosophical work. I do
my historical research to get Buddhists ideas off ground and then I
build on them further without looking back.

How does it work? In the next posts, I will introduce you to specifics
of my project. We will explore a philosophical position rooted in
Buddhist texts that seems worth defending today. Next week, I will talk
about Dharmakīrti’s thoughts on contradictions with own words
(svavacanavirodha) and how they can provide a background for a novel
approach to an old paradox.
