+++
title = "Again on omniscience Why"
full_title = "Again on omniscience Why talking about it, God’s omniscience and some reasons to refute it"
date = "2017-08-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/08/10/again-on-omniscience-why-talking-about-it-gods-omniscience-and-some-reasons-to-refute-it/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/08/10/again-on-omniscience-why-talking-about-it-gods-omniscience-and-some-reasons-to-refute-it/).

Again on omniscience: Why talking about it, God’s omniscience and some reasons to refute it

Why is the topic of omniscience relevant in Indian philosophy? Because
of at least two concurring reasons. On the one hand, for schools like
Buddhism and Jainism, it is a question of religious authority. Ascribing
omniscience to the founders of the school was a way to ground the
validity of their teachings. Slightly similar is the situation of
theistic schools ascribing omniscience to God, as a way to ground His
ability to organise the world in the best possible way. On the other
hand, for other schools the idea of omniscience was initially connected
with the result of yogic or other ascetic practices. In this sense,
omniscience was conceptually not different from aṇimā \`the faculty to
become as small as an atom’ and other special powers.

**The range of omniscience**  
A problem (raised by Sudipta Munsi in a comment on
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2017/07/11/first-thoughts-on-omniscience-in-indian-thought/)
post) connected with the scope of omniscience regards the question of
whether an omniscient being also knows all erroneous beliefs. At first
sight it might seem that if she does not, she is not completely
omniscient and that if she does, she shares also erroneous beliefs,
which seems paradoxical. A possible way out consists in claiming that
she knows all erroneous beliefs but she attributes them to us. In other
words, she knows that I do not know about the place and year of birth of
Kumārila, but still correctly knows where and when he was born. Is this
solution satisfactorily? Possibly, although this kind of omniscience
would lack the first person grasp on how it feels to not know that X or
to hold a false belief.

A connected problem regards specifically God’s omniscience: Does God
also knows what it is to be in pain? If He does not, He seems to be not
omniscient. If He does, He is no longer untouched by sufferance
(duḥkha), as claimed in Nyāya and Yoga. In other words, an Īśvara-like
God (see below) cannot be said to have experience of duḥkha. His
knowledge would nonetheless not be incomplete because duḥkha would be
conceived as just a negative entity (the absence of pleasure), which
does not need to be separately known. God would be omniscient insofar as
He knows all states of affairs, without needing to know also their
corresponding absences. By contrast, God as conceived in theistic
Vedānta (see below the lines on Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta) can even be said
to have experience of duḥkha, insofar as He is the inner controller of
each conscious being and shares therefore their experience from within.

**God’s omniscience**  
Nyāya authors accept the existence of a God, usually referred to as
Īśvara, who can be proved to exist, and develop on this basis a rational
theology which accepts His omniscience and omnipotence. They explain
that Īśvara \`Lord’ needs to be omniscient in order to deploy His
functions, which include the re-arrangement of the world after each
periodic destruction and the re-assignment of their karman to each
living being. Accordingly, God’s omniscience needs to be understood in a
robust sense as the knowledge of all present, past and future states of
affairs and as completely actualised (against some Buddhist conceptions
discussed above). This, however, entails some problem, insofar as the
Lord’s knowledge needs to be at any time complete and is in this sense
atemporal. But this seems to mean that (a) there is no space for human
free will and (b) the Lord knows the world outside of time. He knows, in
other words, all states of affairs simultaneously and independent of
time. This mirror-like omniscience has been criticised by authors of the
Buddhist epistemological school (see Moriyama 2014 and forthcoming).

Śaiva authors, especially of the Pratyabhijñā school, accept both
omniscience of yogins and of the Lord/Īśvara. The first one is often
referred to in discussions aiming at establishing the omnipresent nature
of the Lord as the supreme subject. In fact, how could memory be
possible, if there were not a single subjectivity connecting events from
a subjective point of view? And how could knowledge be possible, if
there were not a fundamental similarity of nature between knower and
known things, which does betrays its partaking to the nature of the
absolute subject? The Nyāya account of a plurality of subjectivity is
rejected insofar as it clashes with cases like the yogins’ ability to
access other minds. The yogin, explain Pratyabhijñā authors, knows other
minds from within, as the subject of their thoughts, and does not take
other minds as an object to be known, since this knowledge would not be
a real knowledge of the other mind, which is intrinsically subjective
and cannot be reduced to an object. This ability of the yogin depends on
the fact that he has recognised his identity with the Lord and can
therefore access any mind. The Lord, as the single all-pervading
subject, is in fact de facto omniscient and liberation consists in
recognising one’s identity with Him (see R. Torella’s studies on
yogipratyakṣa in this school).

Vedāntic authors conceive of God as brahman, and therefore as the only
absolute reality. In this sense, the brahman is not an additional entity
in the world, and the latter only exists because of Him (Dvaita
Vedānta), in Him (Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta) or does not exist ultimately
(Advaita Vedānta). Knowledge is considered in Vedāntic school to be a
substance. Advaita Vedāntins resolve the duality which would emerge out
of the assumption of brahman and knowledge by stating that brahman
consists of cit \`consciousness’. This is unintentional, since any
content would include duality.

Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta authors conceive of God as brahman and at the same
time as a personal God. He is therefore the material cause of the world,
which is conceived by Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedāntins to exist only as a
specification of Him. Like in the case of Advaita Vedānta, knowledge is
conceived as a substance. Unlike in Advaita, knowledge is intentional,
and has as its content the whole world. The reality of the world is thus
guaranteed by its being a specification of the brahman and by its being
a content of His knowledge. At the same time, the brahman is conceived
of as a personal God, which means that the two above mentioned ways of
relating to the world are not mutually exclusive (as it happens to be
the case in Spinoza’s pantheism). Rather, knowledge is connected to Him
as His characteristic. It is not just one characteristic among many, nor
is it connected to the Lord as a quality to its substrate. By contrast,
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta authors describe the relation between God and His
knowledge as one of indissolubility. The two cannot be experienced the
one without the other and, although knowledge is ultimately a substance,
it behaves as a characteristic of Him (it is therefore called
dharmabhūtajñāna \`cognition \[behaving\] like a characteristic’).

**Against omniscience**  
Basing on the same elements, the authors of the Mīmāṃsā elements
altogether deny the possibility of omniscience. They explain that
omniscience contradicts our experience, where knowledge always increases
but never reaches on outmost limit. Against the argument of repeated
exercise, they observe that exercise does not need to be able to reach
whatever result. For instance, no matter how much one exercises, one
will never be able to jump until the moon. Nor will one’s smell be able
to perceive sounds, even after an intense training. Thus, there are
intrinsic boundaries to each faculty, including one’s intellect, which
cannot directly grasp things, without the mediation of perception,
inference and the other instruments of knowledge.  
Moreover, no one could judge the omniscience of someone else. Thus,
claim the Mīmāṃsā authors, the accounts about the Buddha’s omniscience
cannot be trustworthy, since no one but an omniscient can vouch for
someone else’s omniscience.

Why do Mīmāṃsakas insist so much on the impossibility of omniscience?
From an internal and argumentative perspective, because of their
commitment to common experience, which should not be contradicted
without a valid reason. From an external and socio-philosophical
perspective, because their defence of the Veda depends on its uniqueness
as instrument of knowledge for knowing dharma \`duty’. It is clear that
no other human instrument of knowledge could compete with the Veda,
since all human instruments of knowledge can only grasp what there is
and not what ought to be. However, if there were an omniscient human or
divine being, then they could reasonably compete with the Veda and
possibly even falsify it.

The Buddhist arguments against omniscience (see Moriyama 2014 and
Moriyama forthcoming) are different, insofar as they object only against
the Lord’s omniscience, but accept the Buddha’s one. The difference lies
in the fact that the Buddha became omniscient, whereas the Lord is
allegedly permanently omniscient. Hence, only in the case of the Lord’s
omniscience one encounter paradoxes such as the ones seen above and
regarding the incompatibility of temporality and omniscience.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
