+++
title = "Nandagopa with a sharp"
full_title = "Nandagopa with a sharp spear and cruel deeds"
upstream_url = "https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/12/16/nandagopa-with-a-sharp-spear-and-cruel-deeds/"
date = "2021-12-16"

+++
Source: [here](https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/12/16/nandagopa-with-a-sharp-spear-and-cruel-deeds/).

Nandagopa with a sharp spear and cruel deeds

Ah, the month of Mārkaḻi has come, making us think of Āṇṭāḷ more than ever. The *Tiruppāvai* is recited in every nook and corner of the Tamil-speaking land, and beyond. While for some, the *Tiruppāvai* is part of the daily recitation (except during certain periods), for others, it is this month that pushes them to wake up early in the morning, make nice, colourful *kōlam*s, and recite the *Tiruppāvai*. Sometimes all of the 30 daily; sometimes, the first *pācuram* on day 1, the first 2 on day, building up to all 30 verses on day 30; and some of the lazier recite only the *pācuram* of the day. I suppose anything is better than nothing in this case. One ought to think of what Parāśara Bhaṭṭar once said.

Anyway, I thought I should listen to a *kālakṣepam* of the *Tiruppāvai*, not just an *upanyāsam*, this year. So I have started (as a precaution, already a few days before the beginning of the month) listening to Velukkudi Krishnan’s *kālakṣepam* based on Periyavāccāṉ Piḷḷai’s *Mūvāyirappaṭi* commentary (by the way, this year, he is giving a *kālakṣepam* based on Aḻakiya Maṇavāḷa Perumāḷ Nāyaṉār. You can register [here](https://www.kinchit.org) if you are interested). And I realised why I loved Piḷḷai so much, just by going through his commentary on the first verse. What I found particularly lovely and amusing is his gloss on the line *kūr vēl koṭum toḻilaṉ nantakōpaṉ =* “Nandagopa with a sharp spear and cruel deeds”.

Piḷḷai begins introducing Nandagopa’s character: he was not someone who even trod upon fresh grass so that it didn’t die (*śrī nantakōpar muṉpu pacum pul cāva mitiyātavar āyttu*), that’s how *sātvika* he was. Piḷḷai gives a comparison: “he was essentially compassionate/merciful like our Ciṟiyāttāṉ” (*nam ciṟiyāttāṉai pōlē ānṛśaṃsyapradhānar-āyttu pōruvatu*). The latter said is to be an Ācārya as well, who was particularly soft and considerate. What a wonderful way to explain how good Nandagopa was to one’s students by pointing out a living example that they knew of! And how wonderful Ciṟiyāttāṉ must have been to deserve a mention in such a work! He’ll be remembered even if he hasn’t composed anything or done anything else that would have carved his name in history. OK, if Nandagopa was so good, then why call him cruel?

When the children (presumably Balarāma as well as Kṛṣṇa) were born, he started carrying the spear worrying what might befall them, continues Piḷḷai. But why perform cruel deeds? and what sort of cruel deeds? When there was an ant under the cradle, he would get his hands bloody by jumping upon that ant as if he pounced upon a lion, out of excessive furor! (*toṭṭiṟ kīḻē eṟumpu pukurilum siṃhattiṉ mēlē viḻumā pōlē cīṟṟattiṉ mikutiyālē utirakkai ākiṟār*). For, the common laws give way to the special laws (and protecting Kṛṣṇa is a special *dharma* as opposed to the common *dharma* which prohibits undue violence). Plus, if it was performed for his own sake (*svārtham āka*), then that would have been bad. Any act that he performs for the safety of Him is *dharma*, notes Piḷḷai. And I think another commentator mentions that since Kṛṣṇa was attacked by Asuras in different forms since His birth, Nandagopa became paranoid and as a result, would take no risks when it came to protecting his Child.

After a few lines, Piḷḷai explains how fair Nandagopala was: if people complained to him that Kṛṣṇa robbed butter or women, he would tell them that if they brought Him to him, he would punish Him (*eṉ kaṇvaṭṭattilē vantu tōṟṟiṉāṉ ākil niyamikka kaṭavēṉ*). As if that was an easy task! And even when they managed to, Kṛṣṇa appeared so polite/modest (*savinayar*) in His father’s presence, that he would exclaim: “Drat! Is it *Him* that you blamed in this way??” (*keṭṭēṉ! ivaṉaiyō iṅṅaṉē paḻiyiṭṭatu?*) and be angry with those who complained int he first place. And even Yaśodā, Piḷḷai concludes, warns a misbehaving Kṛṣṇa that His father would be angry (*untamaṭikaḷ muṉivar*) when scolding Him. And yet, she would also feel guilty about being so cruel as to send her Son to falter \[behind the calves\] in the forest so that He didn’t get into any mischief in the hamlet. What wonderful parents!!

And before we leave, another thing that Piḷḷai explains: Kṛṣṇa is well-behaved in the presence of His father because the latter is intent upon His good (*hitakāmar*), meaning that he would not hesitate to punish Him for His own good (Yeah, right! We saw how he went about that!). But He was proud and lordly (read: unruly and mischievous) in Yaśodā’s presence because she dealt with Him lovingly (*priya*). He hints at the difference between the father and the mother, although in this case, I seriously don’t see the difference, because *hita* and *priya* merge together when dealing with Kṛṣṇa!

PS: image above: copyrights @krishnafortoday.com and Keshav
