+++
title = "Bādha from hermeneutics"
full_title = "Bādha from hermeneutics to epistemology"
date = "2020-02-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/17/badha-from-hermeneutics-to-epistemology/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/17/badha-from-hermeneutics-to-epistemology/).

Bādha from hermeneutics to epistemology

The chapter on epistemology (tarkapāda) is the first chapter in the
basic text of Mīmāṃsā, the Mīmāṃsāsūtra, but was presumably the last one
added to the Mīmāṃsā hermeneutic enterprise.

Consequently, it makes sense to look at Mīmāṃsā epistemology as reusing
a terminology coming from the Mīmāṃsā’s hermeneutic commitments. For
instance, the impact of words like nitya in Mīmāṃsā epistemology can
only be understood against the background of its meaning in the ritual
part of the Mīmāṃsā, which forms the biggest part of the Mīmāṃsāsūtra
and of early Mīmāṃsā itself. The same applies to the role of various
instruments of knowledge, which can often be only understood once one
thinks of their ritual rule (e.g., śrutārthāpatti and the addition of
words to Vedic sentences; upamāna and ritual substitutes).

Let me now shortly discuss the similar case of bādha. This is well-known
in epistemology, especially in Kumārila’s theory of intrinsic validity
(svataḥ prāmāṇya), as the defeater through which a cognition is
recognised as invalid, or is made invalid, according to the
interpretation of Kumārila’s commentators. The exact understanding of
bādha is crucial in order to understand the concept of truth at stake in
svataḥ prāmāṇya. In fact, if bādha invalidates a previously valid
cognition, and is in turn liable to be invalidated, this seems to imply
that truth has only a regulative role, but can never be said to be
surely attained. Knowledge would therefore work, also at the epistemic
level, without the 100% certainty of its truth. By contrast, if bādha
indicates the cognition leading one to recognise that a previous one was
invalid, then truth can still play a real role.

In this connection, a look at the ritual history of bādha and at the way
bādha is used in ritual contexts by Kumārila can be revealing. In a
ritual context, bādha indicates the suspension, not invalidation of a
Vedic command, in order for another one to step in. Epistemological and
hermeneutical cases are moreover discussed together in the
balābalādhikaraṇa of Kumārila’s Tantravārttika.

I am grateful to Malcolm Keating for interesting discussions on this
topic. This post was posted also on my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com).
