+++
title = "Does the"
full_title = "Does the kammatic/nibbanic distinction fit the facts?"
date = "2020-02-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/16/does-the-kammaticnibbanic-distinction-fit-the-facts/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/16/does-the-kammaticnibbanic-distinction-fit-the-facts/).

Does the kammatic/nibbanic distinction fit the facts?

How helpful is Melford Spiro’s [kammatic/nibbanic
distinction](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/)
in describing Buddhism? It can be tempting to line it up too closely
with other dichotomies –to say that kammatic Buddhism is practised by
householders and nibbanic Buddhism by monks, for example. Damien Keown
(*Nature of Buddhist Ethics* 86) notes that in Spiro’s own survey of
Burmese villagers, many laypeople say that they would prefer nirvana for
their next life and most monks do not describe striving for nirvana as
one of their main functions; so such a mapping of kammatic/nibbanic onto
householder/monk would be false.

But Keown takes this point about laypeople and monks much too far when
he draws the conclusion that therefore Spiro’s kammatic/nibbanic “theory
does not fit the facts”. I think Spiro’s language *suggests* kammatic
Buddhism is for householders and nibbanic is for monks, but he never
actually *claims* that, let alone making it a part of the theory. Spiro
explicitly says that “all three systems are found in varying degrees in
all Buddhists.” (*Buddhism and Society* 13. The third system is
“apotropaic” Buddhism,
[superstitious](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/03/of-superstition-and-aesthetics/)
practices of magical protection from illness and demons.) Rather,
sociologically, kammatic and nibbanic Buddhism are [ideal
types](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/10/ideal-types-in-philosophy/),
analytical constructs that help us observers make sense of what we see.
Spiro distinguishes between “religious virtuosos” in which nibbanic
Buddhism is more prominent and the more kammatic “religiously unmusical
masses” (66), but he never assumes that monks are necessarily virtuosos
or householders unmusical.

So when Keown claims the kammatic/nibbanic distinction “stems from an
overestimation of the significance of the distinction between lay and
monastic lifestyles” (*Nature* 85), I think this is a gross misreading
of Spiro. I have found no place where Spiro maps the one distinction on
to the other at all, and Spiro explicitly proclaims that that is *not*
what he is doing. Spiro’s supposed overestimation is nothing more than
Keown’s straw man.

Rather, what Spiro is noticing – entirely appropriately, in my view – is
a tension between the nibbāna-focused path of the suttas and abhidhamma
on one hand, and on the other the utterly different Buddhism one finds
[in the
Mahāvaṃsa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/)
and in the everyday life of Buddhist countries, where nirvana seems
irrelevant. The Mahāvaṃsa is particularly relevant here because it shows
the kammatic/nibbanic distinction doesn’t even map onto the standard
distinction between textual and everyday (“lived”) Buddhism: it is a
distinction that shows up *between texts*. It is significant to me that
Keown, whose work is mostly based on texts, does not discuss texts like
the Mahāvaṃsa: texts that provide even a casual reader with a striking
contrast to the suttas’ goal of transcending suffering.

My criticism of Keown on Spiro aligns with my [previous criticism on
eudaimonia](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/):
Keown fails to see Charles Taylor’s distinction between a Platonic-Stoic
“revisionist” account of the good, in which normal human ends like
romantic partners and material wealth play no proper part, and an
Aristotelian “comprehensive” account in which they do. I think that a
distinction of this sort has played a significant implicit role in the
history of Buddhism, and that the kammatic/nibbanic distinction is very
helpful in articulating its particular Buddhist form (nibbanic Buddhism
as revisionist, kammatic as comprehensive). As Spiro himself notes,
these ideal types are found in various ways in all Buddhists –but we
see nibbanic Buddhism much more strongly in the suttas and kammatic much
more in the Mahāvaṃsa.

Spiro and Keown are both thinking about the kammatic/nibbanic
distinction descriptively –whether it’s helpful in describing how
Buddhists in Buddhist societies do in fact think about karma and
nirvana. But this sort of distinction can also be normative. The
20th-century Sri Lankan monk Henpitagedara Gnanavasa made a very similar
distinction ([described by H.L.
Seneviratne](https://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/W/bo3616339.html))
between *bhāvagāmī* and *vibhāvagāmī*. Literally “going to being” and
“going away from being”, Seneviratne renders these latter terms into
English as “conducive to rebirth” and “conducive to escape from
rebirth”. For Gnanavasa, the Five Precepts and acts of merit-making like
giving to monks are *bhāvagāmī*: they are helpful, but the ultimate
point of the Buddhist path requires *vibhāvagāmī* acts of self-control
like the [five additional precepts taken by
monks](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/ptf/dhamma/sila/dasasila.html).
In that respect Gnanavasa does indeed map the distinction onto the
householder/monk distinction –but in a way that is immune to Keown’s
objections to such a mapping, because Gnanavasa’s intent *is* normative.
For Gnanavasa, kammatic (*bhāvagāmī*) Buddhism is helpful, but we
*should* be practising a nibbanic (*vibhāvagāmī*) Buddhism –and
following a monastic life is what will get us to the latter. The
distinction is not intended to provide a sociological picture of what
Buddhists happen to do, but to distinguish a less and a more effective
way of getting us out of suffering.

I agree with Gnanavasa that the distinction is important from a
normative Buddhist theological perspective. My relative evaluation of
the two sides of the distinction, though, is very different from his. I
will discuss that point more next time.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/does-the-kammaticnibbanic-distinction-fit-the-facts)
