+++
title = "Words are arrows"
full_title = "Words are arrows piercing lotus leaves"
date = "2020-02-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/13/words-are-arrows-piercing-lotus-leaves/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/13/words-are-arrows-piercing-lotus-leaves/).

Words are arrows piercing lotus leaves

I recently received a thoughtful email from Satyanarayana Hegde, who is
a Civil Attorney by profession and characterizes himself as an
autodidact interested in Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Persian and Urdu
languages and literary cultures who ccasionally perpetrates random acts
of literary criticism. He wrote in reference to an [older
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/31/3345/), in which I
meditated on the comparison between arrows and words in Sanskrit texts,
and the range of ways it appears. I included a tentative translation of
Vācaspatimiśra’s Nyāyavārttikatātparyaṭīkā:

प्रयोगप्राचुर्याद अत्यन्ताभ्यासेनातिशीघ्रतया सन्न् अपि प्रत्ययक्रमो न
लक्ष्यते शीघ्रतरबाणहेतुकशतपत्रशतव्यतिभेदवद् इति चेत । न ।

Suppose you say: due to the profuse number of such uses, since they are
very common and occur so fast, \[secondary meaning understood from the
primary meaning\], although it is a sequential awareness, it is not
recognized as such–just like the explosive appearance of hundreds of
feathers caused by hundreds of the fastest arrows (bāṇa). (We reply) no…

In my post, I puzzled over the image of being “like the explosive
appearance of hundreds of feathers caused by hundreds of the fastest
arrows” (*śīghratara-bāna-hetuka-śata-patra-śata-vyatibhedavad*). The
imagery is clearly intended to illustrate a view which Vācaspati will
deny, namely that certain cases of primary meaning are actually
secondary meaning, but they just occur so rapidly that we aren’t aware
of the sequence. However, I wasn’t sure what the image was meant to be.

Mr. Hegde wrote to share not only his translation of that compound, but
some thoughts on other places where the words-as-arrows image appears,
not limited to Sanskrit literature. What follows from this point are his
comments:

------------------------------------------------------------------------



I’m afraid, *data venia*, that Vācaspati isn’t talking here about a very
large bow from which many arrows could be shot at a single time and in
fact, there are no bows here! This image is that of a hundred lotus
leaves being pierced by a needle or as in this case, an arrow. The
translation (*ad sensum* rather than *ad verbum*) should read, I suppose
something like this:

Suppose you say: due to sheer usage and their being customary, they are
so rapid that although there is sequential cognition, the temporal gap
isn’t noticed, as when an arrow pierces through a stack of a hundred
lotus-leaves

This very vivid image is that of a hundred leaves (*patraśata*) of a
lotus (*śatapatra*) stacked one on top of the other and a needle (or an
arrow) piercing the first through the last, which seems to be immediate
and non-sequential, despite being temporal and sequential. I suppose
this is due to the bisemy of the word *patra*-it means both “leaf” (of a
flower or a lotus) as well as “the feather of an arrow.”

Kumārila uses a variant of this simile in the *Śūnyavāda* chapter of the
*Ślokavārttika*, verse 157 to refute the contention that the example of
a lamp and the light emitted by it illustrates the simultaneity of cause
and effect by arguing that there’s a minute uncognizable temporal gap
between a lamp and its emitted light, just like there is when a hundred
lotus petals are being pierced: *yatpradīpaprabhādyuktam sūkṣmakālo’asti
tatra naḥ/durlakṣastu yathā* *vedhaḥ* *padmapatraśate yathā*//

Viśvanātha, commenting on *asaṃlakṣyakramavyaṅgya* at *Sāhityadarpaṇa*
4.5 uses this simile to illustrate that though this variety of *dhvani*
is called as “sequenceless,” there nevertheless is a temporal sequence
between the presentation of the textual elements and the cognition of
suggestion: *atra
vyaṅgyapratītervibhāvādipratītikāraṇakatvātkramo’vaśyamasti
kintūtpalapatraśatavyatibhedavallāghavānna saṃlakṣyate*. Jagannātha in
the first *ānana* of the *Rasagaṅgādhara* also uses this simile for a
similar point, though he mentions a needle: *ete
cāsaṃlakṣyakramavyaṅgyāḥ* *sahṛdayena rasavyaktau jhagiti jāyamānāyām
vibhāvānubhāvavyabhicārivimarśakramasya sato’api,
sūcīśatapatrapatraśatavedhakramasyevālakṣaṇāt*

This is an ancient simile. In the *sūkta* addressed to Brahmagavī, the
poet tells us symbolically how *Braḥman* pierces the cavilers of the
gods using his speech as an arrow: *jihvā jyā bhávati kúlmalaṃ vān
nāḍikā dantās tápasābhídigdhāḥ/tébhir brahmā vidhyati devapīyūn
hṛdbalaír dhánubhir devájūtaiḥ* (*Atharvaveda* 5.18.8; *Atharvaveda
Paippalāda Saṃhita* 9.18.3)-

His tongue a bow-string, His speech an arrow-neck,  
His teeth heat-anointed arrows-  
With these *Braḥman* pierces the cavilers of the gods,  
With god-speedened bows strengthened by the heart

This simile is used in kavya too: *kiṃ kavestasya kāvyena kiṃ kāṇḍena
dhanuṣmataḥ/parasya hṛdaye lagnaṃ na ghūrṇayatiyacchiraḥ//*
(*Subhāsịtāvali* 134, *kavikāvyapraśaṃsā*, *Subhāṣitratnabhānḍāgāra,
kukaviniṃdā*)-

The poet’s poem, the archer’s arrow, which strikes the heart, but
doesn’t make the head sway:roll, is no poem, is no arrow

A variant:

*yallagnaṃ hṛdi puṃsām bhūyo bhūyaḥ śiro na ghūrṇayati/tadapi kaveḥ kimu
Kāvyaṃ kāṇḍo vā dhanvinām kimasau//* (*Subhāṣitaratnakoṣā,*
*Kavistutivrajyā* no. 1721)

This is, as you note, frequently used in the *Mahābhārata*–

*Karṇinālīkanārācān nirharanti śarīrataḥ/vākśalyastu na nirhantum śakyo
hṛdiśayo hi saḥ*// (*Mahābhārata*, *Anuśāsanaparva* Ch. 13/*Viduranīti*)

One can pull out any arrow lodged in the body  
Word-arrows, however, can’t be pulled out  
For they lodge deep in the heart

This is a classical simile too:

*exaudi orationem ad te omnis caro veniet qui exacuerunt quasi gladium
linguam suam tetenderunt sagittam suam verbum amarissimum ut sagittarent
in absconditis simplicem* (Psalm 64:3-4)

They sharpen their tongues like swords and aim harsh words like deadly
arrows. They shoot suddenly and fearlessly from ambush at the innocent.

Pindar has famously used this simile:

*polla moi hyp’ agkōnos ōkea belē endon enti pharetras phōnanta
synetoisin: es de to pan hermēneōn chatizei. sophos ho polla eidōs
phyai: mathontes de labroi pagglōssiai, korakes hōs, akranta garyeton
Dios pros ornicha theion. epeche nyn skopōi toxon, age thyme, tina
ballomen ek malthakas aute phrenos eukleas oïstous hientes; epi toi
Akraganti tanysais audasomai enorkion logon alathei noōi tekein mē tin’
hekaton ge eteōn polin philois andra mallon euergetan prapisin
aphthonesteron te chera Thērōnos* (Pindar, *Olympian Ode* 2.91-105)

I have many swift arrows in the quiver under my arm, arrows that speak
to the initiated. But the masses need interpreters. The man who knows a
great deal by nature is truly skillful, while those who have only
learned chatter with raucous and indiscriminate tongues in vain like
crows against the divine bird of Zeus. Now, bend your bow toward the
mark; tell me, my mind, whom are we trying to hit as we shoot arrows of
fame from a gentle mind? I will aim at Akragas, and speak with true
intent a word sworn by oath: no city for a hundred years has given birth
to a man more beneficent in his mind or more generous with his hand than
Theron.

This was composed for Theron of Akragas for his chariot victory at
Olympia in 476 B.C.E. Aeschylus, *Suppliant Women* 446; *Eumenides* 676;
Eurypides, *Suppliants* 456 use the image of human utterance as arrows.
Language and arrows have been linked since the time of Homer: *epea
pteroenta prosēuda*, “He spoke winged words”; *Iliad* 1.201; 8.101-words
are said to be “winged”: *epea pteroenta*. Etymologically *pteron* is
“feather” and *pterux* is “wing.” The metaphor is that of a “winged”
bird escaping through the “barrier of the teeth” of the speaker, like a
bird escaping from a cage, and flying swiftly to the eager ears of the
hearer. In Sanskrit, *patatrin* is both “a bird” and “an arrow” (or in
contexts of the *Rājasūya* “a horse”). An arrow is a winged shaft or
metaphorically a “winged word,” the *tertium comparitionis* between
bird’s wings and arrows being swift flight.

(Cross-posted at my personal blog.)
