+++
title = "Kammatic and nibbanic"
full_title = "Kammatic and nibbanic Buddhism"
date = "2020-02-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/).

Kammatic and nibbanic Buddhism

Last winter my wife and I made a wonderful trip to Sri Lanka. Before I
say anything about the trip’s philosophical implications, I just want to
note that *you should go there* if you have the money and time to travel
off-continent. This cradle of Theravāda Buddhism has spectacular
beaches, deliciously spicy food, and no less than eight UNESCO World
Heritage Sites in a country the size of West Virginia or Latvia. Sri
Lanka’s friendly and cheerful people make a great deal of their living
from tourism – and it saddens me to think that last year’s
well-publicized bombings might devastate that living, especially since
one’s actual risk of being a victim of terrorism is no greater in
today’s Sri Lanka than it is in France. They and their country deserve
better. Please visit Sri Lanka. You won’t regret it.

[![ruwanwelisaya-stupa-srilanka-serendipity_holidays_hyderabad_telangana_india_large](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/ruwanwelisaya-stupa-srilanka-serendipity_holidays_hyderabad_telangana_india_large-300x200.jpg)](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/ruwanwelisaya-stupa-srilanka-serendipity_holidays_hyderabad_telangana_india_large.jpg)But
to return to the topics of this blog. We visited several of said
Buddhist World Heritage Sites, including Buddhaghosa’s home of
[Anuradhapura](https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/200/) (whose great stupa
is larger than any other ancient building save the Pyramids). We talked
about Buddhism with our tour guide there. We passed many Buddhist
temples and shrines on the road. I read the
[Mahāvaṃsa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/),
the old historical chronicle of Buddhism’s arrival in Sri Lanka. And all
of it was very far from the Buddhism I
[profess](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/)
–even though they and I would all claim to be Theravādins.

This is not the first time I’ve encountered such a distance, of course.
[Thai
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/03/of-superstition-and-aesthetics/)
in practice is likewise focused in very different directions from the
Buddhism I know. For most Buddhists as for most Catholics, their
tradition is more about [lentils than
liberation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/protestantism-and-populism-in-religious-studies/).
I’ve known that intellectually for a long time, and once upon a time
that wouldn’t have really mattered to me –I would have just said
they’re getting the Buddha’s teaching wrong. But since then, I have come
to appreciate this everyday Buddhism for its [affirmation of goals
beyond the removal of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/),
and especially its [aesthetic
beauty](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/03/the-power-of-a-beautiful-temple/).

Still, there remains a problem here. It struck me that I saw not a
single mention or reference to a non-self doctrine in anything I
encountered in Sri Lanka, including the Mahāvaṃsa text; a
[Pudgalavādin](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/how-can-you-be-yourself-if-there-is-no-self/)
would have had no problem with any of it. But even more basic doctrines
like the Four Noble Truths or Noble Eightfold Path came up at most in
allusion, if at all. The Buddhism of this lived Sri Lankan world is so
very different from the suttas and abhidhamma from which we philosophers
learn –yet few of us would dare to say that either one is “not really
Buddhism”. How should we *think* about this difference, this wide gap in
the tradition?

Many people have asked such questions before. And so it turns out that
there are many conceptual bifurcations, dichotomies, available for
thinking about two different sides of Buddhism – if not always the
*same* different sides. (Notice none of these are strongly related to
the most common way of dividing Buddhism, between Mahāyāna and
Theravāda.) The anthropologist [Melford
Spiro](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melford_Spiro), making sense of
Buddhism in Burma, distinguished between *kammatic* and *nibbanic*
Buddhism: a Buddhism aimed at better karma/kamma for a better life,
“improving one’s position on the Wheel” of rebirth, versus a Buddhism
aimed at nirvana/nibbana and getting off that wheel entirely. Adopting
generally Indian terminology from Franklin Edgerton, Spiro identifies
kammatic Buddhism with an “ordinary norm” “intended for the religious
majority”, and nibbanic Buddhism with an “extraordinary norm” “confined
to a much smaller group, those whose primary concern was with
salvation.” (*Buddhism and Society* 11-12) This language might suggest
that kammatic Buddhism would be followed by householders and nibbanic
Buddhism by monks, although we will see that even for Spiro things are
not so simple.

The hybrid-English adjectives “kammatic” and “nibbanic” are Spiro’s
coinages, but related distinctions are found within the tradition –and
not only among élite intellectual monks. In [Martin Southwold’s
ethnographic research on a Sri Lankan
village](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/11/the-supernatural-without-ascent/),
Sinhalese villagers drew contrasts between the *laukika*, literally
“worldly”, and *lokottara* or “supraworldly” – the latter being
concerned with nirvana, liberation from the world and its sufferings.
The role the gods play in village culture is one can transfer one’s good
karma to them and be granted worldly benefits –and that is therefore a
*laukika* activity, one which the villagers [even feel guilty
of](https://www-jstor-org.ezproxy.bu.edu/stable/2801935?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents):
“‘As Buddhists’, they would say, ‘we ought not to do these things. But
we are sinful and weak, and so we have to concern ourselves with worldly
matters’.” Such a distinction (using the Pali forms *lokiya* and
*lokuttara* , as opposed to the Sinhala *laukika/lokottara*) is also
found in the classical
[abhidhamma](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/abhi/index.html)
texts. So such a distinction is hardly the mere imposition of Western
anthropologists.

I find the kammatic/nibbanic distinction helpful not only for the
historical or sociological study of existing Buddhist tradition, but for
constructive Buddhist philosophical or theological thought. I’ll say
more about that soon, but first –next time –I want to address a
notable objection to it from within the field of Buddhist ethics.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/)
