+++
title = "Learning from Gārgī’s"
full_title = "Learning from Gārgī’s Silence"
date = "2020-02-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/05/learning-from-gargis-silence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/05/learning-from-gargis-silence/).

Learning from Gārgī’s Silence

[![Gargi
Vacaknavi](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/02/Gargi-Vacaknavi-300x300.jpg)](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/02/Gargi-Vacaknavi.jpg)

*“Thereupon, Gārgī Vācaknavī fell silent.” (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad3.6)*

I’m currently teaching a class called “Ancient Women Philosophers: India
and Greece,” which is interesting for many reasons. I’ll get to some of
those reasons in another post.

In this post I want to talk about the sage Gārgī Vācaknavī, who is one
of the few women to appear in the*Upaniṣads*. I’m particularly
interested in why she fell silent, and what I think we might learn from
this today.

Gārgī appears in the*Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad*in conversation with the
famous sage Yājñavalkya (BAU 3.6 and 3.8; I am using Olivelle’s 1996
translation). In their first interaction, she asks him a series of
penetrating metaphysical questions about the foundation of reality. She
starts with, “since this whole world is woven back and forth on water,
on what, then, is water woven back and forth?” After several exchanges
with Yājñavalkya, she asks, “On what, then, are the worlds
of*brahman*woven back and forth?” Instead of answering with something
even more basic, Yājñavalkya declares, “Don’t ask too many questions,
Gārgī, or your head will shatter apart!”

After he explains that she is asking the wrong kinds of questions, the
text says, “Thereupon, Gārgī Vācaknavī fell silent.”

What is going on here? Is Gārgī’s silence representing the fact
that*brahman*is that which one cannot ask beyond (Lindquist 2008)? Is
it that her questions are the wrong way to know about*brahman,*as
Śaṅkara and others have argued (Raveh 2018)? Is this a violent terror
tactic on the part of Yājñavalkya to keep her in her place (Vanita
2003)?

I don’t in any way want to eliminate the possibility that Gārgī is being
silenced in the way that women and other marginalized people have often
been silenced as a tool of their marginalization, being told to shut up
and know their place. I also don’t want to deny that this kind of bad
silencing has been and remains a tactic of oppression.

Yet I suspect something else may be going on in Gārgī’s case—or at least
something in addition to that sort of problematic silencing. For one
thing, falling silent is a common trope in the*Upaniṣads.*Almost every
man Yājñavalkya speaks to in the chapter three of the BAU also falls
silent, and the head of the man Śākalya actually does shatter apart (BAU
3.9). Yājñavalkya does not remark upon Gārgī’s gender directly; by
contrast, consider King Janaka’s misogynist dismissal of the sage
Sulabhā in the*Mahābhārata*(although she later silences*him*in that
debate). So, what is going on here?

Perhaps a clue comes in Gārgī’s second conversation with Yājñavalkya
(BAU 3.8). This time she is putting him to the test and declares that if
he can answer her questions, nobody else can defeat him in debate.

She asks a similar question concerning that on which everything is woven
back and forth. There may be some humor in the fact that she asks him
the same question twice after she is dissatisfied with his first answer,
or rather, lack of an answer (Black 2007). The first answer after this
is space, and the next answer is “the imperishable.”

Gārgī once again falls silent, but this time it seems to be a silence of
satisfaction, since Yājñavalkya has answered her question and
demonstrated his superiority over the other Brahmins.

I’d like to suggest that Gārgī’s first silence could be taken as a
silence that allows her to turn inward to make space for her thoughts,
which is demonstrated by the fact that she comes back later for another
debate. The second silence may indicate that she has done what she set
out to do (namely, to test Yājñavalkya), but still, I think, this leaves
room for deeper thought about these fundamental metaphysical questions.

I think there is a valuable lesson here about the value of silence for
philosophical thinking. Philosophical thought is often about frameworks
and deeper principles, usually while*inhabiting*those frameworks
and*using*those principles.

Philosophy is not merely an enterprise of finding answers via
established methods and moving on. You are thinking about thinking while
trying to think about questions that you have little idea*how*to
answer. And this is hard. Really hard. As I often tell my students, if
philosophy is not difficult, you’re not doing it right!

Gārgī is thinking about the fundamental nature of existence—what it
could be, how we could know it, and whether we could put it into
language even if we did know it. As important as philosophical debate
has been and remains in India and elsewhere, you can’t always be worried
about your next move in the debate. Sometimes you need to slow down and
think rather than offer the first response that comes to mind.

I think this lesson could be especially important to people interacting
online. There is a tendency to skim headlines, tweets, or blog posts and
immediately rush to respond, but what if instead you thought silently
before commenting? Often our initial gut reactions turn out to be wrong
upon further reflection. A bit of silent thinking can help to sort out
what to say and how to say it. It can help you to avoid misunderstanding
others. It can get you immortalized in an*Upaniṣad*(at least that
worked for Gārgī).

I will fall silent now so that you, dear readers, can think about this
for yourselves.



Works Cited

Black, Brian. 2007.*The Character of the Self in Ancient India: Priest,
Kings, and Women in the EarlyUpaniṣads.*Albany: SUNY Press.

Lindquist, Steven E. 2008. “Gender at King Janaka’s Court: Women in
the*Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad*Reconsidered.”*Journal of Indian
Philosophy*36: 405-526.

Olivelle, Patrick.1996.*Upaniṣads*,*Translated from the Original
Sanskrit by Patrick Olivelle.*Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Raveh, Daniel. 2018. “Silence or Silencing?: Revisiting the
Gārgī-Yājñavalkya Debate in Chapter 3 of the*Bṛhadāraṇyaka
Upaniṣad*.”*Journal of the Indian Council of Philosophical
Research*35: 159-147.

Vanita, Ruth. 2003. “The Self is Not Gendered: Sulabha’s Debate with
King Janaka.”*NWSA Journal*15 (2): 76-93.



*Cross-posted to [my personal
blog.](https://examinedworlds.blogspot.com/2020/02/on-need-to-fall-silent.html)*
