+++
title = "Gesturing toward"
full_title = "Gesturing toward conversational implicature–a snapshot"
date = "2014-10-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/10/02/gesturing-toward-conversational-implicature-a-snapshot/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/10/02/gesturing-toward-conversational-implicature-a-snapshot/).

Gesturing toward conversational implicature–a snapshot

I think that we all have had experiences where we pick up an old text
for the umpteenth time, and looking over an old passage, see something
new or interesting within it.Recently, I noticed something interesting
while reading though Vātsyāyana’s Bhāṣya, in the section where he
defends the Veda as a special case of authoritative testimony (Nbh
2.1.57-68). There’s a lot here of interest, including an expansion of
his account of what makes a speaker authoritative (*āpta*), and the
development of a strategy that articulatesthe status of non-ordinary
modes of knowing as special cases of our familiar,
time-tested*pramāṇas*. Common phrases in the section include variants
of*yathā loke*. . . (“just as it is in this world”).

What just caught my eye is his response to the objection that anuvāda
passages of the Veda are defective owing to the fault of repetition (NBh
2.1.66-7). I leave it to Andrew Ollett and Elisa to provide more context
for the literary fault of repetition (if they so choose!). Suffice to
say, it is minimally taken to be bad form to repeat something already
said. From the perspective of *pramāṇa-śāstra*, we know that on one
fairly common—if problematic—construal, genuine knowledge sources must
give us something “new”. Whatever his motivations, Vātsyāyana’s
interlocutor tells us that the fault with repetitive passages in the
Veda is that they repeat words whose objects are “already known”, and
are thus as useless *(anarthaka)*as ordinary repetition.

In his response, Vātsyāyana distinguishes between useless repetition and
purposive repetition. Simply repeating something is \[sometimes\]
useless, but there are clearly cases when repetition has meaning
(*arthavat*).

Some examples:

“Hurry! Hurry!”, conveys the notion that one must increase one’s effort
and pick up the pace.

“He’s cooking, he’s cooking”, conveys the fact that the activity of
cooking continues uninterrupted.

“The god’s rain avoids Trigarta, it avoids Trigarta” conveys complete
lack of rain on the region.

While this is notdeveloped into an accountof implicature (or, for that
matter, speech acts), it is a pleasant, early recognition of the wider
ranging power of language to produce contentful awareness beyond mere
denotation.
