+++
title = "Veṅkaṭanātha’s"
full_title = "Veṅkaṭanātha’s epistemology, ontology and theology"
date = "2014-10-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/10/30/ve%e1%b9%85ka%e1%b9%adanathas-epistemology-ontology-and-theology/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/10/30/ve%e1%b9%85ka%e1%b9%adanathas-epistemology-ontology-and-theology/).

Veṅkaṭanātha’s epistemology, ontology and theology

In the world-view of a fundamental Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta teacher like
[Vedānta
Deśika](http://elisafreschi.com/category/sanskrit-philosophy/visi%E1%B9%A3%E1%B9%ADadvaita-vedanta-sanskrit-philosophy/ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADanathavedanta-desika/)
(1269–1370, aka Veṅkaṭanātha), theology is the center of the system and
epistemology and ontology assume their role and significance only
through their relationship with this center.  

For instance, Veṅkaṭanātha adopts more or less the Pūrva Mīmāṃsā
epistemology, with some differences which are due to his theological
position. Concerning sense perception, a sensitive topic is that of
*[yogipratyakṣa](http://elisafreschi.com/category/philosophy/epistemology/intellectual-intuitionyogipratyak%E1%B9%A3amystical-experience/)*
‘intellectual intuition’, a specific kind of direct perception in which
the intellect acts as a direct access to knowledge, as if it were a
sense faculty. This kind of direct perception is upheld by philosophers
of the Nyāya and of the Pramāṇavāda schools as belonging to exceptional
individuals. Through intellectual intuition exceptional individuals,
like the Buddha, a *ṛṣi* or God, could have direct to dharma, thus
relativising the uniqueness of the Vedic Sacred Texts. Supporting the
possibility of *yogipratyakṣa* is, thus, consistent with the Nyāya’s
discussion of the validity of the Veda as *dependent* on its author, and
on the Pramāṇavāda view that the Buddha could access dharma.
Veṅkaṭanātha, conversely, is in a difficult situation, insofar as he
wants to defend both the uniqueness of the Vedas and the authority of
God. In order to reconcile these two positions, Veṅkaṭanātha in his
*Seśvaramīmāṃsā* ad 1.1.4 (the Pūrva Mīmāṃsā sūtra dedicated to direct
perception) rigidly negates the possibility for human beings to attain
intellectual intuition, so that no single human being could ever
question the validity of the Vedas. Nonetheless, consistently with his
theism, Veṅkaṭanātha does not negate the possibility for *God alone* to
see the dharma. This entails that it would be theoretically possible for
God to reveal a new Sacred Text. He will, nonetheless, not do it,
because the Veda *is* already His will made into words, and God does not
change whimsically what He wants.

As for the Pāñcarātras, they enjoy the same validity of smṛti texts,
insofar as they derive their validity from the fact of stating what is
already present in the Veda, either in a branch of it which is
available, or in a lost one.

What is then God’s relationship to the Veda and to the world? The Veda
is said to be the direct manifestation of His will, but not His
revelation. The latter option is refused because it would make the Veda
subordinate to God’s will and liable to be overcome by a later and
possibly more complete revelation. Thus, the Veda is a crystallisation
of God’s permanent free will. Similarly, the world —including all human
beings inhabiting it— is described as God’s body in the sense that God
can experience through it. Human free will is, thus, granted only
insofar as God Himself wants humans to be free (see my
[article](https://www.academia.edu/6986850/Are_the_limbs_of_Gods_body_free_Yes_if_He_wants_so_---Free_will_in_and_before_Ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADan%C4%81tha)
on free will in Veṅkaṭanātha).

The claim that the world is the body of God puts in the right light also
Veṅkaṭanātha’s interest for ontology, which is always subordinate to his
interest for theology. Ontology is not conceived as the study of what
exists independently of God, nor as the study of inert matter —since
such an inert matter is not conceivable in the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
world view.

**Should we re-configure our questions concerning ontology and
epistemology?**

On Veṅkaṭanātha, see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/category/sanskrit-philosophy/visi%E1%B9%A3%E1%B9%ADadvaita-vedanta-sanskrit-philosophy/ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADanathavedanta-desika/)
series of post. On intellectual intuition,
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/category/philosophy/epistemology/intellectual-intuitionyogipratyak%E1%B9%A3amystical-experience/)
one. On my claim that we should reconfigure our questions (and not just
look for new answers) when we work on an “alien” philosophy, see
[this](http://warpweftandway.com/interpreting-philosophy-works/) post.
