+++
title = "Śabda and the sciences"
full_title = "Śabda and the sciences"
date = "2014-10-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/10/12/sabda-and-the-sciences/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/10/12/sabda-and-the-sciences/).

Śabda and the sciences

One of the key debates in Indian philosophy is what counts as a
*pramāṇa*: an instrument of knowledge, a “reliable warrant”, a means of
knowledge reliable enough that one can be reasonably confident to take
its conclusions as true. What counts as a *pramāṇa*? Many Indian
philosophers will provide a numbered list of them.

In the empiricist tradition that remains popular in the West, boosted by
the discoveries of natural science, only experience is admitted as a
*pramāṇa*: to a full-blown empiricist, nothing counts as knowledge if it
doesn’t ultimately have its roots in experience, based in some sort of
direct perception. (Ken Wilber’s thought has come to take this position
more and more over the years, [to its
detriment](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/09/precis-of-beyond-enacted-experiences/).)
The debate over *pramāṇa*s in modern Western philosophy is [often
framed](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/rationalism-empiricism/) as
one between empiricism and *rationalism*. That is, where empiricists
admit only experience as a *pramāṇa*, rationalists also allow reasoning
an independent validity: some things can be rationally known *a priori*,
independently of sense experience.

Some Indian philosophers have agreed with these views. It has been
argued (controversially I think) that the long-dead
[Cārvāka](http://www.iep.utm.edu/indmat/) materialist school, like the
empiricists, accepted only direct perception (*pratyakṣa*) as a
*pramāṇa*.
[Dignāga](http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-9780195393521/obo-9780195393521-0085.xml),
the early Buddhist logician, admitted logical inference (*anumāna*),
making him more comparable to rationalism as usually construed.

In India, the debate has gone well beyond one or two *pramāṇa*s; some
views argue for as many as six. But the most common formulation, first
developed by the [Sāṃkhya](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samkhya)
thinkers, says that there are three.

The third commonly stated *pramāṇa*, beyond perception and inference, is
*śabda*, which literally means “word”. I take this to be important and
true: we *do* get a significant portion of our knowledge from words. And
not merely the words we use to make inferences, but – the meaning that
*śabda* takes on in Indian thought – words we trust.

The mainstream of modern Western philosophy, beginning with Descartes
but even more so with the empiricists, has avoided the idea of *śabda*
as a means of knowledge. It has not *ignored* this idea, however; rather
it has looked upon it with suspicion. For *śabda* would have kept it too
close to the old medieval philosophies it was trying to get away from.
In India as in the West, the paradigm of *śabda* was an old text that
had come to be revered and held above others, “sacred”: the Veda in
India, the Bible in Christian Europe. If not a text, then the word of
people established as traditional authorities, the Church or learned
*paṇḍit*s.

And for the early moderns, this wouldn’t do. Hume saw in accepted
“religious” views a catalogue of error, leading human beings to the
“monkish” asceticism he thought self-defeating and counterproductive.
Descartes was not so hostile to past tradition, but lived through
Catholics and Protestants fighting destructive wars over what was,
essentially, an epistemological debate. His hope was to avoid such
debates entirely by establishing knowledge independently of authority.

Did Descartes and Hume succeed? In a word, no. Descartes’s attempted
foundation [does not
stand](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/certain-knowledge/);
still less so the philosophical structure he attempted to build on it.
His view, and Hume’s even more so, has proved enormously influential in
part because of the rise of natural science and technology – finding new
and effective knowledge derived from experience.

But hold on a minute. To what extent *is* scientific knowledge derived
from experience – from human perception guided by instruments? That is
clearly a *part* of it, but it is far from the only part. There is [far
too much scientific
knowledge](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/following-science-as-a-layperson/)
out there for any individual to ever have a chance of replicating it.
Some of that knowledge must simply be taken on faith in scientists’
*śabda*.

Hume and his followers would point out that scientists’ *śabda* is valid
*because* it is presumed to rest on experience. But it is important that
in many cases *we* are not believing them because of *our* experience;
we are believing them on a faith that the knowledge they promulgate
comes out of *their* experience. The assumption is that theoretically we
*could* go back and replicate those experiences themselves – but of
course we don’t, and in many cases can’t. Even if I had the knowledge to
interpret the results properly, I could not simply walk into
[CERN](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CERN) and replicate the experiments
that led to the discovery of the Higgs boson or antihydrogen; I would
need the connections and credentials to get in there. I certainly could
not conduct those experiments without CERN’s equipment. And even those
physicists who do have access to CERN will not have access to similarly
sophisticated equipment in biology or astronomy. Knowledge outside their
fields, they must take on faith.

Yes, that faith is at some level a faith *in experience*, a faith that
scientists have had the experiences they say they have. But faith it
nevertheless is, and that point is important. It is a fundamental aspect
of human knowledge that it always depends at least in part on reliable
authority – not merely *pramāṇa* but *śabda*.

The point is vital to note because there are so many realms of knowledge
that do not and cannot rest on experience. In ethics, experience can
tell us that some actions more than others are conducive to our
happiness; but it cannot tell us that our happiness is that which we
should be seeking in life. More fundamentally – I have mentioned this
point
[several](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/12/living-with-doubt/)
[times](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/e-o-wilson-and-the-limits-of-empiricism/)
before but continually turn back to it because I think it is the most
glaring and fundamental philosophical error of our times – one cannot
use experience to prove the validity of experience. There is a vicious
circularity in this approach, one that usually [proves
self-contradictory](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/12/living-with-doubt/).
When one is trying to decide what counts as a *pramāṇa*, one will make a
fool of oneself if one relies only on experience. One needs to rely on
*śabda*: the words of others that become our own prejudices, our own
“intuitions”, our own “common sense”. Of course the authority one
thought reliable can turn out to be in error; Descartes and Hume were
absolutely right to fear that. (I’ve certainly
[spent](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/06/lack-of-training-is-not-reliable/)
[my
share](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/07/is-common-sense-merely-plausible/)
[of
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/07/of-the-plausibility-or-reliability-of-common-sense/)
on Love of All Wisdom criticizing a reliance on common sense.) But what
is important there is to use experience and reasoning as *correctives*
to the errors of reliable authority, not to reject it entirely.
