+++
title = "Face Blindness"
full_title = "Face Blindness"
date = "2013-05-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/24/face-blindness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/24/face-blindness/).

Face Blindness

Us humans seem to have a specialized mental mechanism for identifying
faces. It’s pretty easy to see that could have been favored by selection
for a long, long time.

In 2006, Ingo Kennerknecht and associates published a study indicating
that about 2.5% of people in Germany had a hereditary, congenital form
of prosopagnosia (face blindness). Looking at the pattern of occurrence
in families, they concluded that it is inherited as an autosomal
dominant.

That’s strange. Once in a while, a recessive allele with negative
effects in homozygotes can get that common – for example, malaria
defenses like sickle-cell. In a case like that, big disadvantage in
homozygotes are balanced by smaller (still sizeable) advantages in
heterozygotes. The frequency of the sickle-cell allele stabilizes at an
intermediate frequency, say 10%.

But here, the negative effects are in heterozygotes. There’s no way that
they could be balanced by advantages in homozygotes, which are much
rarer.

So how can prosopagnosia exist at such a high frequency? Well, maybe
it’s like red-green color-blindness. The mutation rate for errors in the
genes coding red and green opsins  
is unusually high, due to illegitimate recombination. If you assume that
the high frequency we see today in Europeans is a product of mutation
accumulation due to relaxed selection since the dawn of agriculture some
ten thousand years ago, it’s the highest mutation rate known, around 2 x
10-4 per generation, higher even that of dystrophin (the longest gene).
It seems that the fitness loss due to red-green color blindness isn’t
too large, at least in some societies. It’s hard for me to believe that
face blindness matters so little, but maybe.

The next thought is that the allele for prosopagnosia is linked to some
driving gene, something like the t-haplotype in mice. The t-haplotype
cheats, so that 90% of a male carrier’s offspring carry the t-haplotype,
instead of the usual 50%. Homozygous males are sterile, which ( along
with other factors) keeps the t-allele from going to fixation. People
have looked for transmission distortion in the human genome, but there
are no definitive results, as far as I know.

The third explanation is that this research is just wrong..

Interesting that the authors don’t seem to have noticed how strange
their claim really is.

