+++
title = "Ignorant Chatterers"
full_title = "Ignorant Chatterers"
date = "2013-05-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/11/ignorant-chatterers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/11/ignorant-chatterers/).

Ignorant Chatterers

The kind of people who write columns in the *New York Times* or the
*Washington Post* are occasionally amusing or offer useful insight, but
most of it is simply blather. Nothing wrong with that I suppose. Imagine
that there were to arise a national movement advocating arboreal
marriage, people marrying trees. Columnists would have a field day. What
about the children? Would they be warped? And the fate of the saplings?
If one’s tree was entitled to hospital visitation, who would provide the
transport?

The arboreal marriage issue, like many other contemporary issues, is not
burdened with data. Writers are free to let their imaginations go free.
But other issues are blessed with data, and one would assume that the
first obligation of a pundit would be to learn the data, perhaps even
learn the science. The recent kerfluffle over Jason Richwine’s
dissertation, where there are data and where the pundits have not a clue
about it, is a shame and disgrace for both journalists and those who
publish them.

IQ test scores as well as achievement indicators of all kinds are well
known, easy to check out for oneself. There is almost no controversy
about any of it because there is arguing with test scores nor
incarceration statistics. Ron Unz valiantly tried several years ago, and
his arguments were pretty well demolished.

What we see from the paper talkers instead is a lot of name calling and
snark. Those people are, almost all of them, so ignorant that they have
no clue about data, they are also so ignorant that they do not
understand how useless they themselves are. Shame? Never heard of it. To
them, blather about arboreal marriage is not different from blather
about Hispanic IQ.

IQ differences among groups are well known, well established, and not
very interesting IMHO. OTOH there are interesting things out there that
deserve focus for thoughtful people. Here is one:

![Ezero](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/ezero.jpg?w=600&h=428 "ezero.jpg")

Given the density of twaddle that is published about poverty and health,
why do US Hispanics live on average two and a half years longer than US
Anglos? The chatterers have no interest in this, and amazingly neither
do sociologists and the ilk at my university. It just isn’t in their
domain. Perhaps this health difference is a hate fact?

