+++
title = "They’ll never get old"
full_title = "They’ll never get old and gray"
date = "2013-05-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/29/theyll-never-get-old-and-gray/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/29/theyll-never-get-old-and-gray/).

They’ll never get old and gray

The New York Times has an article about work by researchers at Harvard
Medical School, which concluded that immigrants are a net plus for the
finances of Medicare – even though most of the immigrants in the current
wave have low incomes.

Of course those immigrants are on average young, and don’t get sick
much. What about costs over the entire life cycle, which is of course
what you would look at if you were trying to get the right answer? Well,
judging from current trends, those young workers are pretty likely to
get older as time passes. Since they have low incomes, but age and die
just as expensively as anyone else, they’re not likely to be a net
financial plus for Medicare. Or so it would seem.

We can’t go around accusing Ivy League types of lying. Perhaps they have
different models of the future. For example, if we came to have
self-replicating perfect autodocs that work on wall current, people
wouldn’t age any more, and medical expenses would be a trivial fraction
of GNP. This is sure to happen eventually – you can reduce entropy with
enthalpy. Maybe the world will end before these guys get old – either
through a cleansing asteroid strike, alien conquest, or a robot
takeover. Or, maybe they intend to shoot these workers when they slow
down, presumably charging the relatives for the bullet. It’s been known
to happen.

I think we need to understand more about their assumptions, in order to
make better policy decisions. Maybe they know something I don’t.

