+++
title = "Somavati Amavasya –"
full_title = "Somavati Amavasya – Worship of Shiva and the Ancestors on the Monday of the Dark Moon"
date = "2022-01-02"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/02/somavati-amavasya-worship-of-shiva-and-the-ancestors-on-the-monday-of-the-dark-moon/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/02/somavati-amavasya-worship-of-shiva-and-the-ancestors-on-the-monday-of-the-dark-moon/).

Somavati Amavasya – Worship of Shiva and the Ancestors on the Monday of the Dark Moon

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2022/01/rupam-raaj-r-mahakaal3-custom-1.jpg?w=809)

Today is Monday – Lord Shiva’s Day; however it is also Amavasya – a day
with special significance and potential for observances for the Dead (as
we have covered in some of our previous pieces looking at the Libations
to the Ancestors).

What Amavasya means is the ‘Dark’ point of the Moon’s 28-day cycle –
where it is immediately prior to, and about to reach full occlusion
afore it begins to lighten again.

The conjunction of these two observances, Monday (Lord Shiva’s Day) and
Amavasya results in what is known as Somvati Amavasya ; a particularly
opportune occasion for both the worship of Lord Shiva & Lady Parvati, as
well as the Libations for the Pitrs \[‘\[Fore-\]Fathers’ – Ancestors\].

I therefore chose this fine art (by Rupam Raaj R.) to illustrate, as it
has Lord Shiva meditating amidst the Smashana (Cremation Grounds).

Somvati, itself, is more truthfully Somavati – Soma (for the Moon, and
also the Soma that is directly linked thereto), in combination with
‘Vati’, meaning ‘Flow’.

The Moon is, itself, spoken of as a ‘pathway’ for the Dead in the Vedas;
and also as bearing and ‘charging’ the Soma in those same texts. It is
therefore not hard to see how the confluence of these circumstances with
the Moon’s Day (i.e. Monday) should render things additionally … potent.

Now, as for Somvati Amavasya, let us quote from the Skanda Purana:

“A man who takes the holy bath in Somavatī and worships Someśvara shall
become free from impurities like the moon and rejoice in Somaloka.

\[…\]

Listen, O Vyāsa, how the very excellent Soma Tīrtha and Someśvara Liṅga
originated. I shall tell you the facts.

Lord Soma who greatly nourishes and revives the whole world, had a
Brāhmaṇa of great penance as his father.

He was a highly exalted sage in Avantī by name Atrī, He kept his arms
lifted up for a period of three thousand divine years and performed a
great penance engrossed in the meditation on Brahman.

Then, O Vyāsa, the Brāhmaṇical radiance of the great soul went up and
dripped through his eyes illuminating the ten directions. On seeing the
splendour enveloping the ten direction, O Vyāsa, the directions
themselves found it difficult to contain it. Thereupon, the unbearable
splendour dropped down from the quarters.

Illuminating all the worlds it fell on the earth and became Soma (Moon).
Hence the Moon is popular among the ordinary subjects.

O Vyāsa, due to the same fiery brilliance, water originated from Soma.
That water entered the Śiprā river which was filled with nectar.

Thereupon Śiprā became famous as Somavatī (‘whose water flowed from
Soma’), the bestower of all Siddhis. By visiting the river Śiprā in
conjunction with Soma, sin is eliminated.

It is reputed all over the three worlds as the bestower of merit unto
sinners. All these four sinners, a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa, an imbiber of
liquor, a thief and a defiler of the preceptor’s bed, become rid of
their sins certainly due to a visit (to Śīprā).

O sage, when Monday coincides with new-moon day, a wise person should
take his holy bath in Somavatī and perform the rites of Dāna, Japa and
Homa. He will have everlasting benefit thereby as long as the moon and
the sun exist.

Since even after the usual season, the Pitṛs can be propitiated by means
of oblations with gingelly seed-water and rice-balls, the rite should be
performed duly.

Five Sakāras (entities beginning with ‘SA’) viz. Śiprā, Soma the juice,
Soma the planet, Someśvara and Somavāra (Monday) are very difficult to
obtain everywhere.

O Vyāsa, the water of Soma in Śiprā is the bestower of the benefit of a
crore of Tīrthas. When the new-moon coincides with a Monday it is
remembered as simitar to a Pitṛ-Tīrtha.

When new-moon coincides with a Monday and there is also Vyatīpāta
(conjunction), the benefit in Somavatī is glorified as hundred times
more than that of Gayā.

It was thus that the Somavatī Tīrtha came into being, O great sage.”

So, having carried out Libations at Dawn to my Pitrs, I hope that the
‘Way’ for Soma is *also* therefore opened – and that Mahadev, the Lord
of Ghosts and also of the Moon is Pleased Likewise. He is, after all,
the ‘Ultimate Ancestor’.

It certainly felt an excellent dispelling of some doom and gloom which
had settled in. I do very much like those opportunities to pour
sustenance for my Ancestors !

May They receive such offerings, be pleased, and avail me in our
intrepid efforts !

ॐ नमः शिवाय
