+++
title = "On Why Gods Are Gods"
full_title = "On Why Gods Are Gods – A Response To A Question"
date = "2022-01-04"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/04/on-why-gods-are-gods-a-response-to-a-question/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/04/on-why-gods-are-gods-a-response-to-a-question/).

On Why Gods Are Gods – A Response To A Question

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2022/01/gods-of-olympus-1534-35-giulion-romano.jpg?w=1024)

Earlier this evening, I was asked to contribute my thoughts on a
frequently occurrent question – “What makes a God a God?”

Now in this day and age of ever-shifting meanings and the relativism
that enables the worship of literal out-and-out demons or flawed mortal
would-be ‘messiahs’ in personality-cults across the land, it is a vital
thing to have some regard of. Yet it is also quite a difficult topic to
get a handle upon.

To my mind, the way to answer the question is to look at what we mean by
‘God’ in the various Indo-European scriptural canons and the additional
insights that can be drawn from them utilizing our mytholinguistic
approach.

Words are pathways to meanings, although unless carefully considered,
can easily become their obstacle (or their substitution) instead.

‘God’, itself, has two possible chains of etymological origination. It’s
*either* from Proto-Indo-European \*ǵʰew- \[‘To Pour’\], or PIE \*ǵʰewH-
\[‘To Invoke’, ‘To Call Upon’\]. I suspect it’s non-mutually exclusive
in that regard.

If the former, then it is ‘That Which Libations Are Poured Unto’, that
which sacrifices are rendered to; and if the latter, then That Which Is
Invoked – that to which liturgy is recited for, that which is called
upon in the course of rites or prayer.

Now, this is not a bad place to start. Except it leads us into some …
difficulties, because we *also* carry out sacrifices (or, at least,
offer portions of sacrifices) ‘apotropaically’ – that is to say, to ward
*away* attentions, from demons etc.

We also, likewise, carry out offerings of sustenance (especially in
libation form) to our own departed Ancestors, and we may certainly call
upon these and other beings that aren’t (necessarily) Gods in the course
of our devotional activities.

(Theos, meanwhile, in the Ancient Greek – ‘That Which Is Placed’ – is
similarly a ‘functional’ perspective oriented around our worship which
is likewise lacking in essential qualitative characteristic for the
‘object’ of such praise)

In other words – it is not enough to say ‘That Which Is Worshiped’ is
what makes a God a God. We worship any array of beings that aren’t Gods.
Or, at least, we carry out the external *activities* which ought
correlate with ‘Worship’ in that archaic context, for beings that aren’t
Gods. Indeed, often we find that the ‘templating’ for our Worship of
Gods is directly and expressly resonant with our respectful engagement
with, say, mortal rulers or human guests.

I do think that there’s an element of ‘engagement’ to the ‘God Question’
– how it is that we ‘engage’ with Gods, that is; although that opens up
questions of ‘subjectivity’. I believe that piety and that sense of
reverence is a necessary component to the ‘Divine Engagement’ – yet
somebody who is an out-and-out unironic demon-worshiper presumably
thinks much the same thing for *their* preferred orientation.

We could certainly go through and approach the entire matter through
‘negative theology’ – seeking to define what Gods are via first taking
the ontological set of what we ‘worshipfully’ engage with and
eliminating the bewildering array of sub-clades within that which aren’t
Gods, based around particular characteristics which disqualify them.

However not only is that unsatisfying – but it also leaves essentially
unremarked upon the *actual* characteristic which enables us to
meaningfully state: “yes, this isn’t a God, this entire set is not
Gods”, etc.

And that just simply won’t do.

An interesting approach for our purposes is to go back to the more
archaic stratum of common Indo-European theological heritage: Vedic
Sanskrit, and Proto-Indo-European terms ancestral to same that are
*reasonably* pervasive in their occurrence in other IE canons.

The most obvious of which is, of course, Deva. What does this mean?
‘Shining One’. What’s it from? PIE \*deywós. Where else do we see it?
‘Deus’ in Latin, and ‘-Tyr’ (or, in plural, Tivar) in Old Norse. ‘Dia’
in Irish is another exemplar – as seen in the ‘De’ of ‘Tuatha De
Danann’, for example. And, as everybody knows, ‘Daeva’ in Avestan and
‘Div’ in Old Persian – which in both cases refer to ‘Demons’ … because
the Zoroastrians heretically sought to cast the Gods down and stop Their
proper worship.

Why is this a useful and important term for us to focus in upon? Because
of that ‘Shining’ nature.

Now it is not (necessarily) something meant literally. Otherwise we
would surely encounter some ‘interesting’ questions when the Deva in
question is depicted as being Black or Dark in colouration.

Rather, the question to be asked is what exactly this ‘radiance’ may be
intending to communicate to us. Other than, one assumes, something on
the order of YES be afraid – at least, where overtly necessary.

The answer is as simple as it is difficult to succinctly explain. Cosmic
Order. Radiated into the universe via (inter alia) the Sun. Hence the
persistent association of the Sun and Solar elements with the Divine
Order.

There’s more – much more – to all of it than *just* that, but it shall
do as a conceptual shorthand for the moment.

We can demonstrate this when we consider the deific, iconographic, and
other such associations for the Sun. Solar Aditi, for instance, as the
Goddess quite commensurate with Law as the Queen of the Heavens in Vedic
terms, for instance – or Scythian Tabiti \[a name, itself, connected to
the Solar Radiance of Heat and Light\] out back upon the Steppes.

The ranks of the Devas, therefore, in the broader sense of this term –
are of the group intimately connected to this Solar Order. Even if the
‘Solarness’ of their Order is not *necessarily* on-show for every God at
every point in time.

Odin, for instance, we can argue back-and-forth about the extent to
which Solar associations are to be found for Him (I maintain that a
proper consideration of certain details pertaining to His Throne and
Hall(s), and for that matter, Flaring Eye – should demonstrate that such
Solar linkages *do* exist for Him), yet with all the “-tyr” theonymics
for Him and His membership of the Tivar, we can still trace the linkage
in other ways.

Another way we can show that we are on sure ground with this is by
considering the opposing opposite – the A’Sura, the Opponents of the
Sura \[‘Light’ – from the same root as ‘Solar’, ‘Surya’, etc.\], Demons
that are inexorably opposed to the Cosmic Order’s ongoing saliency here
in this universe of ours. They are defined by their opposition to The
Gods – and so, as we can see, they are literally nominatively determined
via their opposition to the (Solar) Order.

There are other archaic Indo-European designations for the Gods (as a
general clade, or as specific Gods amidst Them) which are useful in
these regards.

Asura – note, *not* A’Sura’ – should stand out as an example. The way I
tend to translate it is as ‘Sire’. For this simultaneously connotes the
‘Power’ and ‘Regality’ of one sense of the term, as well as the
‘Progenitorial’ sense of its other ‘facing’.

The likely derivation from PIE \*h₂ems-, which refers directly to the
‘creation’, ‘birthing’, ‘begetting’ of other beings. It has attained a
‘Lordship’ connotation for rather obvious reasons – yet while this is
relevant for our purposes here, I suspect that it is the other sense …
the ‘familial’ sense and the ‘ancestral’ sense that is rather more
appropriate to immediately consider. Gods being Gods because not only do
They Rule – but also because They Found, They Create, They are
responsible for Us. The Sky Father is, after all, the Ultimate Father –
the Mother Goddess, likewise, the Ultimate Mother. Whether, in various
cases, of the Universe Entire or some more specific portion thereof, we
are still dealing with something powerful and which deserves our homage.
In Old Norse, we have Aesir – and there are some \*possible\* terms from
this same PIE root with cognate general ambits of meaning occurrent in
other IE languages as well.

But to speak to the ‘Rulership’ point – this is again something which
fairly frequently occurs in Indo-European linguistics and theology. The
Regin of Old Norse refers to the Rulers – of the universe, implicitly.
The Gods. And, again, Ruling with – indeed, It (or, rather, She) Rules
through Them – the aforementioned Cosmic Order (Rta, Orlog, etc.)
Absolute. Hence, ‘mere’ rulership is not enough to claim such a title
nor such a mantle. Should demonic forces somehow manage to impose their
wicked mastery over the worlds at large, this does not make them the
Regin. For they are not righteously ruling – quite the literal and
direct opposite. It is ONLY that Divine status – in foundational,
fundamental concord with the Divine status of the Absolute Cosmic Order
– which entitles a figure to Cosmological Rule.

There are, of course, quite an array of other and more specific ‘God’
terms out there – each of which contains within it important insights
for how to regard the Divine either in general terms or more
specifically. ‘Bhaga’, etc. – as the ‘Bestower’, the ‘Lord(s)’
responsible for the supporting of us through provision of the
necessities of life (from PIE \*bʰeh₂g- – ‘To Distribute’).

And certainly, we tend to find general clades – especially in the more
ornately expounding texts of the Hindu canon – wherein there are, say,
Vasus, Adityas, Rudras, and quite a bewildering array besides (all of
which are similarly ‘functional designations’ and often significantly
overlapping for some of the entailed most august Memberships in same).

Yet for general terms to speak of Gods in general, I think that it is
enough.

What makes a God a God is that essential, indeed downright essence-tial,
connexion to and \[existing-as-\] expression of the Cosmic Order.

Long May They Reign !
