+++
title = "Toward The ‘Western"
full_title = "Toward The ‘Western Shakta’ Approach – A Preliminary Outlining For Goddess Engagement And Esoteric Empowerment In The European IndoEuropean Spheres"
date = "2022-01-12"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/12/toward-the-western-shakta-approach-a-preliminary-outlining-for-goddess-engagement-and-esoteric-empowerment-in-the-european-indo-european-spheres/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/12/toward-the-western-shakta-approach-a-preliminary-outlining-for-goddess-engagement-and-esoteric-empowerment-in-the-european-indo-european-spheres/).

Toward The ‘Western Shakta’ Approach – A Preliminary Outlining For Goddess Engagement And Esoteric Empowerment In The European Indo-European Spheres

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2022/01/tumblr_pinbndycut1x415njo1_r1_1280.jpg?w=1024)

Something I have been thinking about over the past few hours is what we
might term ‘Western Shakta’ conceptry.

Now, to explicate what I mean by this … if we consider several of the
major strands of Western Indo-European religious belief, we find that
these are co-expressive of significant strands found amidst the
Hindusphere. This absolutely should not surprise us. Same Gods, for a
start.

So, when we are speaking about ‘Odinism’ or ‘Dionysian’ approaches …
what we are implicitly discussing is that aforementioned Western
correlate expression to what we find in the Shaivite sphere of Hinduism.

This matches up rather well for the mythology, of course – however the
‘interesting question’ has always been how well it works for the
‘theology’ … and also for the ‘esoteric’ side of things when it comes to
the personal and much higher-level (in some ways) forms of practice.

I tend to believe that the pattern continues – and that the resonancies
to be found elsewhere are so significantly strong that they to some
extent enable us to ‘overcome’ the manifest gaps in actual detail which
we have for these Western IE spheres of action.

Or, to perhaps address things in another manner – while there’s no way
that we’ll be able to accurately reconstruct a workable paradigm for,
say, breath-control for empowerment in the Nordic / Germanic sphere (or,
at least, not to anything like the incredible depth, potency, and detail
for which Pranayama is attested in the Hindusphere) … the fact that we
can identify the Same God presiding over a strongly
correlate-coterminous cognate approach to the Vital Energy of Breath
\[viz. my recent work ‘On The Mytholinguistics of the Smoking Breath’,
etc.\], should appear to suggest that similar mechanisms for *engaging*
with the God and engaging with the Energy ought be at least somewhat
effective.

Now, where I’m going with this is the aforementioned enthusiasm for
‘Western Shaktism’ conceptry that has been burgeoning in my mind.

The situation that we have, as applies the Indo-European religious
spheres of the West is that we *know* that these have Goddess(es), and
we also know that these are often pretty strongly correlate with the
Hindu co-expressions of same.

We can also, intriguingly, identify an array of empowerments from and
engagements with said Goddesses that directly resonate with what we find
in the Hindusphere – again suggesting that there is considerable scope
for exploring potential resonancies of tangible practice in these
regards.

Although it has to be said that, for various reasons, what we have
that’s come down to us in certain of these Western IE spheres is .. not
quite so direct in extolling the glories and centrality of these
figures. Even if the materials in question are still *very much* there
in more fragmentary and brief attestation.

As for why all of this matters – the situation of the Shakta & Shaivite
spheres in the East is that these … aren’t really ‘separate’ spheres.
The ‘Venn Diagram’, if you like, is as appropriately overlapping as to,
as with the Ardhanarishvara Shared-Aspect of Shiva & Devi, not really
make for ‘discrete’ identities at all.

Rather, what we tend to observe is that housed within what might be
approachable as a Shaivite understanding – is, irreducibly, the
Devi-figure that is associated with it. Empowering it – giving it life,
and enabling it to come forth.

A similar situation can be observed in various of the Western IE
mythologies, as we have been subtly demonstrating and adducing for some
time.

I am rather fond of drawing from the dual exemplars of Diomedes and
Achilles in the Iliad to illustrate the fundamental truth of this – and
not least because there are some downright *remarkable* points of
concordancy to the relevant presentations and what we find in the Hindu
esoteric tradition.

(I hesitate to say ‘the Tantrika sphere’, there – because, of course, we
shall once more be deluged with people insisting on a ‘hard separation’
between Tantrik and Vedic elements, or braying about how Tantrik
understandings “have” to be non-IE, or whatever it is this week,
apparently in all cases quite regardless of the facts … but anyway, more
upon all of this at some other time)

There, the situation is presented of Athena having Her Chosen, and
acting to Empower these figures in rather remarkable ways. We have
considered these at greater length elsewhere – but suffice to say that
the situation of Diomedes being able to ‘see the world as it truly is’
with a veil of illusion lifted from his eyes (and the accompanying
coruscating flame which appears to go with) … and then even manage to
contend with Gods … matches up rather well with especial Siddhis
bestowed by the cultivation of one’s ‘interior’ Shakti in the Eastern
sphere.

Similarly, Achilles’ situation – wherein Athena bestows to him the
empowerments of Ambrosia and Nectar immediately prior to his Roaring
Rampage of Revenge (his Aristea toward the conclusion of the Iliad, we
should perhaps more scholarly say) – can also find its due ‘resonancy’
in decidedly Devi-mediated Hindusphere esoteric terms.

In various of these cases, we should seem to behold the ‘Spirit’ of the
warrior ‘raising up’ – viz. the understanding we have in Hindu /
Sanskrit terms around ‘Manyu’, and directly linguistically cognate with
the ‘Menos’ and ‘Menis’ encountered for Diomedes and Achilles
respectively.

Something that, while we know – broadly speaking – ‘how to do’ this on
an individual basis (although nothing is ever ‘truly’ individual in
these spheres – we walk with Divinity and lines of heritage and
initiation all of the time) here in the Hindusphere … has become
something that’s more relegated to Myth in the West precisely because it
is difficult to ‘replicate’ the mythic occurrences out here for people
who aren’t those already written about in the myths in question.

What approaching the myths in this manner entails, therefore, is the
recognition that while the words printed upon the page have Gods and
Goddesses turning up (often seemingly semi-intangibly – for most
mortals, at any rate) and acting in manners that are ‘human-resemblant’
(so, for instance, blocking a projectile by blowing to cause it to
change course; or moving from one point to another as a courier by
(meta-)physically bringing the Empowering Elixir to a hero; etc.) …
there are *also* ‘esoteric’ dimensions to each and every, all of these
acts.

And that hidden beneath the legendary (mytho-)poetry lie procedures and
processes via which the human heroes of these tellings engaged with
divinity to be able to receive such favouritism and empowerment from
same.

This, vitally importantly, does NOT mean vitiating the divinity and
theism of The Gods in pursuit of such things, of course. The fact of a
Goddess existing – a-priori and external to one’s self – does,
correspondingly, not vitiate that there is some ‘resonancy’ for Her and
particular of Her Potency that may be found within the individual.

Indeed, quite the contrary – in order to truly unlock such potential, it
is absolutely imperative to be able to cultivate the proper homage,
proper regard, and proper engagement with said Capital C Goddess in the
first instance.

There shall also almost certainly be manners via which one might attempt
to ‘brute-force’ empowerments – drawing Runes upon one’s self in a
manner vaguely similar to how Mantras can be ‘placed’ upon the body by
an experienced Tantrika professional, for instance.

Yet even that should not likely get around the fact that Language –
especially ‘Esoteric Language’, ‘High Speech’, ‘Empowered Speech’ –
often should seem to similarly be Goddess mediated and guided or
directed.

The exemplar for this in the West is presumably also to be found amidst
the Norse – wherein Sturluson’s Ynglinga Saga makes a point of
identifying the traditions of magic accomplished through song as being
bestowed to the Aesir (and, thence, humanity) through the actions of
Freyja.

Now I could go on at great length about all of this – and no doubt in
the coming weeks I shall be doing just exactly that.

But to bring things back to the ‘core’ of my conceptualization here –

What a ‘Western Shakta’ saliency requires is twofold:

First and foremost, something that we have long been doing already. The
re-establishment of the mythos and theology around Indo-European
Goddess(es) in the Western IE mythologies – guided by the points of
clear resonancy and coterminity with the Hindusphere understandings for
Devi.

This does not simply entail the ‘linking up’ of this deific expression
over here with that one over there ; nor even the rather more involved
work of demonstrating how this myth featuring this deific expression is
the same as that myth featuring that deific expression. As eminently
useful and positive as all of that is.

Rather it demands the strong attention to the relevant *theology* – how
the mythology, the divinity ‘in motion’ and in active ‘engagement’ (or,
we should more properly say – being actively engaged with *by* us) is to
be perceived and undertaken.

And that, really, is the second sphere required for this.

The exploration of what can be recovered, reconstructed, or even simply
reasonably extrapolated … in the more esoteric sphere, as well as the
practical sphere (and, as ever, both at once – the practical side of the
esoteric, actually doing things rather than merely reading about them);
with the goal of ‘self-cultivation’ and ‘collective, collaborative
engagement’ and accompanying greater engagement with the Goddess(es) Who
make(s) all of this possible in the first place.

So – as I say.

It is time for a ‘Western Shaktism’ quest.

One which explores and maps – and re-illuminates, as best it can (even,
especially, whilst utilizing borrowed Fire from the East – which is a
Dawn, of sorts, one supposes) – these vitally important considerations
in the Western Indo-European traditions; drawing, as ever, capacious
guidance and inspiration as to not just ‘what is possible’ but ‘what is
necessary’, ‘what is righteous’, ‘what is Right’, from that Western IE
sphere’s cousins in the still-living, thriving, flourishing IE-integral
realm to the east.

As we would say over here in the Hindusphere:

Jai Mata DI !
