+++
title = "Goddess Worship Is"
full_title = "Goddess Worship Is IndoEuropean – Modern Efforts To Undermine This Are Not"
date = "2022-01-14"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/14/goddess-worship-is-indo-european-modern-efforts-to-undermine-this-are-not/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2022/01/14/goddess-worship-is-indo-european-modern-efforts-to-undermine-this-are-not/).

Goddess Worship Is Indo-European – Modern Efforts To Undermine This Are Not

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2022/01/soumyadipta-roy-soumyadipta-roy-maa-durga-ver-2-crop.jpg?w=1024)

It is FRIDAY – Devi’s Day ! Or, if we are are approaching things from
the Germanic perspective … Frigg’s Day. But, then, I repeat myself.

And, with that in mind – here is a most insightful comment from one of
our men about this ongoing situation we seem to encounter of brazen
insistence against all evidence to the contrary about the Indo-Europeans
purportedly lacking a strong Goddess belief, picking it all up from
non-Indo-European cultures, etc.

Jai Mata DI !  
\[-C.A.R.\]

O. Rapace: “There is little to be added to what Arya Akasha said but
what should be perhaps mentioned is the astounding level of ignorance
that is involved in this whole “patriarchal Indo-Europeans wiped out the
Mother Goddess cults of the Mediterranean and Middle East” (and Old
Europe and India and… wherever they went, basically) narrative.

In order to run with this narrative, you have to ignore that throughout
the Indo-European world (like… from the Pillars of Hercules to the Bay
of Bengal) we find basically the variations of the same fundamental Devi
theology (and mythology) going on. When we realize this, that narrative
(promulgated, for various reasons, both by well meaning academics
seeking to, well, fit into the dominant narrative, as well as various
folks, incl. academics, with agendas… that, interestingly enough,
otherwise put them into opposing camps – just consider, say, Evola on
one side, and Gimbutas on other side) starts to crumble.

Just consider this – what is more likely truthful explanation for those
deep level concordancies between various Indo-European myths of the
Devi?

We know that Indo-Europeans conquered large areas inhabited by various,
in many cases, mutually unrelated substrates. And yet, the Indo-European
Goddesses and their mythologies are presented to us as coming from these
substrates. That would really be incredible if that was the case,
because we literally find almost identical stuff in Europe and in India.

The substrates concerned are actually not really related (not in any
historically meaningful way, anyway), yet we are told that European IE
got their “Goddesses stuff” from Old Europe and Indian IE got their
“Goddesses stuff” from “dark-skinned aborigines of the Indian
subcontinent”.

And yet, this “Goddesses stuff” that supposedly comes from such diverse
and different substrates, is in fundamental ways quite coherently
concordant… You would expect that at this point most people would
probably stop and start wondering whether such deep coterminities
between Indo-European Goddesses perhaps come from… well,
proto-Indo-Europeans rather from various substrates with which
conquering Indo-Europeans interacted.

This is not to say, as Arya Akasha noted as well, that there were no
local substrate influences. IMHO we should expect that to be the case to
some degree. The remarkable thing though is that these presumed
influences actually did little to substantially modify the fundamentals
of the IE Devi theology and mythology and possibly murk the
aforementioned coterminities found throughout the Indo-European world.
And of course, what in many cases is presented as “non-IE substrate
influence” (starting with the actual notion of the Great Goddess
Herself), is actually something that can be shown to be a fundamental
feature shared by IE cultures that absorbed totally different
substrates… so… yeah…

Long story short – the Great Goddess, Meter Theon, Supreme Power above
All, is our ancestral, Indo-European Goddess, as are Her divine
daughters (and divine sons… although the place and role of the male gods
is not really contested by academics and IE enthusiasts and/or
detractors).

Jai Mata Di!  
“

❤
