+++
title = "Astra – The Star Weapon"
full_title = "Astra – The Star Weapon Of Orion, Ardra, Rudra"
date = "2021-11-07"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/11/07/astra-the-star-weapon-of-orion-ardra-rudra/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/11/07/astra-the-star-weapon-of-orion-ardra-rudra/).

Astra – The Star Weapon Of Orion, Ardra, Rudra

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/120491262_10164211267420574_5148863610481547926_n.jpg?w=1000)

Orion is remarkable. Whether the constellation, the Metallica
instrumental, or the mythological figure(s) – there is something
impressively resonant and incredibly enduring behind the name and
figure.  
I’m currently working upon a ‘Forensic Theology’ effort to look at the
actual underlying archaic Indo-European myth and the figures involved
(particularly the Death aspect – and just what, or rather Whom was being
hunted) – but that piece is not this.

Rather, we shall be looking at something similarly enduring – the Weapon
of this most mighty Hunter Who Stalks The Stars , and how it has perhaps
surprisingly persisted from its most archaic mentions in ancient Vedic
ritual accounts through to the present-day’s most prominently
recognizable iconographic Shaivite saliency.

In the standard Western perception of the constellation of Orion,
considerably informed to us by the Greeks, you will often see several
armaments associated with the figure. One is a raised club, another is
the sword hanging from His justly famed Belt. A third comprises the Bow
– although frequently, this seems to be subsumed in recent iconographic
depictions: the stars in question being instead repurposed as a shield
or some fearsome beast held aloft by the throat. Where Orion’s hand
holds the Bow in firing position with limb outstretched, the raised
other arm which should otherwise be hefting a close quarters implement
of violence is instead occasionally depicted in the position which
suggests an arrow has immediately been let fly. At other times, both
club (or sword) and bow are held in opposite hands – and for reasons
that shall become apparent, it would be interesting to consider the
possibility of an Axe as the swung weapon likewise.

Personally, I grew up knowing Orion as ‘the Archer’, which makes logical
sense after all for a Hunter – and so therefore it was with considerable
interest that I learned of the relevant archaic Hindu perception in
relation to this figure. Wherein, once again, an Archer is most
definitely Who is meant.

Now as I say – there are quite some complicated points to be made upon
the co-identification of the constellations (and deific figures)
relevant for this myth between the Vedic view and the Hellenic or later
European. We shan’t get into all of that here, except to note that the
coterminity is a somewhat ‘imperfect’ one. Insofar as some stars in
Greek Orion are identified with the prey of the Hunter – Mrgashira, the
‘Deer’s Head’ (and therefore Prajapati, Who had assumed such a form at
the time that Rudra was dispatched to carry out severe sanction against
Him); whilst other stars (pointedly, Orion’s Belt) are the Arrow,
protruding from the quarry; and it is Sirius / Alpha Canis Majoris that
is significantly identified with Rudra – a situation which we have
significantly explored in previous works such as “Sirius In Central Asia
– Soma, Tisya, Tishtrya, Rudra”, and which makes abundant sense given
the situation of Rudra as a ‘Wolf God’ (whether accompanied by His Two
Wolves, or in a more straightforward sense with the Wolf as tracker par
excellence) and the Classical recollection of Sirius as linking to the
concept of ‘Shaking’ (with Fury – or, we should say, Furor).

Meanwhile, in mythic terms – and again, I am simply breezing through
this ‘once over lightly’ to leave it for grander exploration in the
subsequent works to come – what we appear to see in the Classical
mythology around Orion is a scenario wherein Orion is at once *both*
Rudra *and* Prajapati. Rudra when Orion is the famed huntsman and lover
of Artemis in a positive condition ; Prajapati when Orion is the figure
being shot by Apollo (with Apollo unsurprisingly being Rudra) in order
to *protect* Artemis (here fulfilling the role of Saraswati / Diva) or
when Artemis (here Rudra) is acting to avenge Orion’s rape of Oupis; and
with the dispatch of Orion via Scorpio actually speaking to a rather
lesser-remarked upon yet pervasive Indo-European understanding of the
Wife of the Sky Father killing the Sky Father (as can be demonstrated
via not only Artemis contra Orion … but also Gaia utilizing Scorpio –
due to the intriguing identification of the Scorpion’s Tail as belonging
to Prithvi in the Nakshatra Sukta appended to the AtharvaVeda) – but
more upon this in the future. Let us return to the Arrow of Rudra that
is so remarkably identified with what we would speak of as Orion’s
Belt.

Given Rudra’s eminent status as The Archer (Sarva) in Vedic theonymy, it
should come as no surprise to find that He is also hailed as launching
that aforementioned Arrow. And so it might be tempting to ask just why I
had felt this understanding worthy of its own standalone piece – because
where is the actual unexpectedness to this if we have a feared Hunter
utilizing a Hunter’s weapon against a target that had taken the form of
a game-animal.

And the answer is : the actual *form* of the Arrow itself.

Per the Aitareya Brahmana’srendition of the occurrence, the weapon
unleashed by Rudra is described as ‘Trikanda’. That is to say ‘Three-‘
(or ‘Tri-‘ – it means just as it does in English or Greek etc.)
‘-kanda’. What is ‘Kanda’? Well, it would be tempting to render this as
‘division’ – and certainly, in modern usage one frequently encounters
‘Kanda’ utilized in such a manner. ‘Chapter of a book’, for example, may
be referred to as ‘Kanda’, or we have ‘division of land’ (a la
‘province’) as seen with, say, Uttarakhand. English “Candy” even derives
from this same Sanskrit term – as sheets of jaggery (sugar-cane) were
‘broken’ into smaller pieces and could then be consumed like .. well ..
modern-day ‘candy’. However that is not the most appropriate rendering
for ‘Kanda’ here.

Instead, we find Kanda to mean a ‘stalk’, a ‘shaft’, an ‘arrow’. That is
to say – ‘Trikanda’ would therefore mean not so much an arrow which has
three parts, but rather a ‘Three-Arrow’: a three-pointed arrow \[Which
is, not at all coincidentally, how the modern-day Vedic sage,
Manasataramgini has rendered it in his translation of the relevant
portion of text\].

Now, whereabouts do we see a three-pronged weapon being utilized by a
deity familiar to us in Vedic terms as a formidable Archer …

Lord Shiva’s Trishula\[‘Three-Spear’\] is quite clearly resonant with
this understanding. In both cases, we have the weapon useful for a
hunter (a bow and arrow, or a spear) – and in both cases, three points
or shafts to the single ‘shootable’ / ‘castable’ / ‘fireable’
instrument.

And lest I be accused of blatantly overlooking the fact that an arrow is
not a spear … actually, yes, yes it is. It is just a rather small one,
which is utilized via the availment of a launching mechanism. We
similarly find a ‘convection-zone’ of sorts when we consider one of the
major Vedic names for Rudra’s Bow – Pinaka. This, at once, can refer to
a Bow, but also to a Spear. The idea of ‘projecting’ force in a
piercing, penetrating manner oriented around a speeding shaft is perhaps
rather more important than whether the projectile in question was shot
from a bow or hurled via more direct means and the strength of His Arm.
I had touched upon some of these points in my earlier work – ‘On The
World-Spear of the Sky Father – Trishula, Gungnir, Pinaka’.

Now it should be noted that in various other presentations of the
encounter of Rudra with Prajapati, the weaponry does change somewhat. We
see an axe is utilized – because Prajapati (later, in Puranic era
retellings, Brahma) is being decapitated. This should come as little
surprise – as Rudra (and His emanations – for example, KaalBhairava; or
His other Forms – such as Brihaspati or Agni) is indelibly associated
with this style of weapon, too.

However, there are other details to the ‘Archer’ account which do bear
further examination here – in no small part because they do help us to
understand some of what is going on in mythic terms with this otherwise
curious accounting of a three-tipped arrow being fired by Rudra.

The first point to be made is that in the relevant aforementioned
Aitareya Brahmana accounting, Rudra is congealed as an ‘ultimate
enforcer’ of Cosmic Law – necessary in order to protect the Goddess
(variously identified as a female form of ‘Heaven’ – so ‘Dyaus’ in
feminine … which, of course, tracks with the later Puranic presentation
of Brahma making unwholesome advances toward Shiva’s Wife Parvati;
however also spoken of in the same verse as Ushas) from the outrage
impending at Prajapati’s grasping hands. This does not simply happen
spontaneously – but is rather the direct result of the Gods coming
together to bring Him forth through the investiture of Their most
terrifying qualities. In the RigVeda’spresentation of the episode
\[wherein Rudra is referred to as Mrgavyadha – ‘hunter’, ‘predator’,
more literally ‘prey/deer-piercer’ … and again, not at all
coincidentally a term for the star Sirius\], we find Vastopati thusly
‘manyu-fested’ by the combined outrage of the assembled Gods (a
situation which both reinforces the identification elsewhere of
Vastopati in at least some occasions as Rudra ; and also resonates with
the appearance of Devi Durga from a similar divine convocation in order
to slay Mahishasura). The same understanding quite plausibly informs the
form of the myth recorded in a number of Classical accounts wherein
Orion results from Zeus / Jupiter , Poseidon / Neptune, and Hermes /
Mercury all urinating into the hide of a sacrificially offered bull (or
ox) (particularly given the well-known ‘Bull’ iconographic and
epithetical saliency for Rudra) – although I suspect that the ‘urine’
element is something of a ‘folk-etymology’ and/or misremembering of a
rather key detail that instead pertains to something quite foundational
to the deific. More upon that in the not-too-distant future.

This ‘combined arms’ typology is necessary to note, because in various
of the other typologically resonant accounts from the Vedic (and
subsequent) layers of texts which spring to mind, what we are often
seeing with certain vastly potent arrows of Rudra is that they, too, are
somehow ‘congealments’ or ‘constructions’ which draw together either
Divinities Themselves, or ‘qualities’, ‘essences’, ‘energies’ of Same
for their empowerment.

A grand example for this is provided via the Puranic mythology around
Shiva as Tripurantaka – the ‘Destroyer of the Three Forts’. Again, we
won’t go into detail about the myth in question – but suffice to say,
three airborne demonic strongholds all had to be destroyed, and could
only be combatted if attacked simultaneously. The mechanism to do this
was a fittingly divinely infused arrow, which of course required a
fittingly divine Archer in order to fire it. The Puranic mythology adds
quite a range of potential narrative and theological additional elements
to this basic structure (including a much more expansive role for
various other Gods contributing as, for instance, the wheels of Rudra’s
War-Chariot, or as elements of the Bow Itself … and Lord Shiva pointedly
being able to destroy the three citadels without any of this being
necessary in any case); however the more archaic Vedic accounts (to be
found in the Black Yajurveda and accompanying Shatapatha Brahmana – with
another, semi-related variant present in the Aitareya Brahmana) are much
less expansive and simply orient around those aforementioned key
elements.

This is because they’re there to provide ‘narrative’ encoding for ritual
understandings. In this particular case, an Upasad \[‘Siege’ / ‘Attack’
/ ‘Approach’ – although also ‘Homage’ ‘Worship Ceremony’; and
interestingly, with Nordic Gunnlöð being a figurative resonancy, as I
have discussed elsewhere\] , requiring offerings to three deities (Agni
, Soma , Vishnu) to be undertaken in sets of three (so, three of these
offerings (one for each God), carried out twice a day plus a Homa rite
(again, a set of three), for three, six, or twelve days). These
offerings consist of Ghee (‘clarified butter’ – an important ritual
ingredient, in no small part because it constitutes a ready liquid fuel
for fire) which is understood to congeal the Thunderbolt (Vajra)
utilizable for the smashing of any oppositional fortification or other
such obstruction (c.f the use of the Vajra to do just exactly that by
Indra or Brihaspati (inter alia) against Vritra, Vala, etc. ). This
Thunderbolt, as I have earlier demonstrated elsewhere, is – despite the
more frequent ‘Club’, ‘Mace’, or ‘(Thunder)Hammer’ perception – also
referred to in terms befitting an arrow in the Vedas ; and may occur in
Greek mythic conceptry with, for example, the flaming arrows (or spears)
utilized by Herakles in at least one accounting of the Hydra-slaying. As
well as, of course, *the* Thunderbolt occurrent in Classical mythology –
the one wielded by Zeus and thrown in the manner of a javelin. Something
further supported via the identification of Rudra’s weapon, in any case,
being the Vajra per RV II 33 3 – and other points made elsewhere around
the effective coterminity of Shiva’s iconic armament with the Vajra in
functional terms. But let us bring things back to this ritual occurrence
and its resonancy for the situation viz. Rudra in (avenging, protective)
pursuit of Prajapati.

We can tell that this is the same – or, at least, highly resonant –
occurrence due not only to the Archer and the three-point arrow
involved, but also due to both cases entailing the same exactly
identical price demanded by Lord Rudra in exchange for carrying out the
operation. Namely, He requests to be named the Lord of Beasts
(Pasupati). Now this is interesting to us in quite a number of senses –
one of which being the obvious one around a Supreme Hunter possessing
dominion over the wilds and ‘animal kingdom’; although also because
given the specific association with Cattle that this title pertains to –
which, given the prominent understanding of Cattle as Wealth (c.f, for
instance, Nordic ‘Fehu’ – a rune and a term somewhat connoting both; or
the nature of the hoarded wealth stolen by certain demons that is to be
recovered via Divine war effort in various Vedic hymns … or simply the
next line of the Aitareya Brahmana, wherein invoking ‘Pashuman’ renders
one wealthy in just such terms), would therefore also render Rudra as
‘The Wealthy’, the ‘Lord of Wealth’. ‘Pluto’, we might suggest – which,
in comparative mytholinguistic terms, is rather intriguing due to
‘Pluto’ likely descending from the same PIE term that gives us
‘Pleiades’. But more upon those matters at some as-yet unspecified
future juncture. Suffice to say the linkage of Orion with the Pleiades
in Greek understanding, and of Agni (Shiva) with the Krittikas in Hindu
reckoning , likely recalls an incredibly archaic Proto-Indo-European
belief around that asterism entailing the Sky Father deific.

However there is one rather important point of distinction between these
two schemas. In the Haug translation of the Aitareya Brahmana we find
the ‘tripartite’ Arrow to be comprised of “shaft, steel, and point”.
This makes logical sense – except that it is Haug’s own interpolation.
It is not actually found in the text he is translating. What it DOES
resemble is the situation presented for the Upasad (‘Siege’) rite in the
Shatapatha Brahmana & Taittiriya Yajurveda – wherein each of the three
‘energies’ is indeed spoken of as having a distinct ‘part’ or ‘place’ in
the resultant munition. Except here we encounter additional
difficulties. Both sources identify Agni as the Anika(i.e. ‘point’,
‘vanguard’, ‘facing’, ‘tip’) and Soma as the Salya. Salya is ordinarily
another term for an Arrow or Spear itself, a thing that pierces –
although partially as a result of this, it can also refer to a pin or
peg that is keeping things conjoined. However, this again causes
complexities – as what, then, to make of the Shatapatha
Brahmana’sreferring to Vishnu as the ‘Kulmala’ , a term which usually
refers to the joining of arrow-head and shaft. Some interpretations have
attempted to ‘square the circle’ here by declaring the Salya that is
Soma to be a ‘barb’ or actual ‘point’ to the head – and simultaneously
reconstruing the Anika as the ‘shaft’ (which is not entirely impossible
given its general field of meaning also including a ‘column’ of troops);
however clearly any attempt to dislodge Agni from the ‘tip of the Spear’
and the logical understanding of ‘Anika’ is going to be rather
eyebrow-raising in light of other occurrences for Agni as Anika in the
same text. Meanwhile, Vishnu is referred to as the ‘Tejana’ in the Black
Yajurveda’srendition of the same sacrificial instructional – a term
which, again, maddeningly usually refers to a ‘sharp’ element and
arrowhead although which could feasibly also refer to a shaft.

The proper approach to all of this is, I feel, an indelibly simple one.
Rather than tying ourselves up in knots attempting to ascribe particular
parts to a physical arrow to the energies (and their contributors)
thusly invoked, and having to therefore do very curious things to the
actual words of the scripture congealed out in front of us … it is far
more straightforward to instead observe that the Arrow is a ‘metaphor’.
In much the same manner, in fact, as describing the three stars of
Orion’s Belt (or Rudra’s Arrow) as being , well, a ‘belt’ or an ‘arrow’
is. It doesn’t change that the three immense points of light are
incredibly significant and potent – however it recognizes that the
particular connotation and ‘form’ we use to mentally shorthand these is
a human projection. And projections, even via starlight, should rarely
become too easily nor comfortably confused with the underlying reality
to which they track back.

When interpreted metaphysically, we see the truth of the matter – that
each of these three ‘qualities’ has an essential role to play in
congealing the overarching weapon. And, interestingly, at least one of
these – Tejana, utilized to refer to Vishnu’s contribution in the
TaittiriyaYajurveda presentation – has a rather specific additional
connotation of ‘brightness’ (more properly – ‘brightening’) to go along
with the understanding of piled combustible material for a blaze. This
helps to point the way for us. Three Stars – three immense thermonuclear
pyres – up there in the sky, resonant and in conjunction or syzygy with
three sacral fires down here below upon this mundane (in multiple
senses) plane of ours. And each of these forming a ‘warhead’ (with the
Ghee thusly offered into the flames being fissile material), capable of
exerting a penetrative and smashing force against the impediments and
opposition mounted by the Gods’ foes.

In this way, we might once again recall the situation of the Trishula of
Mahadev – wherein part of the reason for it being, well, a Tri-Shula
\[‘Three-Spear’\] is precisely because each Shula \[Point\] stands for a
particular ‘quality’. And therefore, what Rudra wields when He draws
forth this immensely potent (indeed, literally omnipotent) weapon – is
something capable of acting with all three forces as active components
with which to ‘unmake’ the enemy.

An understanding which similarly facilitates the ritual conduct wherein
some measure of the power and the potency of this device is ‘drawn down’
to us via acting in recognition, in consciously active ‘resonancy’ with
what we find encoded for us in the Stars.

‘As Above, So Below’, as somebody once said. ‘Above’ intended here to
refer to the Supernal, the Heavenly well more than the ‘mere’ view of
what we can behold of outer space from down here with our human eyes.
For that’s precisely the element at issue here – ‘human eyes’ having an
incessant need to render down everything into decidedly ‘human’ terms.
Something that is understandably important, even vital, to ensure that
these beliefs are actually able to be transmitted on down the
generations and attain fresh saliency for persons coming into contact
with them – to keep them connected to us, in other words. Yet which
nevertheless runs the serious risk of ‘reducing’ things in order to make
them more comprehensible .. and losing so much in the process. Even
before one gets to ‘euhemerism’, where quite directly the sacred and
mythic is artificially transmuted to literally just be about humans or
meteorological phenomena etc. And so we wind up with arguments about how
a Trishula “must” be a foreign and non-IE element, because “our spears
don’t look that way” ; or a bow and arrow being unable to also be a
spear – because in human terms, how could these be the same instrument.
I still remember a very stupid encounter a year or two ago with somebody
who *really* didn’t want to believe that a Vajra, Mjolnir, and other
such elements could be the same thing, the same element wielded by the
same figure … because “an axe is not a hammer”, “a mace is not an axe”,
etc. etc. – never mind the comparative linguistics and mythology to
demonstrate the truth being otherwise. Who knows how he’d have coped to
hear the elements around the Vajra being depicted in terms which
likewise relate to an Arrow.

That kind of objectionismI think we might reasonably surmise as
attempts at enforcing “As Below … So Above”. That is to say – insisting
that because some mundane human element works or looks a particular way,
that the mythic element that *may* have been represented in terms
drawing from said mundane element must therefore axiomatically follow
completely suit. Never mind how various of these accounts are artistic
renderings where ‘poetic license’ may render efforts at strict
‘scriptural literalism’ a rather futile and self-defeating agenda even
afore we get into how to reconcile other somewhat or more significantly
differing accounts from within the same mytho-cultural complex. But that
is another series of excursions for another set of times.

For now, it is enough to look up into the Sky in wonder – and marvel at
this most magnificent Weapon of the Wolf Who Stalks The Stars .
