+++
title = "Rahu – The Dark Graha"
full_title = "Rahu – The Dark Graha And His Veiled Grasp"
date = "2021-11-10"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/11/10/rahu-the-dark-graha-and-his-veiled-grasp/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/11/10/rahu-the-dark-graha-and-his-veiled-grasp/).

Rahu – The Dark Graha And His Veiled Grasp

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/planet-north-lunar-node-navgraha-rahu-indian-miniature-paintingwatercolor-painting-jagannath-1.jpg?w=568)

We begin to speak of a figure often veiled, an astrological potent who
is, by definition, ‘obscure’ – and that, in the archaic Latin sense. The
Graha – Rahu.

Now before getting any further, it is necessary to provide a very brief
overview of some relevant Hindu astrological understandings. The piece
will unlikely make much sense to otherswithout them.

In Jyotisha \[‘Astrology’ – the ‘Jyoti’ meaning (Star)Light\], there are
Nine Graha. Often you will hear these referred to as ‘Nine Planets’ –
however that … isn’t quite accurate. And it loses something relative to
the true understanding.

Graha does not mean ‘Planet’. Rather, it means ‘Seizer’, ‘Influencer’ –
indeed, the ‘Grah’ that ‘Graha’ is from is reasonably cognate with
modern English ‘Grab’. You often find ‘Graha’ translated as ‘Planet’ in
an astrological context precisely because the influence of the various
astronomical bodies in question is held to ‘Seize’, to ‘Influence’ the
person. However, as we can see, that is a figurative translation which
skips the step – over-conflating the ‘causation’ (i.e. the planet) with
the impact (the ‘grabbing’).

There are Nine Grahas in the Hindu reckoning. Seven of these are
reasonably conventional and should be instantly familiar to a Western
ken. They are: the Sun (Surya), the Moon (Chandra, or Soma), Mars
(Mangala), Mercury (Budha, or Soumya – ‘\[Son\] Of the Moon’, perhaps
‘Little Moon’ as a diminutive), Jupiter (Brihaspati / Guru), Venus
(Shukra), and Shaani (Saturn). As can be seen, these also directly
correlate to the Days of the Week in our post-Roman reckoning. However,
just as there are important distinctions between, say, the Roman ‘Days
of the Week’ and the Germanic mythology which some Christian sorts
sought to overlay these upon – so too are there important distinctions
to be made between certain of the figures aforementioned in Hindu terms
and the Roman (or Greek, etc.) mythological equivalents we would
otherwise reach towards. But more upon various of those some other time
(and I have already penned several pieces of direct relevancy here).

The other two Graha are something different. They are Rahu and Ketu. And
as for what these Graha are … well, it is slightly complicated to
explain.

A (perhaps overly simplistic) explication would construe Rahu & Ketu as
‘dark bodies’ that are supposed to intersperse between us down here on
Earth and the Sun and the Moon. Phrased another way, these Graha
effectively represent an Eclipse – but not in the simple manner of one
of the conventionally identified celestial bodies interceding in between
Earth and another. Rather, these two ‘Eclipses’ are thought of as being
celestial bodies in and of themselves. Hence, even when there is not a
literal Eclipse occurring, these Eclipses nevertheless continue to exist
– Eclipses In Potentia, or Eclipses just waiting to become visible to us
via actual conjunction we may say. It’s a fascinating concept, and
remarkable in the mathematics that must surely have gone into
calculating the movement of these quite literally invisible figures.

As ever, we find that the astrology is correlate to the mythology. In
this particular case, a figure by the name of Svarbhanu (often
translated as ‘Radiance (Svar) of the Sun (Bhanu)’, ‘Heaven’s (Svar)
Radiance (Bhanu)’, or the like – however given events, I would postulate
‘Censure (Svar) the Sun (Bhanu)’ to be more apt) is said to have snuck
in at a distribution of Amrit \[‘A-‘ (opposite of), ‘Mrit’ (death) being
the Elixir of Immortality\] and managed to drink a certain portion
before being detected – this imbibification meaning that the subsequent
sanction of decapitation meted out to Svarbhanu did not kill the being.
Instead, the Head of Svarbhanu is reputed to have become Rahu, whilst
the tail became another figure by the name of Ketu. A vendetta against
the Sun and Moon for leading to Svarbhanu’s discovery and decapitation
is purported to underpin the motion of Rahu and Ketu to cause eclipses
of these – although as Rahu has been decapitated, this therefore means
that the Sun being swallowed can only ever be a decidedly ‘temporary’
phenomenon. It comes out the neck as the result.

The Svarbhanu attestation we find in the RigVeda (V 40) presents a
narrative of the Sun (Surya) being darkened via baleful magics wielded
by the fiend, afore this situation is reversed by the sage Atri
undertaking proper rites which enable the Sun to become ‘found’ again
and cast off the gloom which has settled upon it. The noted modern Vedic
commentator Manasataramgini has read this as Atri undertaking
“astronomical observations” which then confirm the Sun’s eventual return
from behind the Eclipse, and it is certainly plausible.

Certainly, we can be fairly confident that ‘astronomical observation’
had been occurring within the Vedic Age – not merely in the sense of
being able to chart where and when given planets or stars were to be
found within the night’s sky … but consciously and conspicuously
incorporating endogenous development which refined the theorizing and
consequent mythology involved in same.

How can we tell this? Because we see the movement from RV V 40’s
description of an eclipse as being caused by a demon darkening the Sun
through supernatural potency, through to later Vedic texts wherein
instead the confrontation is effectively re-cast as one of Sun and Moon.
That is to say, the Moon fulfilling an ‘adversarial’ role and attempting
to ‘conquer’ the Sun – as we see in the Shatapatha Brahmana, which
builds upon the involvement of Indra in RV V 40 to cast Indra’s victory
over Vritra in similar terms to the later Svarbhanu mythology. In SB I6
3 17 we find Indra dismembering Vritra, with the head (which had Soma
within it) becoming the Moon. In the next Brahmana, I 6 4, we find Indra
cast in explicitly Solar terms as the Sun for this confrontation with
the oncoming Vritra Moon. An encounter which, of course, Indra wins
handily, causing the Moon to disappear for a time, having been devoured
by the Sun (Although it must be noted that, as with various other
narrativeaccounts in the Brahmanas, this is the encoding of a ritual
process in story form for ease of recollection and preservation – and
ought not, perhaps, be taken mytho-literally. After all, obtaining Soma
by killing Vritra would make little sense, given that it is only with
Soma that Indra is able to *kill* Vritra in the mainSamhita versions of
the combat). Manasataramgini has, of course, identified other texts
wherein it is clear that such developments have occurred – and resulted
in religious or mythically framed perspectives which nevertheless
communicate a quite accurate scientific truth. He points toward the
Brahmanda Purana’s(correct) ascribing of eclipses to shadows (and in
the particular case involved, the shadow of the Earth) as tangible
evidence toward that fact – Svarbhanu here being presented as just
exactly that: Shadow.

But let us return to concepts of ‘Graha’ and ‘Rahu’.

Rahu is, etymologically, from the same root as Graha and Grab – PIE
\*Ghrebh. We find a Rahu prominently mentioned in AtharvaVeda XIX 9,
which I’ll quote verses of in a slightly altered Whitney translation
because I think it sounds cool:

“7 Weal for us be Mitra, weal Varuna, weal Vivasvant, weal the destroyer
(ántaka), \[weal\] the portents from Earth and from Atmosphere, weal for
us the planets \[Graha\] moving in the Sky.  
8 Weal for us be the quaking (vip) Earth, and weal what is
meteor-smitten; weal be the red-milked kine, weal the Earth when
cleaving down.  
9 Be the meteor-smitten asterism \[constellation\] weal for us; weal for
us the enchantments and weal be the witchcrafts; weal for us the buried
spells (valagá), weal the meteors; and weal be for us the
land-plagues.  
10 Weal for us be the Planets belonging to the Moon, and weal the Sun
(ādityá) with Rāhu; weal for us smoke-bannered death, weal the Rudras of
keen brightness.”

And, in case some of that was a little obscurely phrased – here’s
Griffith:

“7 Favour us Mitra, Varuna, Vivasvan, and the Finisher,  
 Portents on Earth and in the Air, and Planets wandering in Heaven!  
8 Gracious to us be trembling Earth, gracious the flaming meteor
stroke!  
 Gracious be kine who yield red milk, gracious be Earth when sinking
down!  
9 Gracious be meteor-stricken constellation, gracious to us be magic
spells and witchcraft!  
 Gracious to us be buried charms, and gracious the meteors and the
portents of the region!  
10 Kind be the Powers Who seize the Moon, with Rāhu be Ādityas kind!  
 Favour us Death and Comet, and Rudras with penetrating might!”

Now in terms of what’s actually going on here, the Hymnal in question is
a generalized apotropaic one. It therefore invokes quite the array of
potential protective (or, alternatively, wrathful against one) figures
in order to ask for protection and positive treatment. And,
unsurprisingly, we find the Graha identified amidst these.

One particular point of interest concerns what Griffith had rendered as
‘Comet’ and Whitney as ‘Smoke-Bannered’ – as this is ‘Dhumaketu’ in the
original Sanskrit. ‘Dhuma’, of course, can mean ‘Smoke’ – however there
is some considerable disagreement amidst recent commentators as to which
of several possible senses ‘Ketu’ is intended to communicate here.
Certainly, we have archaic Hindu usage for ‘Ketu’ in the sense of comets
and meteors, and it might contextually fit here. And I would go so far
as to suggest that it is an entirely artificial distinction to insist
that simply because ‘Ketu’ may also mean ‘Banner’, ‘Sign’ … that this
cannot, therefore, also mean ‘Comet’. After all, we are well familiar
with the notion of a Comet presenting an Omen or Portent even in the
modern day – often as a sign of soon-to-be-impending War and Death. A
‘Smoke-Tail’ would be an interesting figurative way to describe such a
visual phenomenon, and it would additionally make sense for us to find
first mention of Rahu and then a ‘Ketu’ that is a prominent Tail.

Yet why is this archaic Vedic hymnal relevant for us, here, today?

Well, leaving aside that archaic Vedic hymnals are *always* relevant for
us, here, today …

A gifted Astrologer associate of mine has noted a bit of a tendency when
recommending to his clients various Rahu related interventions for their
circumstances and their birth-charts for … hesitancy at actually seeking
to propitiate such a force.

Now this is, perhaps, understandable. I am a conservative man when it
comes to matters of religion, and the idea of what looks like
“demon-worship” is something that I have frequently railed against when
it comes up from quarters seeking to literally engage in such as part of
‘their side’s’ effort at overthrowing the Gods and the immanency of
Cosmic Law here in this universe of ours.

However, the propitiation of Rahu (or, for that matter, in a slightly
different way, Ketu) has never seemed like that to me. Partially this is
because it is a normal and accepted part of our palette of proper piety
– and has been so for, evidently, millennia on end. It is something to
be ‘cautious’ in the approach of, of course, as with invoking any such
potentially wrathful force. These are not as ‘forgiving’ for wrong
conduct in the approach, even if genuinely unintended.

But partially it is because that the reason *for* Rahu influence – and
consequent necessity for propitiation, for some of us – upon human
beings and our circumstance is not truly comparable to that of those
malefic demonic entities supported by malevolent cults in the dark
corners of the world and/or internet. Rahu and Ketu were something, and
have become something else. What is that ‘something else’? Divinely
mandated. That is how Rahu became placed in the Heavens and granted such
influence over the affairs of men. Something that manifests, in part, in
a similar manner to a baleful (yet unquestionably Divine) fellow Graha –
Shaani (Saturn), wherein the sins and shortcomings of mankind are
observed and opportunities for penitence thusly afforded. Which, of
course, can look an awful lot like ‘enemy action’ to the sinful. And
yet, when looked upon from the appropriate (high) vantage point – in
fact demonstrates itself to be a fundamental act of ‘Ordering’ (bringing
order) to our quotient of the universe.

Multiple perspectives presented in, for instance, the Skanda Purana,
show Rahu as having ‘patched over’ from the side of the Daityas
\[‘opposite-to-Adityas’, ‘limiters’, ‘demons’\] – particularly via the
rather direct intervention of Lord Shiva. Which, of course, helps to
explain the not-infrequently encountered maxim that Lord Rahu ‘stands
within the Heart of Shiva’. Certainly, we have the prominent records of
Rahu’s expressions of piety via Lingam obeisance – however while some
might point out that Lord Shiva is a noted accepter of Demonic
worshippers who nevertheless do not truly give up doing Demonic things
(Ravana, for instance, Who failed at His opportunity for true
Redemption) … that tends to be the shortcoming of the demons in question
rather than a shortcoming of Mahadev in His Discernment. He gives
everybody ‘a chance’. And then, we often find that in fact the force
which thence lays the unpenitent demons low is, similarly, Lord Shiva’s
in ultimate expression and tangible execution. With Lord Rahu ? We have
a somewhat different scenario: that of Rahu having been emplaced and
empanelled to do a particular job for The Gods, and doing it well.

The saliency of ‘decapitation’ in Hindu iconography – wherein it often
represents that a figure has become rather more enlightened, more
humble, been corrected (especially by Lord Shiva with the aid of an axe
– an adroit mechanism for cutting a troublesome ego ‘down to size’) or
otherwise improved in terms of their character and congruence with the
Divine Order upon who or what they were before – may likewise be
resonant in the situation of Rahu. After all, a Daitya by origination
that becomes a Divine Servant via orientation must have entailed quite
some ‘self-overcoming’ indeed. And just as we see decapitation in the
context of overcoming hubris (ego) as pertaining to the triumphing over
illusion via superior realization which unveils the truth … well, so too
do we find Rahu’s situation in relation to the burdensome illusions and
their abatement.

Now at this point, it may seem even so utter madness to propitiate a
force Who is capable of – even if only temporarily – Swallowing the Sun
! Is not the Solar Disc the high expression of light, life, love, and
righteousness? Did not the fiend Svarbhanu act malefically in attacking
Surya in the RigVeda? Do we not see that aforementioned combat of Indra
and Vritra cast in such Solar Eclipse terminology elsewhere? Well, yes –
but there is quite a vital distinction to be made between what is going
on in those combats and the understanding of Rahu. Whereas Svarbhanu is
said in the RV to have actively managed to harm the Sun, piercing the
Sun with assailing forces in order to cause genuine injury which must be
recovered from with the help of the priestly piety and a very big
thunderbolt … with Rahu it is quite different. There is only the
*appearance* of the Sun having been imperilled – it passes through
Rahu’s mouth and out the other side. Or, looking at it another way, the
‘illusion’ and ‘shadow’ of Rahu (for Rahu presides over Illusion)
intercedes, Veils the Sun, and causes a very great terror – a potent,
necessary tribulation which encourages men to penitence. And hence why
we also find in the Smritis such mentions for the time of Rahu’s
intercession as being an ideal opportunity to engage in proper
purifactionary conduct.

Meanwhile, in those AtharvaVeda verses that I had quoted earlier, we
find another interesting dimension – namely, that of Rahu being hailed
(in the sense of asking that He not be wrathful with us and instead
(positively) kind and propitious) alongside The Rudras. The Rudras, of
course, being the potent ‘tribe’ and/or collection of emanatory
expressions and even ‘family’ of Lord Shiva. Often in the Vedas when
Rudra is invoked it is in a similar sense – asking the God *not* to
carry out immense and terrifying acts of destruction, to divert His
cataclysmic attentions elsewhere. Although it also must be acknowledged
that in *other* hymnals in the veer-y same Shruti layers of texts, we
find the positive attentions and care of Rudra asked for – particularly
in the provision of medicine and bountiful results as we have elsewhere
proclaimed it. Now I do not seek to suggest Rudra to be the Gana to
which Rahu belongs, however the ‘resonancy’ which evidently induced the
Seer of this Hymnal to place ‘the Rudras’ in the relevant line is
interesting. Particularly as there are other mentions of The Rudras (in
plural) and, of course, Antaka (‘The Destroyer’ – also encountered to
refer to Yama) elsewhere in the hymnal and so little need to repeat the
Rudras invocation unless there were particular reason to do so.

Still, if it makes one feel more comfortable with the concept – it is
certainly possible to think of much of what we do for Rahu propitiation
in similar terms to what we see in that AV Hymnal. Not so much ‘worship’
in the sense of the active strengthening and service that one carries
out for The Gods – but rather, the aforementioned apotropaic endeavour
wherein the devastating forces associated with the Graha are instead
averted. ‘Negative’ rather than ‘Positive’ engagement we might
(respectfully) suggest.

However, to speak further toward that AtharvaVeda Hymnal, it provides
additional details for illumination (rather than illusion) of the true
understanding for Rahu and Ketu within our cosmos. And ‘Cosmos’ is
exactly the right word – especially given its Ancient Greek connotations
of a ‘Realm Under Order’, ‘Order’ Itself.

The motion of the Grahas is regular, predictable, Orderly. We can chart
these out, mathematically analyze the courses, and confidently assert
that Jupiter or Saturn shall be in a given position on any given night
with an incredible degree of horological accuracy. Even if these are on
entirely the opposite side of the Sun, we know where these planets are.
It is no different viz. Rahu and Ketu. They are Grahas precisely because
we know where these two are to be. They are regular and predictable in
motion, even though upon the surface the *consequences* of that motion
may seem initially somewhat terrifying or disruptive to the perceived
immanency of the Cosmic Order.

In short, what we are seeing viz. Rahu (and also Ketu) is not Capital C
Chaos in the sense of the active and demoniacal opposition to Rta,
Orlog, Cosmic Order – but rather, its active upholding through means and
mechanisms that though they may *seem* anarchic or immoral … are
actually precisely the opposite. As the late Terry Pratchett put it –
“There are different kinds of rules. From the simple comes the complex,
and from the complex comes a different kind of simplicity. Chaos is
order in a mask.”

Now an additional form of proof for this is to be found in the
considered association of Rahu and Ketu with Comets and Meteors. On the
one hand, the famed Hindu astronomical commentator Varahamira(and he is
not alone in this) makes a point of stating comets to be, in effect,
‘beyond prediction’. This is a man who put huge effort into the
scientific, the mathematical analysis of the Heavens and the motion of
the bodies therein (actively disparaging to some extent, more
‘superstitious’ approaches of the past) – and to him, the comet is a
body operating outside what framework of ken he could devise. Except if
we look at the saliency for comets meteors in the Vedas, another picture
emerges – certainly, we have this ‘Ensign of Death’ \[DhumaKetu\] in the
AtharvaVeda, yet we also have mention of meteors wielded as divine
weapons … indeed as the Vajra Itself (i.e. the reified instrument of
Cosmic Order) by Brihaspati to smite a certain demon-dragon. And
utilizing our modern-day analytical methods (including some rather fancy
telescopes), we can indeed make reasonable mathematical prediction for
the long-arc orbits of comets and their recurrence beyond what would
have been viable for astronomers working a thousand, two thousand, three
thousand years afore(who nevertheless, it must be stated, could make
impressive inductions in this field themselves).

Again, something that *looks* like it might be anti-order … yet with
deeper kinds of eyes may be realized to be something far more active in
Order’s ultimate enforcement.

However, there is another element spoken to via these situations –
wherein Rahu, as my astrologer associate observed, appears to represent
a sort of ‘unpredictability’ … the ‘veil’ beyond which even a very wise
man (or, for that matter, astrologer) cannot quite penetrate. The
‘wobble’ in the ‘patterns’ of reality which help to ensure that while
the same general ‘cycles’, ‘patterns’ repeat over and over … they’re
never *quite* the same each time around. Something which, as my
associate noted, may go with the folk-beliefs around Shiva having placed
a ‘curse’ (or ‘condition’) upon astrology that it should prove imperfect
in its predictive accuracy (“probabilistic, rather than deterministic”,
as he put it) – allowing for the capacity of free will for the persons
whose charts have been properly read to nevertheless lead to …
unforeseen outcomes. Sometimes, after all, a coin flipped often enough
may even land upon its side.

Other folk-variations upon this same theme of a Deity placing such a
limitation upon the perspicacity of astrology also occur. A particular
iteration has the ‘curse’ as being the result of Devi’s action (whether
as Parvati or Saraswati). One unifying commonality of various of these
stories is that the Deity involved has close and major association with
one of the Rahu aligned Nakshatras – Rudra (Shiva) with Ardra, or
Saraswati with Svati, for instance (For more on Ardra, please consult my
recent and upcoming works upon this asterism; and for Svati – well, I
have not written the commentary yet, but rest assured that it is in
train; although it should be noted that the divinity directly presiding
over Swati is, in fact, Lord Vayu).

Indeed, we can also theorize that the third Rahu-aligned Nakshatra –
Satabhisha (Shatabisha) – has a similar Roudran saliency. Shatabisha,
‘Hundred Healers’, is ostensibly under the aegis of Lord Varuna. There
is an occasionally encountered understanding for Varuna as ( a ) Rudra,
although the more direct pathway to reason such a Roudran essence to the
asterism is to simply note that the presiding over ‘healing’, ‘healers’,
and ‘medications’ is an ancient and deservedly prominent Rudra portfolio
area found right throughout the Vedas and subsequent Hindu
understanding. The situation of Varuna presiding over Shatabishais
likely resultant from the fact that the constellation correlates
somewhat with Aquarius – the Water and Water Bearer. In Persian
astrology we seem to find what *may* be the same archaic asterism
referred to as Satavaesa (although here taken to mean ‘Having 100
Servants’), and connected to the Vouru Kasa ocean. Therefore, it is only
appropriate that we find a deific of the Celestial Ocean (the Sky as
Sea) presiding over the sign. And, doubly appropriate, when we consider
the noted potency of Lord Varuna with both ‘illusion’ (although this is
not *quite* an apt translation of Maya in its archaic Vedic sense –
where (magical) power is perhaps more apt .. ‘mere’ ‘illusion’ becoming
its later reductionist re-definition) as well as the provision of
healing remedies. Indeed, RV I 24 9 seems quite pointed in this regard –
”A hundred balms are Thine, O King, a thousand; deep and wide-reaching
also be Thy favours.” In Sanskrit: ‘Satamte rajan bhisajah’ – and
remember that it is ‘Sata-Bhisha’ that we are speaking of here (although
it is worth noting that ‘Bhishaj’ is capable of meaning both a ‘Healer’
in the sense of a doctor, as well as in the sense of a medication). This
line is uttered in the context of clear astrogative remarks around the
Pathway of the Sun, the movement of the Moon, and the placement of the
Constellations’ glory during the daylight hours. Although the close
association of Water / Ocean and healing elements is, again, elsewhere
attested – AV II 3, for instance. But more upon all of this at some
other time.

One further point to be made concerning Varuna in relation to this Rahu
situation is that we frequently find mention for the similar essential
characteristic of beholding the deeds of men, and then acting to
dispense appropriate sanctions upon them – as well as providing
something of a path back toward untroubled existence via appropriate
penances. Good exemplars for the former can be found by simply
consulting RV I 25 or AV IV 16 (inter many alia); whilst the latter is
to be found in, for instance, AV I 10 … or the general cycle of
Sunahsepa hymnals and their accompanying mythic couching.

The particular manner frequently favoured by Varuna for meting out these
sanctions – disease – bears quite close coterminity itself to a key
action of Rudra; and the magical imprecations employed by Varuna we can
likewise link to both the deific complex which Rudra runs upon (think,
for instance, of Odin’s utilization of Galdr), as well as the immense
potency presented by Saraswati as the Goddess of the High Speech (Vak).
In all cases, the relevant Divinities are intimately associated with the
upholding of Cosmic Order – and the smiting down of those who would seek
to imperil the imanency for same.

There is thus, we may say, once again an essential and unifying
underlying order and orderliness to proceedings – even if, upon first
glance, the assignment of Rudra, Varuna, and Saraswati in coterminous
constellation with Rahu might seem a bit curious. An alignment which
helps to elucidate the true character and essence for the Graha; one
which speaks toward a potency and a purpose which may indeed seem quite
dire (because it is) and baleful (because it most assuredly can be) …
yet which is not only ‘necessary’ in a generalized, cosmological sense –
but also quite pointedly in the personalized one, as well.

So therefore, whilst it remains eminently understandable that many are
affeared of Rahu and concerned about attracting His Attention – in
truth, Rahu’s attention is already pervasive. And if one wishes to avoid
the potentially calamitous outcomings of same, then it is the eschewment
of wrongdoing conduct rather than the avoidance of proper and
propitious, apotropaic engagement that represents the surest pathway
forward. Or, given the mechanism of the Grahas and Their Influence –
likely both, ideally simultaneously.

In closing, I can do little better than what has already been done.
Albeit with some slight figurative alterations in translation to more
aptly draw out the meaning – and one idiomatic pun on Line Nine:

“7 Be Positive Mitra, Positive Varuna, Positive The Wide-Shining (Sun),
Positive The Destroyer  
May The Portentous Events Upon This Earth And In ‘Midst The Sea Of Stars
Be Allied (With Us)  
And So Too The Grahas Active Within Heaven Likewise

8 May The Quake Of Earth Be Healing, May The Striking Of The
Fire-Falling-Star’s Target Bring Peace  
May The Blood-Milk (Trailing) Cows Be Auspicious, And May The Falling
Stone Prove The Same

9 The Meteor-Bombarded Nakshatra Be Auspicious, The Magical Enactments
Not Cause Us Fear  
The Secret, Hidden Spells Become Revealed And Turn To Our Favour,  
The Baleful Portents And Fire From The Heavens Afflicting A Demesne Be
(Revealed) Luck’s Noble Lady

10 BeneficentBe The Graspers Of The Moon And Rahu With The Sun (Even In
Eclipse)  
A Blessing Be Death’s Smoke-Banner (Comet) – And The Rudras’ Flame-Sharp
Majestic Might !”

May That Which Seems Terrible  
In Fact Become Terrific

Yet Never Lose Its Awe
