+++
title = "Panchamrut Preparation –"
full_title = "Panchamrut Preparation – ‘Ancient Aryan Milkshakes’ For Ritual Offering"
date = "2021-11-15"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/11/15/panchamrut-preparation-ancient-aryan-milkshakes-for-ritual-offering/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/11/15/panchamrut-preparation-ancient-aryan-milkshakes-for-ritual-offering/).

Panchamrut Preparation – ‘Ancient Aryan Milkshakes’ For Ritual Offering



![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/img_1040.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/img_1041.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/img_1042.jpg)

This evening, we made a basic Panchamrut for the ritual offerings
(Naivedya – the ‘consumable/edible’ Upachara (form of offering)).

“Ancient Aryan Milkshakes”, indeed.

Panchamrut is Pancha (‘Five’ – like ‘Penta’) Amrit (‘Mrit’ like ‘Mort’,
‘A-‘ here as a negation .. so ‘Immortality’); and effectively functions
as a ritual substitute for the rather more .. esoteric (and hard to
obtain) empowering elixirs of ancient rites.

The ‘Five’ in question is the number of major ingredients – Milk, Honey,
Jaggery (unrefined cane sugar), Curd (for which we are using plain
unsweetened yoghurt), and Ghee (clarified butter).

To this, you occasionally see various additions made as seasoning; and
in some parts of India there are different key constituent components
involved as well.

Now, properly speaking there are several additional considerations for
Panchamrut – particular Mantras that are to be said over its
ingredients, for example; and regulation upon what vessels are used to
contain the offering – copper is preferred, per Varaha Purana; however
fired clay or ceramic should be ok.

The best Panchamrut shall also be going rather more ‘organic’ than I am
here, by using raw Cow’s milk (preferably from the relevant form of
Indian Cow) and Curd made also from same … but due to circumstance,
regular NZ dark-blue top (i.e. not ‘lite’) milk should be fine; and
similarly the yoghurt.

However, it remains a relatively easy to prepare and efficacious
offering.

After the Puja had been completed, and the offerings had been made and
received by The Gods – the Panchamrut was then served as Prasad to my
family with dinner. It is believed that when we consume that which has
been piously offered to Divinity, that is a key component to the
conferment of the blessings derived therefrom (hence the meaning of
‘Prasad’ – ‘Blessing’, ‘Grace’, ‘Boon’)

The ‘Gifting Cycle’ – ‘Do Ut Des’ / Dehi Me, Dadami Te – continues.

ॐ नमः शिवाय  
जय माता दी

❤
