+++
title = "Rise & Fall of Kośala"
full_title = "Rise & Fall of Kośala"
date = "2021-11-01"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/11/01/rise-fall-of-kosala/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/11/01/rise-fall-of-kosala/).

Rise & Fall of Kośala

India in 6th century BCE was brimming with activity, be it religious,
political or cultural. Political map of this ancient civilization at the
time was dotted with territorial units called the janapada-s. Buddhist
sources like *Aṅguttara Nikāya* inform us about the sixteen major
janapada-s of Jambudipa (India) *i.e.* *soḷasa mahājanapada* known for
some time at that period. These were – Kāśī, Kosala, Aṅga, Magadha,
Vajji, Malla, Chetiya (Chedi), Vaṁsa (Vatsa), Kuru, Pañchāla, Machchha
(Matsya), Sūrasena, Assaka, Gandhāra, Kamboja. By the time curtain lifts
on the sixth century BCE, four out of these sixteen mahājanapada-s had
come to prominence and strong monarchies were ruling them. These were
Kosala, Magadha, Avanti and Vatsa. With the presence of such powerful
kingdoms in such close proximity to each other, it doesn’t come as a
surprise that their ambitious monarchs tried to get better of each
other. In the struggle, one was about to outmaneuver the others and we
all know who was to be the ultimate winner in the race – the kingdom of
Magadha.

**Introduction**

The process of rise of Magadha is also the journey of downfall of the
other three very promising kingdoms – the fall of Avanti, Kośala and
Vatsa. Activities from the 6th century BCE onwards in these kingdoms
present a very exciting tale of wars, political intrigues, ego clashes
and all the other spices needed to make a fascinating account. The
account of one such struggle, that of Avanti and Magadha has been dealt
with before on this blog in a previous post titled – [*Magadha and
Avanti: The End of the House of
Pradyota-s*](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/02/21/magadha-avanti-the-end-of-the-house-of-pradyota-s/).
In this post, I humbly attempt to narrate the views and theories of
various scholars and historians on the kingdom of Kośala and it’s
ultimate downfall in the face of the rising power of Magadha. The later
history of Kośala and its struggles before gradually being engulfed by
Magadh form the core of this post.

***Note:*** As all the events considered here are from before common
era, so the readers are advised to consider all the dates in this post
as belonging to that period as it will not be separately mentioned each
time.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/mahajanapadas_fixed.jpg?w=1024)

***The Sixteen Mahājanapada-s (Image Credit:
[indiancontents.com](https://www.indiancontents.com/2017/06/the-mahajanapadas.html))***

***Table of Contents*** ***& Links***

-   [The People & The Territory](#People-Territory)
-   [Geography](#Geography)
-   [Overview](#Overview)
-   [Genealogy](#Genealogy)
-   [Kāśī-Kośala Conflicts](#Kāśī-Kośala-Conflicts)
-   [Śākya-s Under Kośala](#Śākya-Under-Kośala)
-   [Prasenajit/Pasenadi](#Prasenajit-Pasenadi)
-   [Kośala & Ajātaśatru](#Kośala-Ajātaśatru)
-   [Virūḍhaka/Viḍūḍabha](#Virūḍhaka-Viḍūḍabha)
-   [Confederacy](#Confederacy)
-   [Vatsa & Udayana](#Vatsa-Udayana)
-   [Economy](#Economy)
-   [Understanding the Dynamic](#Understanding-Dynamic)
-   [Conclusion](#Conclusion)
-   [References](#References)
-   [Bibliography](#Bibliography)

**The People & The Territory**

Kingdom of Kośala does not find mention in the earliest of the Vedic
literature but in some of the later Vedic works like the *Śatapatha
Brāhmaṇa* and the *Kalpasūtras* (major texts of *Kalpa
Vedāṅga*).^(**1**) Pāṇini also informs us about the kingdom and Buddhist
works include it in one of the sixteen mahājanapada-s. *Atthasālini*
talks about Kośala as one of the great Kṣatriya tribes in the time of
the Buddha.^(**2**) Some kings of the region are of course mentioned in
the literature for the period prior to the 6th century like Āṭanāra
Hiraṇyanābha who is told to have performed the famous A*ś*wamedha
sacrifice^(**3**) but information on those would require a separate post
on its own and do not fall in purview of this particular post. What is
important to note is that ancient Indian literature across the board is
unanimous in ascribing sūrya vaṁśa (the solar family) to the kings of
Kośala and they are told to be the descendants of Manu through Ikṣavāku
(Law, 1943:117). It is in the Epics – the *Rāmāyaṇa* and the
*Mahābhārata* that Kośala comes to prominence. As readers would be well
aware that Bhagawāna Rāma belonged to this region and therefore, the
territory played an important role in the former epic. The *Mahābhārata*
also mentions this kingdom many a times and at one place, a king of
Kośala named Bṛhadbala is told to have been conquered by the Pāndava
brother Bhīmasena and Bṛhadbala also later told to have attended the
Rājasūya sacrifice. After this, Karṇa is told to have conquered Kośala
instead and that’s why, we find Kośala king later in the great war on
the side of the Kaurava-s (Law, 1943:120). The Purāṇa-s give us
information about many a kings of Kośala – almost all of whom were
glorious kings of Bhārata as per our sacred Hindu scriptures. Some of
these glorious names are known all too well – Māndhātā, Sagara,
Bhagīratha, Raghu etc (Law, 1943:120). The genealogical lists in the
Purāṇa-s though very much containing historical names, still present us
with some complications which will be dealt later in the post.

**Geography**

As to the geographical location of the kingdom, it lay east to the great
and famous territories of the Kuru-s and the Pāñcāla-s and to the west
of equally famous kingdom of Videha. The river Sadānīrā (identified
possibly with the river Gaṅḍaka) formed the boundary between the states
of Kośala and Videha.^(**4**) In the north it touched hills in Nepāla
and had territory contiguous with the realm of the Śākya-s. In the
south, river Gaṅgā was its boundary and the area was more or less
similar with the later region of Awadh (Oudh).^(**5**) As told, Kośala
in the west touched the territory of Pāñcāla-s, on the south by
Sarpikā/Syandikā (Sai) river, on the east by Sadānīrā and on the north
by the Nepāla Hills.^(**6**) But scholar Moti Chandra points out an
interesting observation with regard to the western boundary of the state
of Kośala –

***…he states that as Buddhist literature does not mention Uttara
Pāñcāla (Bareilly), it is a possibility that in the west, river Gaṅgā
formed the boundary line of Kośala and other states within the sphere of
its influence.***^(***7***)

Sāvatthi (Śrāvastī) was the capital of the realm and Śrāvasta, the son
of Yuvanā*ś*va is said to have founded it.^(**8**) The other important
cities were Ayodhyā and Sāketa, though both are considered by some as
one and the same but not conclusively. Some scholars like Rhys Davids
are of the opinion that the two were different cities and point out that
both of them are told to have existed in Buddha’s time (Raychaudhuri,
1923:49).

According to the Hindu tradition, Ku*ś*a succeeded Bhagawāna Rāma in
Ayodhyā while Lava got the northern portion of Kośala with Śrāvastī as
the capital.^(**9**) Ayodhyā seems to have been the earliest capital of
the state, Sāketa the next and Śrāvastī the last. By the sixth century,
Ayodhyā had seemed to lost its earlier glory and does not come across as
a town of much significance in the Buddhist texts. But Mahāparinibbāna
Sutta mentions Sāketa and Śrāvastī among the six great cities of India
(Raychaudhuri, 1923:53). The kingdom was very much part of an essential
and flourishing trade of the time and its cities were important centres
in the trade route. Kauśāṁbī in the neighbouring kingdom Vatsa was the
chief encampment of the caravans and the routes from Rājagṛha to
Kośala^(**10**) and another route from Uttarāpatha reached the capital
of the Kośala kingdom – Śrāvastī (Moti Chandra, 1977:17). This route was
on the same course as per Moti Chandra as the railway line from
Sahāranpur-Lucknow-Banārasa.^(**11**)

**Overview**

Before proceeding any further with the detailed analysis of the people
and the events involved in the rise and fall of Kośala kingdom as oppose
to the rise of Magadha from sixth century onwards, it becomes important
to summarize those very people and events to give the readers an
overview. In the sixth century, as mentioned above in the introduction
of the article, out of the sixteen mahājanpadas, four great monarchies
had emerged – Kośala, Magadha, Avanti and Vatsa. Kośala was ruled by the
sūrya vaṁśī Ikṣavāku-s or the Aikṣavāka kings*,* Vatsa was under the
domain of the illustrious House of Bharata – the Puru-s. Magadha was
ruled by the Haryaṅka dynasty and Avanti was under the House of
Pradyota-s. The kingdoms evidently had emerged at the cost of their
neighbouring janapada-s. Thus, immediately before the rise of Buddhism,
these four great monarchies of ancient India had gained territories by
engulfing some of the other important janapada-s. Magadha conquered
Aṅga, Kośala took over Kāśī, Vatsa conquered Bharga and Śūrasena was
under the influence of Avanti (Law, 1943:140).

Magadha and Kośala came together in order to cement alliances between
themselves and Mahākośala, the king of Kośala gave his daughter Kośala
Devī in marriage to the king of Magadha – Bimbisāra (*r. c.* 545- *c.*
493) and revenue of a Kāśī village was given to the daughter. Mahākośala
was succeeded by his son Prasenajit (*Pkt.* Pasenadi) on the throne of
Kośala. At this time, it is important to note that Kośala was the
biggest kingdom of the four great monarchies of India but that was not
to be for long. Pasenadi also had a son named Virūḍhaka (*Pkt.*
Viḍūḍabha) who later becomes very important in the events. After some
time, Bimbisāra was dethroned by his son Ajātaśatru and also possibly
killed by him for all our texts consider Ajātaśatru a parricide. In
grief, shorty afterwards Kośala Devī died as well.

***After this tragic event, Prasenajit took away the rights of the Kāśī
village from Ajātaśatru, an action to which the Magadhan monarch took
serious offence. ***

Battles were fought between Kośala and Magadha on this pretext but
eventually Kośala defeated Ajātaśatru but Prasenajit considered it
politically sagacious to let the Magadha king go and made peace with
him. Some sources even say that he gave his daughter Vajjirā to
Ajātaśatru in marriage along with the revenue of the very same village
of Kāśī. During this time Kośala was one of the prime focus of the
religious activities of the period obviously of Hinduism but also of
Buddhism, Jainism and even the Ājīvika-s. Siddhārtha *i.e.* Gautama
Budhha was very much involved in preaching his views in Kośala and was
also close to Pasenadi.

One time, king Pasenadi decided to march out of his capital with his
army but in his absence, his senāpati (commander-in-chief) established
Viḍūḍabha on the throne of Kośala. Pasenadi went to Rājagṛha (Rājagīra)
the capital of Magadha to seek Ajātaśatru’s help against the usurper but
died before anything could be achieved. Viḍūḍabha on the other hand,
took his army to the Śākya territory and perpetrated a massacre of the
Śākya-s due to a personal grudge. After the massacre, he went back to
his realm and encamped near the banks of the river Achiravatī. He
however, could not survive for long and perished along with his army in
a flood. Taking advantage of the vacuum in Kośala kingdom, Ajātaśatru
gradually increased his influence over the Kośalan territory and finally
seemed to have even annexed Kāśī. Unfortunately, the texts do not
provide much clarity about Kośala after this period and there are left a
lot of unanswered questions.

Avanti and Vatsa, the other two rivals and their actions also affected
the activities and relations between Magadha and Kośala. Avanti had
serious influence over the Śūrasena territory because the king of
Śūrasena who was called with metronymic Avantiputta (Avantiputra) was
apparently a grandson of the Avanti monarch Canḍa Pradyota Mahāsena.
Pradyot was an equally ambitious monarch and had even made attempts to
threaten not only Magadha but also Kośala. But his attempt to capture
the Vatsa territory had resulted quite surprisingly between the marriage
of his daughter Vāsavadattā with Udayana, the Vatsa king. But this upset
doesn’t really affect Pradyota for now through his daughter, he could
still have Vatsa under his influence.

***These ever changing dynamics and the boiling ambitions of the four
great monarchies played a very important role in the downfall of Kośala
and emergence of Magadha from a kingdom into an empire. Now we will move
towards understanding the nuances behind this summary of events.***

**Genealogy**

As briefly mentioned above, the Purāṇic genealogy with regard to
Ikṣavāku kings of Kośala is very confusing for after the Kośalan king
Bṛhadbala who died in the great Bhārat War and before Prasenajit, they
have included Shuddhodhana the Śākya chief, Siddhārtha (Buddha) his son,
and Rāhula, the son of Siddhārth while not mentioning Mahākośala at all.
The corroboration from Buddhist sources confirm that Prasenajit was
actually a contemporary of the Buddha.**¹² **But this does not mean that
the Purāṇic lists cannot be a source for history of the period. They
evidently contain names of very much real kings and princes of the
family but also with some very visible discrepancies (Raychaudhuri,
1923: 51). Dr. Raychaudhuri’s opinion in this regard is really helpful.
He thinks that the Purāṇa-s seem to have placed the names of the
Ikṣavāku kings and princes of various branches or territories at one
place, thus resulting in the mixed names and the confusion where some
contemporaries have been made successors and collaterals as lineal
descendants along with some important omissions like that of king
Mahākośala.**¹³ **After all, various branches of the same Ikṣavāku
family of Kośala are said to have been ruling at Viśālā or Vaiśālī
(*Rāmāyaṇa* I. 47. 11-12), at Mithilā as well according to the *Vāyu
Purāṇa* and at Kuśinārā as per *Kuśa Jātaka*.^(**14**)

In the summary written above, the readers might have noticed that Kośala
had control over the territory of another extremely valuable and
important kingdom of Kāśī. But how did Kośala achieved the overlordship
of Kāśī? How did it come about? We will now discuss that in the section
below.

**Kāśī-Kośala Conflicts**

Kāśī-Kośala-Videha seems to have been closely connected throughout their
early history. The *Śānkhāyana Śrauta* *Sūtra* tells us that Jala
Jātūkarṇya was the Purohita of all the three kingdoms in the past
(Raychaudhuri, 1923:34). Before the eventual rise of Kośala as the
penultimate monarchy in India, preceding the rise of Magadha, the two
kingdoms – Kāśī and Kośala were involved in frequent wars with each
other for many years with one kingdom defeating the other in
turns.^(**15**) The importance of the kingdom of Kāśī with its capital
Vārāṇasī cannot be underrated. It fired the ambitions of many of the
kings of the time and it appears that the Puru-s of Vatsa had conquered
it once but Kāśī seems to have again emerged independent when we see the
frequent struggles of Kāśī with another power on the scene – the
Ikṣavāku-s of Kośala.^(**16**)

We can ascertain the strength and power of Kāśī through the *Assaka
Jātaka* which informs us that once Poṭalī in the kingdom of Assaka
(Aśmaka) also came under its the suzerainty. The reigning prince of
Poṭalī at the time must have been a vassal of the ruler of Kāśī
(Raychaudhuri, 1923:47). Kāśī was therefore, once a much stronger power
than many of its neighbours including Kośala.^(**17**) *Mahāvagga* gives
the very clear impression that during the rule of the earlier
Brahmadatta dynasty, Kāśī achieved great territorial heights and in
fact, Kośala was a rather small kingdom but came to prominence again in
the seventh and thesixth century.^(**18**) The Brahmadatta-s of Kāśī
and their history has also been mentioned on this blog in an earlier
post titled – [*Who were the Brahmadatta-s of
Kāśī?*](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/08/who-were-the-brahmadattas-of-kasi/)
The conquest of Kośala by Kāśī according to scholar Jayaswal must have
happened at least three generations before Mahākośala.**¹⁹ **Buddhist
text *Ārya Mañjuśrī Mūla Kalpa* also gives some information in this
regard – One very successful, vigorous and kind king of Vārāṇasī named
Brahmadatta whose son was also very pious and son of the latter was
Harya (Hayagrīva- In Tibetan) Now this does not mean that only one king
Brahmadatta made such advancements. We know that many kings of this
dynasty were called by this name. By one estimate, Brahmadatta, the king
of Kāśī probably conquered Kośala about a century and a half before
Buddha’s time.**²⁰ **In the *Gangamāla Jātaka,* we are told that a
prince named Brahmadatta, when became king of Benāres, he married the
beautiful daughter of the king of Kośala and also made her the chief
queen (Law, 1943:107). According to the *Sona-Nanda Jātaka*, a king of
Benāres named Manoja is told to have subdued Kośala, Aṅga and even
Magadha (Raychaudhuri, 1923:48). The dynasty of Kāśī possibly annexed
Magadha in *c.* 727 (Jayaswal, 1934:13).

The conflict with Kāśī which lasted generations finally came to an end
when Kāśī was subjugated by the Kośalan king Kaṁsa who probably was a
predecessor of Mahākośala.**²¹ **That this Kaṁsa had been given the
epithet Bārānasiggaho – the conqueror of Benāres in the Jātaka tales
confirms the theory that he was the monarch that finally annexed Kāśī to
Kośala for good.^(**22**)

***The early Buddhist texts mention people still remembering Kāśī as an
independent kingdom, thus implying that the conquest by Kaṁsa could not
have been long ago and hence was rather recent.***^(***23***)

The accession of Kāśī in the kingdom of Kośala was therefore an accepted
fact during and after the rise of the Buddha. As mentioned above, the
Jātaka-s mention that when King Bimbisāra of Magadha married the
daughter of king Mahākośala of Kośala, a village of Kāśī (Kasigāma) was
given as dowry for the bath money for the bride (Law, 1943:109). The
village must have been quite large for it reportedly gave revenue of a
hundred thousand for bath and perfume money for Kośala Devī
(Raychaudhuri, 1923:81). Now we will consider analyzing the evidence
behind that part of the summary where Śākya-s are mentioned as
subjugated to Kośala.

**Śākya-s Under Kośala**

The confirmation of Śākya-s’ subjugation under Kośala comes from
Buddhist sources themselves. Buddha says in Sutta Nipāta – *“just
besides Himavanta there lives a people endowed with the power of wealth,
the inhabitants of Kośala. They are Aadichchas by family, Sakiyas by
birth; from that family I have wandered out not longing for sensual
pleasures.”*^(**24**) As per Majjhima Nikāya, Pasenadi says, *“Bhagavā
pi khattiyo, aham pi khattiyo, bhagavā pi kosalako, aham pi kosalako,
Bhagavā pi āsītiko, aham pi āsītiko.”* (Raychaudhuri, 1923:49). Dr.
Raychaudhuri considers this as an evidence for Kośalan suzerainty over
Śākya-s. Though Dr. Law makes an important distinction as to the
inherent meaning of these lines told by Pasenadi as per Majjhima Nikāya
as oppose to the meaning understood by Raychaudhuri. While Raychaudhuri
considers this line as an evidence of Buddha belonging to Kośala, thus
clearly implying that the Śaka territories were subjugated under the
Kośalan monarch, Law thinks that these lines only imply the following –
*“the intimate and enduring connection of Kośala with the life and
teachings of Buddha”*, so much so that *“Pasenadi felt himself justified
in feelingly saying to him…, ‘The Blessed One is a man of Kosala, as I
am’.”***²⁵ **But this does not mean that the Śākya realm was not under
the Kośala kingdom for which there is ample evidence in affirmative,
only that these particular lines imply a different meaning to these
scholars. It is however not certain that during whose reign did Śākya-s
lost their independence. Probably during Mahākośala or during the rule
of Pasenadi but the Kośala king did overlord the Śākya.

We will now analyse the very significant reign of king Prasenajit or
Pasenadi of Kośala. Important to note is the fact that not only Śākya
but some other republics and tribal territories were under Kośala as
well. The Buddhist texts do not particularly refer to any major conflict
between Kośala and any other tribe or state, quite unlike its constant
friction with Kāśī. This hints to the possibility that tribes or clans
in the northern part of Kośala were gradually absorbed into it without
much hassle.^(**26**)

**Prasenajit/Pasenadi**

Dr. Law opines that there is very much clear evidence to suggest that
Pasenadi was almost of the same age as Buddha and both of them lived up
to their eightieth year – he mentions these lines from the Buddhist
texts in his support – *“The Blessed One is in his eightieth year, so am
I.”* It is confirmed that Prasenajit had maintained the dominions
inherited by him from his father Mahākośala. Dīgha Nikāya mentions
Pasenadi as the king of Kāśī and informs us that he used to collect
taxes from inhabitants of the two said kingdoms *i.e.* Kāśī and Kośala
and also used to share the income with his subordinates. (Law,
1943:110). The Lohichcha sutta provides the confirmation for this.**²⁷
**When Mahāvagga says that a Kāsika-raja once sent a robe to Jīvaka, the
famous physician of Bimbisāra, by the authority of Buddhaghoṣa, we are
told that this king was actually a brother of Pasenadi and son of the
same-father. It then becomes clear that Kāśī was being ruled by a
sub-king *i.e.* a viceroy of Kośala in Kāśī who was a brother of
Prasenajit of Kośala.^(**28**) This is also the reason for when finally
Ajatasatru won the contest and increased his influence over the kingdom
of Kośala, he got the control of the dominion of Kāśī as well.^(**29**)

Samyukta Nikāya mentions Pasenadi as the head of the group of five
Rājā-s, one of them must have been his brother, the viceroy of Kāśī.
Another of these Rājā-s Dr.Raychaudhuri identifies with Hiraṇyanābha
Kauśalya. Another Rājā according to him must have been the Śākya head of
Kapilavastu as we have already seen that the Jātakas and other Buddhist
texts confirm the Śākya territory as under the subordination of Kośala
and also that the Buddha along with his people was called Kośalan. The
might of Prasenajit must have been formidable for the Jain literature
gives a very exalted epithet to Prasenajita – Jītaśatru *i.e.*
vanquisher of the enemy or the conqueror.**³⁰ **The Jain list in the
*Uvāsagadasāo* of the five cities in the dominion of Jītaśatru
(Prasenajita) can help us to identify the five components of the Kośala
kingdom whose head Prasenajita has been told. They were – Sāvatthii of
Kośala proper, Baranasī of Kāśī, Ālabhī of Ālabhī, Kampillapura
(Kampillanagara) of Uttara Pāñcāla, and Polāsapura of similar integral
part.**³¹ **Thus Kośala on the west was actually bound by the territory
of Śūrasena which was either annexed or under the strong influence of
Avanti^(**32**) due to the close family relations between the kingdoms
of Śūrasena and Avanti. It can therefore be reasonably surmised that
Kośala during the Buddha’s time consisted of almost the whole of the
western half of the middle country mentioned in the Buddhist
literature.**³³ **This also means that the kingdom of Kośala had much
more territory under its influence as compared to the restricted version
of considering it similar only to the modern area of Avadha.

Pasenadi was thus a very influential personality. Dr. Raychaudhuri
mentions about his character through the following excerpt from an
article titled*“Sage and King in Kosala-Samyutta”* by Mrs. Rhys Davids
–

> ***“He is shown combining like so many of his class all the world
> over, a proneness to affairs of sex with the virtues and affection of
> a good ‘family man’, indulgence at the table with an equally natural
> wish to keep in good physical form, a sense of honour and honesty,
> shown in his disgust at legal cheating, with a greed for acquiring
> wealth and war indemnities, and a fussiness over lost property, a
> magnanimity towards a conquered foe with a callousness over
> sacrificial slaughter and the punishment for criminals. Characteristic
> also is both his superstitious nervousness over the sinister
> significance of dreams due, in reality to disordered appetites, and
> also his shrewd, politic care to be on the good terms with all
> religious orders, whether he had testimonials to their genuineness or
> not.” ***
>
> **H. C. Raychaudhuri, Political History of Ancient India. pp.
> 100-101.**

As for the good terms with all religious orders, it is confirmed from
the Buddhist sources that Pasenadi gave support to not only the
heterodox sect of the Buddhists but also that he was equally, if not
more of a patron of the orthodoxy – the Brāhamaṇa-s and *“gave them
spots on royal domains with power over them as if they were kings”*
(Raychaudhuri, 1923:101). The great Brāhamaṇa-s of Kośala are called
mahāsāla in Pālī canonical texts, a word which means ‘rich and
influential’, the word is treated as a equivalent of mahāsāra, meaning
‘a man of substance’ (Law, 1935:14). Dr. Law suggests that the
richness and power of these Brāhmins of Kośala means that Pasenadi
possibly made some permanent land grants and endowments to these
Brahmins. The Pālī literature also suggests that each of the great
mahāsāla was established in a distinct locality with such control over
the given land pertaining to the revenue/judicial/civil administration
determined by the terms of royal grants and religious endowments *(rañña
dinnaṁ Brahmmadeyaṁ)* (Law, 1935:15). But the Kośala monarch was not the
only king to provide such support to the orthodoxy as it seems to have a
norm in most of the territories in ancient India. *Dīgha Nikāya* also
gives an example of this from the city of Caṁpā in Aṅgawhere a Brāhmin
named Sonadanḍa was *“in the enjoyment of the revenue of the town as it
was given to him by Bimbisāra of Magadha.”* Though, the text relates
that later the Brahmin and some of his people converted to Buddhism
after they met with the Buddha.

These sources also inform us about some very important officials of the
Kośala kingdom like Mṛgadhara, Siri-Vaddha, and also one Dīrgha
Cārāyaṇa. Interestingly Kauṭilya also mentions one Dīrgha Cārāyaṇa as an
author of treatise on kingly duties and is also mentioned by Vātsyāyana
as an author of science of erotics.**³⁴ **This official played a very
important role as per the later Budhdist texts in the ascendance of
Viḍūḍabha, the dethroner and successor of Prasenajit.

The Buddhists text mention many other towns of Kośala besides Sāketa and
Sāvatthi like Dandakappaka, Nalakapāna, Setavya and Pankadha (Law,
1943:132). The inhabitants of Kośala mentioned in these texts are told
to be healthy and powerful. The earlier Buddhist texts refer to King
Pasenadi venturing out of Śrāvastī on his royal chariot yoked to the
best of the steeds and sometimes even on his royal elephant named
Ekapuṇḍarīka.**³⁵ **The kingdom was clearly a prosperous one. At the
time, the city of Takṣaśilā had become the preferred place for the
Indian royalty of the period to receive and finish its education. And we
find that the Kośalan princes also used to attend Takṣaśilā university
(Law, 1943:133).

**Kośala & Ajātaśatru**

As noted above, Ajātaśatru had important relations with the Kośala royal
house. Some Jātaka-s like Thusa and Musika make the Kośalan princess
(Kośala Devī) as the mother of Ajātaśatru and the evidence of Samyukta
Nikāya confirms that. But, the same Samyukta Nikāya gives us the name of
the mother of Ajātaśatru as Maddā (Raychaudhuri,1923:103-104). The Jain
writers however, contradict this information and make Chellanā, the
daughter of Cetaka of Vaiśālī who was also married to Bimbisāra as the
mother of Ajātaśatru and calls him Vaidehiputta. As Vaiśālī, the capital
of Licchavi republic was situated in the erstwhile territory of Videha,
it makes sense for the Jain writers to give this metronymic to
Ajātaśatru. But Buddhaghosha gives a different meaning for Vedehi
implying that it comes from Veda-Iha/Vedena Ihati meaning intellectual
effort. Interestingly, some of the Kośalan kings like Para Āṭanāra were
called both Vaideha and Kauśalya.**³⁶ **The question of maternity of
Ajātaśatru thus remains complicated and unanswered.

As mentioned above, after Bimbisāra died, the son and successor of
Mahākośala – Prasenajit (Pasenadi) withdrew the gift of Kāśī village
from Ajātaśatru, who was now king of Magadha. This Kāśī village became
the bone of contention between the two kingdoms and there ensued a
protracted struggle and frequent wars. In the start, it was Ajātaśatru
that had the upper hand and he once even drove Prasenajit back to
Śrāvastī but then the tables turned and Ajātaśatru had to surrender his
entire army to the Kośala monarch. But Prasenajit treated the Magadhan
king generously and as per Samyutta Nikāya, he let him go after marrying
his daughter Vajjirā to Ajātaśatru and gave the disputed village to her
as a wedding gift.**³⁷ **Some scholars are of the opinion that this
story of Ajātaśatru being let go by Pasenadi after he is married to the
king’s daughter is a later turn in the tale and cannot be taken
seriously. The theory is that this cross-cousin marriage is a very
Ceylonese/Sri Lankan twist (Dravidian traditions as some scholars call
them) in the tale influenced by their traditions and societal norms
rather than the north Indian ones. The argument in support of the theory
is that the Jain accounts also show Ajātaśatru to have been son of
Bimbisāra from his Vaidehan wife and not Kośalan one and even if
Pasenadi had decided to marry off his daughter to Ajātaśatru, it
evidently could not have been a cross-cousin marriage but only a
political decision to end a bloody conflict.^(**38**)

The texts in which this story is told like *Vaḍḍhakisūkara Jātaka* and
*Dhammapadatthakathā* are all post-canonical.^(**39**) This therefore,
is considered by some historians as Ceylonization of Indian history of
which the genealogy of the Buddha is the prime instance. Important to
note is that the *Samyutta Nikāya* ends the story at Ajātaśatru being
freed by Pasenadi with no talk of a marriage.^(**40**) and considering
the fact that Ajātasattu was given the metronymic vedehiputta, it
further confuses the narrative. It is an even more conflicting evidence
when in Samyutta Nikāya Pasenadi calls Ajātasattu both bhāgineyya and
Vedehiputta. Even Vajjirā is not mentioned. Only one Vajiri is told
about in the text though she is not daughter of Pasenadi in it. How this
narrative can be reconciled? This also then remains an unanswered
question.

The reason for such confusions is tha the Kośalan War between Ajātasattu
and Pasenadi is clearly less well attested than comparatively the one
between Magadha and the Vajjis because the former conflict is only
mentioned in Buddhist literature. Moving ahead, shortly after the
victory of Prasenajit over Ajātaśatru and the final truce, Prasenajit
went to the fateful march which ultimately ended his life. It is
therefore certain that Pasenadi had died before the war of Ajātaśatru
with the Vajji-s had began.**⁴¹ **Before Magadha-Licchavi/Vajji
conflict, Viḍūḍabha had ascended to the throne of Kośala.

**Virūḍhaka/Viḍūḍabha**

One Kṣūdraka is named as Prasenajit’s son in the Purāṇa-s and it is a
possibility that this was one of the name for Viḍūḍabha.**⁴² **Viḍūḍabha
apparently and interestingly served at first as a senāpati (general) of
the Kośalan army (Raychaudhuri:1923:101). When Prasenajit was out of the
kingdom, the commander-in-chief of Kośala – Dīrgha Chārāyaṇa (*Pkt.*
Dīgha Kārāyaṇa) who according to one version of the story had gone with
Prasenajit, conspired to come back to Kośala and use the absence of the
king to make Viḍūḍabha as the king of Kośala instead (Raychaudhuri,
1923:105). The dethroned king now tried to get help from Magadha and
went to Rājagīra, the capital. But there was a practice of the Magadha
kingdom in which as per Vinaya Piṭaka –

> ***..the city-gate of Rājagṛha was closed in the evening,..then
> nobody, not even the king, was allowed to enter the city.***
>
> **B. C. Law, Tribes in Ancient India. p. 221**

Pasenadi therefore, could not get the desired help and was utterly
exhausted from the exposure to the wind and the sun and then he lay down
in a certain rest house and died there in the night. Interestingly, the
Pālī Sutta closes on the very peaceful departure of Pasenadi accompanied
with his general Dīgha Kārāyaṇa. It is only in the later legends that we
find the intrigue by the general to establish Viḍūḍabha, son of Vāsabha
Khattiyā on the throne of Kośala instead.**⁴³ **After Pasenadi’s death,
Viḍūḍabha attacked the territory of Śākya-s as mentioned in the summary.
The reason is told due to an old grudge – Pasenadi had once demanded a
wife from the Śākya royal house but the Śākya-s had an interesting
custom according to later Buddhist texts. They did not under any
circumstances gave their girls for marriage outside the tribe. So to
find a way out of the conundrum and to not be seen as disrespecting
their overlord, they gave the daughter (Vāsabha Khattiyā) of the Śākya
chief Mahānāmana from a slave girl to Pasenadi. Viḍūḍabha was born of
this alliance. When he came to know about the insult to him and his
family, he wanted to avenge it. Therefore, the first act of Viḍūḍabha
after gaining the throne was to attack the Śākya-s. He perpetrated a
massacre of the Śākya-s and killed everyone. He also took away their
women as slave girls and when these women defied his advances, he also
had them killed. And then he also perished, as mentioned in the summary
along with his forces in a deluge. All this happened when the Buddha was
alive, the later texts then continue to narrate the gory tale of
Viḍūḍabha’s massacre of the Śākya-s who remained non-violent.^(**44**)

But as is with such stories in the Buddhist texts, there is some
contradiction. The early Pālī canonical texts neither make Vāsabha
Khattiyā as a slave girl of the Śākya head Mahānāmana nor make Viḍūḍabha
Pasenadi’s son but only his general (senāpati), quite like Dīgha
Kārāyaṇa. Added to this is the fact that the Śākya-s, as Dr. Law
curiously points out, remained quite independent at least immediately
after the demise of the Buddha in Kuśīnara for they are explicitly
mentioned in Mahāparinibbāna Suttānta as demanding a share of his
ashes/relics after the fact. But in another strange turn in the tale,
these early texts do not mention any one coming from Kośala coming to
claim any share in the Buddha’s relics, something that might have been
expected considering the close connection and amount of time spent by
the Buddha in Kośala and also his close relations with Pasenadi.**⁴⁵
**It is quite likely as per Dr. Law that the two generals might have
conspired to usurp the Kośala throne in favour of one of them *i.e.*
Viḍūḍabha and the ensuing confusion and the intrigues of the Kośala
court prevented the kingdom from claiming any share in the master’s
relics. The first step of Viḍūḍabha after claiming the throne then might
have been to conquer the Śākya territories to solidify his rule and not
to avenge some personal insult as later Buddhist texts make it out to
be.

Viḍūḍabha also becomes a reason for another interesting story of another
very famous monarchs of India – Caṅdragupta Maurya. One of the many
origin stories of Caṅdragupta is also related to how Viḍūḍabha treated
the Śākya-s. The Mahāvaṁśa Tīkā states that troubled from the oppression
of Viḍūḍabha, some of them fled to the Himālaya-s where they settled and
built a beautiful city known as Moriyanagara (Mauryanagara). The city
was named as such because it always resounded with the cries of
peacocks.**⁴⁶ **Though it has to be stated that while the Kṣatriya
origin of Caṅdragupta (from Moriya-s of Pipphalivana) is largely
accepted among scholars, this particular story related to Viḍūḍabha does
not find much traction.^(**47**)

**Confederacy**

The famous Magadha-Licchavi conflict is very significant in the history
of ancient India. And we also know that Ajātaśatru emerged victorious in
this prolonged struggle. The Jain texts give us the information
regarding Ajātaśatru and that he attained victory over the powerful
confederacy of Eastern India that had 36 republican states as its part:
9 Mallaki, 9 Lichchhavi, and 18 gaṇarājya -s of Kāśī and
Kośala.^(**48**) This confederacy coupled with the earlier
Kośala-Magadha wars as per Raychaudhuri were probably not random events.

***They clearly were “not isolated events but parts of a common
movement directed against the establishment of the hegemony of Magadha.
This struggle reminds us of the tussle of Samnites, Etruscans and Gauls
with the rising Roman power.” ***^(***49***)

The head of the confederacy was Cetaka, a Videhan domiciled at
Vaiśālī^(**50**) whose sister Triśalā or Videhadattā was the mother of
Mahāvira and as per Jaina texts, whose daughter Cellanā or Vedehi was
mother of the Magadhan monarch Kuṇika Ajātaśatru as mentioned above.**
**Buddhaghoṣa’s Sumaṅgalavilāsinī bearing on the first chapter of
Mahāparinibbāna Suttānta mentions the reason for the germination of
rivalry between Lichchavi and Magadha – as the output from the mine or a
quarry on the boundary of Lichchavi-Magadha was as per an agreed
arrangement, supposed to be divided between the two realms but the
former broke its agreement and took away all of the output and thus,
there ensued a war between them.**⁵¹ **Interestingly the Jain legends
like Bhagavatī and Nirayāvalī bring forth Kuṇika Ajātaśatru as only a
viceroy of Aṅga when it is told that the conflict between Lichchavi and
Magadha emerged (Law,1935:16). But these Jain legends also give a very
different reason for the Licchavi-Magadha war implying that the origin
of the conflict was that Vaiśālī tried to set up another son of
Bimbisāra named Vehalla for the throne of Magadha instead of Ajātaśatru
(Law, 1935:17). Thus the Jain legends suggest that the sheer opposition
to the succession of Ajātaśatru to the throne of Magadha prompted the
confederacy/alliance between the Kāśī-Kośala dominions along with the
Lichchavi-Malla gaṇarājya-s.^(**52**)

But Basham points out an important question about this theory of
Raychaudhuri which doesn’t really explain how Kāśī-Kośala from being
monarchy turned into the territory of eighteen gaṇarājya -s? Though
Basham agrees with Raychaudhuri that the evidence in favour of a
widespread tribal confederacy north of the Gaṅgā against the growing
ambitions of Kośala and also Magadha is overwhelming. His attempted
answer for this is the situation created by Viḍūḍabha’s accession to the
throne of Kośala and the subsequent massacre of the Śākya-s and also the
eventual death of Viḍūḍabha himself soon after. As per him –

> ***“It may well be that the only motive of the new and ambitious king
> of Kośala was the desire to impose a tighter and more centralized
> control on the feudatory tribes to the north and east of his
> kingdom.”***
>
> **A. L. Basham, Ajātaśatru’s War With the Licchavis.** **p. 39**

It is important to remember that Malla-s were also feudatories of the
Kośala monarch and a wanton attack on the Śākya-s might have roused
‘suspicion and hostility’ of the many feudatory tribes of Kośala
kingdom.**⁵³ **Basham goes on to suggest that these tribes after the
attack on Śākya-s and death of Viḍūḍabha and the ensuing confusion in
the Kośala court might have decided to free themselves from the
suzerainty of Kośala and ally with Lichchavis instead.**⁵⁴ **

**Vatsa & Udayana**

Some interesting possibilities about the events after the death of
Viḍūḍabha also arise from *Svapnavāsavadattā* according to which once
Udayana, king of Vatsa had to flee from his kingdom to a frontier
village called Lāvāṇaka because of an attack by an enemy called Āruṇi
who had been ruling north of the Ganges. And *Ratnāvali* also represents
a king of Kośala to be Udayan’s enemy**⁵⁵ **Is it therefore a
possibility that this Āruṇi was actually a king of Kośala? The attack
and the danger from it to the kingdom must have been serious for the
prime minister of Udayana – Yaugāndharāyaṇa considered the support of
Avanti (Udayana was afterall a son-in-law of Canḍa Pradyota Mahāsena,
king of Avanti) insufficient and was keen to have support of Magadha as
well, mostly through a matrimonial alliance. In the story, Udayana ends
up marrying Padmāvatī, princess of Magadha. By the time, Mahasena had
already sent succour and driven away Āruṇi from Vatsa kingdom to the
north of Ganges where he is joined by the Udayan and his forces along
with the additional forces of Magadha. They are there with the explicit
objective of killing Āruṇi and possibly they accomplished the task as
well.^(**56**)

**Economy**

Economic causes are very powerful reasons for the contestation between
any two states and such also seems to have happened for example between
Magadha and Lichchavis whose fight started over the customs duty
realised in the hilly region on the frontier of Magadha and Vrijji.**⁵⁷
**The same economic reasons were important for the inter-relations of
the four great monarchies. Rivalry between Magadha and Avanti was after
all for the possession of the Gangetic Valley. In Śaurasena was ruling
Avantiputta (Avantiputra) at Mathurā who was the grandson of Pradyota.
Kośala was anyway an infuential economy on its with the city Śrāvastīan
important trade centre. Added to this was its possession of the very
significant kingdom of Kāśī. There is then the possibility that Pāñcāla
to the west of the Vatsa kingdom was under Vatsa’s influence.**⁵⁸ **The
Kuru king also was a kinsmen of Udayana and therefore sympathetic to
Vatsa. The kingdoms were therefore ruling with increasing influence on
other territories as well. Add to this that the effects of the aftermath
of destruction of the Śākya-s and their capital Kapilavastu were severe
on the trade route between Śrāvastī and Kapilavastu. This route lost its
earlier importance and the territory of the Śākya-s was gradually
swallowed by the forests. After the fall of Vatsa, the route between
Mathurā and Ujjain came within the influence of Avanti,**⁵⁹ **thus
making the political scene as battle ground for Magadha and Avanti.

> ***The route proceeding to Ujjain connecting northern India with the
> coastal region of western India was in the hands of Avanti, which also
> exercised influence over the route between Kauśāṁbī and Pratiśṭhāna.
> In this way, controlling these routes, Avanti could stop the commerce
> of Magadha with western and south India. In the same way, parts of
> northern and southern routes in Gangetic valley being under the
> control of Magadha which could easily stop profitable commerce of the
> people of Avanti with Kāśī and Magadha.***
>
> **Moti Chandra, Trade & Trade Routes in Ancient India. p. 53**

The Gangetic river system was thus extremely important in ancient India.
The aim of controlling as much of the Gaṅgā river system must have
played an important role in the minds of these ambitious monarchs. *“It
may be possible to trace the same objective later, motivating the
campaigns of Samudra Gupta, Śaśāṅka, and Dharmapāla – the kings in
possession of lower course aiming at control of the whole river
system.”***⁶⁰ **How important was this or any river system in ancient
times India hardly needs any mention. As per all Pālī texts, Aṅga and
its capital Caṁpā was a flourishing river port and must have been as per
Basham an entrepot for the southern trade and its distribution across
northern India. He further argues that acquisition of Aṅga probably
paved the way for the much needed wealth required for internal
consolidation of Magadha by Bimbisāra and the expansion of the kingdom
by Ajātaśatru.**⁶¹ **It needs to be kept in mind that the war with the
Licchavis was also over a dispute over river port. His view is that the
gradual annexation of Kośala must have given Magadha a control of
further length of the river Gaṅgā and a final victory over the Licchavis
in the protracted struggle provided a foothold over the north Gaṅgā,
thus giving a control over both the banks and paving the way for its
hegemony over other kingdoms and republics of ancient India.

**Understanding the Dynamic**

Now considering all the information just analysed, we are in a position
to make some suggestions to the reasoning behind these events and also
make some plausible guesses about the undercurrent of some of these
political decisions. According to Smith, the battles between Prasenajit
and Ajātaśatru could not have started until Bimbisāra was alive and the
revenue from the Kāśī village was still flowing. After the king’s death
about *c.* 493 and a break in the revenue by the orders of Prasenajit,
the date of the conflict and the battles must be around *c.* 490 – *c.*
492.**⁶² **Until this time, Vatsa had acted as a sort of a buffer state
between Magadha and Avanti at one hand and Kośala and Avanti on the
other.If we keep in mind the emerging power of Canḍa Pradyota Mahāsena
of Avanti at this time and also the fact that after the marriage of
Udayan of Vatsa and the Avanti Princess Vāsavadattā, Vatsa had come
under the influence of Avanti, it becomes very clear why Ajātaśatru as
per the texts was apprehensive about an attack from Avanti and had to
fortify his capital Rājagīr shortly before Buddha’s death in *c*.
489-87.**⁶³ **Coupled with this is the fact that Avanti was now also in
a position to threaten Kośala as well.

All of this information helps us to understand why did Prasenajit after
defeating Ajātaśatru and virtually arresting him, ultimately decided to
let him go. Smith is of the opinion that Avanti played a catalyst in the
peace that Prasenajit made with his defeated foe. Under the scare of an
“unforeseen danger from Avanti – *kṣatriyāṇām miṣatām* – he had no
bargaining power and had to set free and restore his enemy for nothing
but an alliance.” When Prasenajit was away, it is implied by the texts
that he had considerable force with him when he set off from his
capital, it was probably due to the next year’s *i.e. c.* 489 defensive
campaign against the danger from Avanti and Smith suggests that it is in
this context that Pradyota besieged Rājagīra.**⁶⁴ **Though some texts
suggests that Darśaka was the Magadhan monarch when Yaugāndharāyaṇa
decided to have Udayan married to Padmāvatī, princess of Magadha, Smith
goes on suggest that the king might have been Ajātaśatru who very likely
had a daughter at a respectable puberty (possibly born around c. 502)
around this time.

***The marriage was thus an attempt to loosen the hold of Pradyota on
Vatsa and thus provide a breathing space to Vatsa and Magadha
both.***^(***65***)

After he had repulsed an attack from Pradyota, Magadha was emerging as
the prime opponent to Avanti because Kośala – the other major power was
in complete disarray after the death of Prasenajit and the intrigues of
the Kośalan court. Hence, the actions of Viḍūḍabha were clearly for
trying to gain prominence by re-subjugating the Śākya-s (Smith,
1957:268) but he remained Kṣūdraka, small. This thus gives a
suggestion/supposition behind the reasoning of Purāṇa-s to give the name
of Prasenajit’s successor as Kṣūdraka. His campaign clearly wasn’t that
smooth for we do see Śākya-s in the earlier Buddhist texts as mentioned
above, among the people who demanded a share in the Buddha’s relic after
his death. His campaign might have gone for a bit long probably until
after Buddha’s death, till around *c.* 485 and that’s why the Kośalans
weren’t there to demand their share in the relics. It is probable that
Viḍūḍabha ultimately emerged victorious against the Śākya-s and there
was therefore defeat but not a massacre of the scale suggested by the
later Buddhis texts. But the new Kośala king died soon after.And hence,
the confusion in the Kośala kingdom after this makes sense.

Another interesting possibility here emerges. As aforementioned, is it
possible that the Āruṇi mentioned as the danger from the north of Gaṅgā
(Kośala?) to the kingdom of Vatsa was some sort of successor to
Viḍūḍabha? This was apparently the danger due to which Vatsa sought a
matrimonial alliance from Magadha. And was Āruṇi’s defeat and possibly
death in the face of the succour from Avanti and a kind of joint
operation by Vatsa-Magadha the reason that Kośala was now not a power on
its own but only a territory coveted by the kingdoms of Avanti and
Magadha? Vatsa clearly was not that powerful if its defence for a danger
from its north depended on the help from Avanti at one hand and Magadha
on the other.

**Conclusion**

The game was set and the two powers that were playing it were Magadha
and Avanti. By this time the Magadha-Licchavi protracted war might also
have started and that is possibly the reason why in the confederation
that was forged against Magadha (the nine gaṇarājya-s of Licchavi and
Malla each and eighteen of Kāśī – Kośala) we do not find Kośala as a
kingdom but as republics as it clearly was no longer under any powerful
monarch. These states in the confederation were now afraid about the
ambitions of Ajātaśatru. They clearly had seen by Viḍūḍabha’s actions
that the monarchs of these ambitious kingdoms were no longer satisfied
with what territories they were ruling and wanted a more firm and direct
control over them. The eventual victory of Magadha also provided it with
an advantage over Avanti as now it had the Licchavi and also Kāśī under
him. Kośala with no powerful monarch to rule over was turning into an
easy prey with each passing year. Gradually by the time of Śiśunāga and
his successors, Avanti was finally declining and losing the war at its
end. Thus, with no strong power left to confront and oppose Magadha,
Kośala gradually passed under the control of Magadha and a strong
kingdom lost in front of the new emerging power – the imperium of
Magadha.

***References***

-   **¹** B. C. Law, *Tribes in Ancient India*. p. 117.
-   **²** *ibid*.
-   **³** *ibid.* p. 118.
-   **⁴** *ibid.* p. 117.
-   **⁵** *ibid.*
-   **⁶** H. C. Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p.
    48.
-   **⁷** Moti Chandra, *Trade & Trade Routes in Ancient India*. p. 51.
-   **⁸** *The History and Culture of Indian People – The Vedic Age
    (Volume I)*. p. 279.
-   **⁹** *ibid*. p. 295.
-   **¹⁰** Moti Chandra, *Trade & Trade Routes in Ancient India*. p. 16.
-   **¹¹** *ibid*. p. 17.
-   **¹²** *The History and Culture..- The Vedic Age (Vol I)*. p. 326.
-   **¹³** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* pp.
    51-52.
-   **¹⁴** *ibid*. p. 49.
-   **¹⁵** Law, *Tribes in Ancient India*. p. 107.
-   **¹⁶** *ibid*. p. 109.
-   **¹⁷** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p. 48.
-   **¹⁸** *ibid*. p. 53.
-   **¹⁹** K. P. Jayaswal, *An Imperial History of India.* p. 13.
-   **²⁰** *The History and Culture..- The Vedic Age (Vol I)*. p. 331.
-   **²¹** *ibid*. p. 327.
-   **²²** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p. 80.
-   **²³** *ibid*.
-   **²⁴** *ibid*. pp. 48-49.
-   **²⁵** B. C. Law, *Śrāvastī in Indian Literature.* p. 16.
-   **²⁶** *The History and Culture..- The Vedic Age (Vol I)*. p. 327.
-   **²⁷** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p. 81.
-   **²⁸** Law, *Tribes in Ancient India*. p. 110.
-   **²⁹** *ibid*.
-   **³⁰** Law, *Śrāvastī in Indian Literature.* p. 11.
-   **³¹** *ibid.* p. 12.
-   **³²** *ibid*. p. 13.
-   **³³** *ibid*.
-   **³⁴** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p. 101.
-   **³⁵** Law, *Śrāvastī in Indian Literature.* p. 21.
-   **³⁶** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p. 102.
-   **³⁷** Law, *Tribes in Ancient India*. p. 110.
-   **³⁸** Trautmann, *Study of Dravidian Kingship.* p. 167.
-   **³⁹** Trautmann, *Consanguineous Marriage in Pali Literature*. p.
    162.
-   **⁴⁰** *ibid*.
-   **⁴¹** Basham, *Ajātasattu’s War with the Licchavis.* p. 39.
-   **⁴²** Bhandarkar, *Lectures on the Ancient History of India.* p.
    65.
-   **⁴³** Law, *Śrāvastī in Indian Literature.* p. 18.
-   **⁴⁴** *ibid*.
-   **⁴⁵** *ibid*.
-   **⁴⁶** Law, *Kṣatriya Clans In Buddhist India.* p. 197.
-   **⁴⁷** *ibid*. p. 204.
-   **⁴⁸** *The History and Culture of Indian People – The Age of
    Imperial Unity (Volume II)*.p. 23.
-   **⁴⁹** Raychaudhuri, *Political History of Ancient India.* p. 107.
-   **⁵⁰** *ibid*. p. 63.
-   **⁵¹** Law, *Śrāvastī in Indian Literature.* pp. 16-17.
-   **⁵²** *ibid*. p. 17.
-   **⁵³** Basham, *Ajātasattu’s War with the Licchavis.* p. 39.
-   **⁵⁴** *ibid*. pp. 39-40.
-   **⁵⁵** Bhandarkar, *Lectures on the Ancient History of India.* p.
    62.
-   **⁵⁶** *ibid*. p. 63.
-   **⁵⁷** Moti Chandra, *Trade & Trade Routes in Ancient India*. p. 51.
-   **⁵⁸** *ibid*.
-   **⁵⁹** *ibid*. p. 53.
-   **⁶⁰** Basham, *Ajātasattu’s War with the Licchavis.* p. 40.
-   **⁶¹** *ibid*.
-   **⁶²** R. Morton Smith, *On the Ancient Chronology of
    India (II)*. p. 267.
-   **⁶³** *ibid*.
-   **⁶⁴** *ibid*. p. 268.
-   **⁶⁵** *ibid*. p. 268.

***Bibliography***

-   Bimala Churn Law, *[Tribes in Ancient
    India](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.215048/page/n5/mode/2up)*.
    Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona. (1943).
-   R. C. Majumdar, A. D. Pusalker, A. K. Majumdar, *[The History and
    Culture of Indian People – The Vedic
    Age](https://archive.org/details/vedicage00bhar/page/n5/mode/2up)*,
    Volume I. Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, Mumbai. (1951/Ninth Edition –
    2017).
-   S. Ramakrishnan, R. C. Majumdar, A. D. Pusalker, A. K. Majumdar,
    *[The History and Culture of Indian People – The Age of Imperial
    Unity](https://archive.org/details/ageofimperialuni07bhar/page/n7/mode/2up%20Hemachandra%20Raychaudhuri,%20Political%20History%20of%20Ancient%20Indi)*,
    Volume II. Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, Mumbai. (1951/Seventh Edition –
    2001).
-   Hemachandra Raychaudhuri, *[Political History of Ancient India (From
    the Accession of Parikshit to the Extinction of the Gupta
    Dynasty)](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)*.
    University of Calcutta, Calcutta. (1923).
-   K. P. Jayaswal, *[An Imperial History of India – In a Sanskrit Text
    \[c. 700 BC – c. 770
    AD\]](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.12147/page/n3/mode/2up%20Moti%20Chandra,%20Trade%20and%20Trade%20Routes%20in%20Ancient%20I)*.
    Motilal Banarasi Das, Lahore. (1934).
-   Moti Chandra, *[Trade and Trade Routes in Ancient
    India](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.532337/page/n3/mode/2up)*.
    Abhinava Publications, Delhi. (1977).
-   Bimala Churn Law, *[Kṣatriya Clans In Buddhist
    India](https://archive.org/details/cu31924092263247/page/n7/mode/2up)*.
    Thacker Spink & Co., Calcutta. (1922).
-   Bimala Churn Law, *[Śrāvastī in Indian
    Literature](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.106958/page/n5/mode/2up)*,
    Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, Manager of
    Publications, Delhi. (1935).
-   D. R. Bhandarkar *et el.*, *[Lectures on the Ancient History of
    India](https://archive.org/details/lecturesonancien00bhan/page/n5/mode/2up)*.
    University of Calcutta, Calcutta. (1919).
-   Basham, A. L. “AJĀTASATTU’S WAR WITH THE LICCHAVIS.” *Proceedings of
    the Indian History Congress*, vol. 14, Indian History Congress,
    1951, pp. 37–41, <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44303932>
-   Trautmann, Thomas R. “THE STUDY OF DRAVIDIAN KINSHIP.” In *Aryan and
    Non-Aryan in India*, edited by Madhav M. Deshpande and Peter Edwin
    Hook, 153–74. University of Michigan Press, 1979.
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.3998/mpub.19419.9>
-   Thomas R. Trautmann. “Consanguineous Marriage in Pali
    Literature.”*Journal of the American Oriental Society*93, no. 2
    (1973): 158–80. <https://doi.org/10.2307/598890>.
-   Law, Bimala Churn. “MAGADHA AND RĀJAGṚHA IN THE PĀLI LITERATURE.”
    *Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute*, vol. 8, no.
    2, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1926, pp. 159–71,
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44001457>
-   Smith, R. Morton. “On the Ancient Chronology of India (II).”
    *Journal of the American Oriental Society*, vol. 77, no. 4, American
    Oriental Society, 1957, pp. 266–80, <https://doi.org/10.2307/596129>
    or <https://www.jstor.org/stable/596129>

