+++
title = "Measles and"
full_title = "Measles and immunological amnesia"
date = "2015-05-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/15/measles-and-immunological-amnesia/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/15/measles-and-immunological-amnesia/).

Measles and immunological amnesia

A new paper in
[Science](http://news.sciencemag.org/biology/2015/05/measles-vaccine-protects-against-other-deadly-diseases)
, by Michael Mina et al, strongly suggests that measles messes up your
immunological defenses for two or three years. This is the likely
explanation for the fact that measles inoculation causes much greater
decreases in child morbidity and mortality than you’d expect from
preventing the deaths directly due to measles infection. The thought is
that measles whacks the cells that carry immunological memory, leaving
the kid ripe for reinfections. I think there can be a similar effect
with anti-cancer chemotherapy.

If correct, this means that measles is much nastier than previously
thought. It must have played a significant role in the demographic
collapse of long-isolated peoples (such as the Amerindians). Its advent
may have played a role in the population decrease associated with the
decline of the Classical world. Even though it is relatively new
(having split off from rinderpest a couple of thousand years ago) strong
selection for resistance may have favored some fairly expensive genetic
defenses (something like sickle-cell) in Eurasian populations.

We already know of quite a few complex side effects of infectious
disease, such the different kind of immunosuppression we see with AIDs,
Burkitt’s lymphoma hitting kids with severe Epstein-Barr infections
followed by malaria, acute dengue fever that requires a previous
infection by a different strain of dengue, etc: there may well be other
important interactions and side effects, news of which has not yet come
to Harvard.

