+++
title = "Out of Africa"
full_title = "Out of Africa"
date = "2015-05-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/29/out-of-africa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/29/out-of-africa/).

Out of Africa

There is a new
[paper](http://www.cell.com/ajhg/pdf/S0002-9297%2815%2900156-1.pdf) out
in the American Journal of Human Genetics, in which the authors try to
determine the path by which modern humans left Africa – basically,
through the Sinai Peninsula into the Levant, or crossing the Bab el
Mandeb strait (very narrow in glacial times) into Yemen. Life is
probably somewhat more complicated than this question suggests, since
there were probably at least two expansions out of Africa ( judging from
those mysterious Basal Eurasians) and maybe more, but the question
itself is not an unreasonable one.

They try to see which population – Egyptians or Ethiopians – is
genetically closer to Eurasians. That sounds nuts, since both
populations have had massive genetic inputs from Eurasians, but they try
to identify and mask the Eurasian components of the genome and compare
the residual genomes. Nuts is maybe too strong a word here, but that
strategy (assuming that you can implement it correctly) is extremely
dubious, because it implicitly assumes that, prior to relatively recent
Eurasian gene flow , the locals have been sitting in the same place –
without being replaced (or mostly replaced) by a different population –
for sixty or seventy thousand years. In the regions where we have good
information (parts of Eurasia, from ancient DNA) this never happened.
Eurasians are like ogres – multiple layers of ancestry.

They talk about Ethiopian genetics. They say that highland Ethiopians
like the Amhara are about 50% Middle Eastern, Somalis 30-40% Middle
Eastern, but almost no Eurasian ancestry in the
[Gumuz](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gumuz_people) (a Nilotic people
that speak a (probably) Nilo-Saharan language). So they use Gumuz
samples for their comparison.. But since the Nilo-Saharan expansion is
thought to be recent (a few thousand years), and to have originated in
the eastern Sudan, the odds are strongly against the Gumuz having been
sitting in place in Ethiopia for the last 70,000 years. I don’t think
the Gumuz are a good proxy for ancient Ethiopians – they look like
recent immigrants from the Sudan. They live pretty close to the
Sudanese border now, and used to be closer. There may well be people in
Ethiopia that have some local hunter-gatherer ancestry (there are
indications of this) but the Gumuz are probably not among them. And,
even then, it’s unlikely that those hunter gatherers are a good proxy
for Horn-of-Africa types from 70,000 years ago.

But their treatment of Egypt is far worse. They find that Egyptians are
about 80% Eurasian – which means Middle Eastern mostly, and sounds about
right. They estimate that the time of admixture (between Middle Eastern
and African ancestry) was around 750 years years ago, which also sounds
about right. But from what they actually say in the paper, it sure
sounds as if they think that Egypt was sub-Saharan-type African until
the Arab conquest ! Someone bleached all the mummies!

In fact, Egypt was settled by Middle Eastern type farmers maybe 7000
years ago (later than the Balkans) , who brought in all the standard
crops, and most of that sub-Saharan component arrived after the Arab
conquest, through the slave trade.

But crazy as it sounds, they must think that the black African ancestry
in Egypt is old while the Eurasian ancestry is new, else there is no
point at all in what they are doing. They have it backwards.

Now those Middle Eastern farmers settling Egypt (speaking something in
the Hamito-Semitic family) must have encountered some kind of
hunter-gatherers living in the Nile Valley, and there’s likely some
genetic trace of that. But it’s probably not very big, and for all I
know their genetics looked Eurasian as well ( looking at the Berbers,
for example). To have any chance of figuring this out you probably need
to sequence mummies, if that can be done.

The idea that Egypt of the pharaohs was genetically African – by which
they mean in practice sub-Saharan Africa – is lunacy. The sub-Saharan
component in the Egyptians is mostly pretty new – from the Arab slave
trade, a lot of it from Nubia. In fact, that’s what it says in one of
their
[references](http://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1002397)
on this, in the abstract even: “a migration of individuals with Nilotic
ancestry *into* (my emphasis) Egypt occurred about 25 generations ago
(approximately 750 ya).”

Some of that Nubian ancestry is probably a bit older – the Pharaohs
hired Nubian mercenaries back in New Kingdom days – but still, nothing
like ancient.

I’ve been
[complaining](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/24/breadth-first-search/)
about researchers being too narrow. This article is a spectacular
example. But it’s not just the lead author: everyone whose name is on
the paper must be assumed to be equally ignorant and incurious – as well
as the reviewers, and editors, and for that matter anyone who doesn’t
stay up all night laughing at them.

