+++
title = "When Public Policy Meets"
full_title = "When Public Policy Meets Elementary Biology"
date = "2015-05-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/when-public-policy-meets-elementary-biology/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/when-public-policy-meets-elementary-biology/).

When Public Policy Meets Elementary Biology

I have been thinking a lot about public policy, welfare, support of the
indigent, and the growth of the underclass in industrial societies,
mostly to prepare for this
[meeting](http://www.uni-bielefeld.de/(en)/ZIF/FG/2015LifeChances/index.html).
Public discussion and journalism routinely identify people as “right
wing” or “left wing”. My reaction is that most public commentary—on both
the right and the left—is hardly worth our attention.

Some trends that I find particularly distressing are outlined by Charles
Murray and Robert Putnam in a youtube
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eB5kQ2XDbAg) which we discussed
in a previous
[post](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/03/20/charles-murray-and-robert-putnam-on-class/).
Both Murray and Putnam describe growing numbers of the underclass in
this country with their failure of community and family organization.
Single mothers are normative. Both speakers focus on white people:
Murray explicitly restricts his recent
[book](https://books.google.com/books?id=eyuLAPIGuXIC&printsec=frontcover&dq=murray+coming+apart&hl=en&sa=X&ei=ZgNhVduiNpH3yQTEuIDgBw&ved=0CB8Q6wEwAA)
to ‘White America’ while Putnam’s new
[book](https://books.google.com/books?id=0dANBAAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=robert+putnam+our+children&hl=en&sa=X&ei=qANhVdObNJL8yQSktIGoBA&ved=0CDMQ6AEwAg)
is ethnographic in style about his own home town, again mostly white. Is
there a way out of the trends they describe through social engineering?

Neither Murray nor Putnam have much in the way of policy suggestions.
Murray identifies increasing isolation between the prosperous and the
impoverished and the failure of the prosperous to advocate their own
moral and social values to the to the poor. Putnam advocates a Soviet
style system of public education in which teachers assume the duties and
roles of parents, starting with early childhood education.

Politicians, journalists, and education advocates agonize a lot about
issues of our social future but most of it is wordspeak and twaddle.
Many politicians are shameless vote chasers with no principles,
journalists seek sensation and scandal, and educators have had no real
accomplishments in a century. What would be the outcome if social
engineers understood evolution? Does biology have a contribution to make
to the solution of do our social and economic problems?

The reasoning would go like this (straight from freshman biology):
diploid organisms are shaped by evolution to generate copies of their
DNA. In order to make these copies a diploid organism has to allocate
energy and risk to competing demands of (a) growth and maintenance and
(b) reproduction. Reproduction has two parts, mating and parenting. This
allocation is the stuff of life history theory. The allocation problem
is complicated by the presence of two sexes that are designed
differently. This is especially so in mammals: internal gestation,
mammary glands, and prolonged immaturity indicate of the commitment of
females to bear the brunt of reproductive effort. Fish, for example, are
not engineered in this way. In fish species where males mouth brood,
mama fish is free to shed some eggs and abandon dad and the kids to
continue her partying unimpeded.

Humans exhibit a diversity of strategy “choices” that are solutions to
the allocation problem between mating and parenting. Males can devote
most of their effort to mating effort, usually involving competition
with other males. Male commitment to parenting effort is not common in
mammals but there are familiar examples like beavers, coyotes, gibbons,
and some humans. In the jargon the polar strategies of male mammals are
called “cad” and “dad” strategies.

Females have a more restricted set of strategy choices because of their
engineered commitment to parenting. At one extreme a human female can
seek a dadly male who provides resources like food and protection to
their joint offspring. At the other extreme, a human female can pay
little or no attention to her mate choice, instead letting the guys work
things out. In the jargon these female alternatives are called “coy” and
“fast”.

You can find a more detailed account of this game between the human
sexes works in a chapter of our book (that the editor discarded as “too
academic”) on our website
[here](http://the10000yearexplosion.com/human-cultural-diversity/).
Briefly we are likely to find dad males/coy females in ecological
situations where male labor and resources are critical for successful
reproduction. Think of labor-intensive agriculture, European peasants
and Asian farmers, as examples. In the United States in the past,
“working class” meant stable mated pairs who together provisioned and
cared for children. An archetype of working class in American television
was Archie Bunker.

Social organization with cad males and fast females is found prominently
among tropical gardeners where women provide most of the food for
themselves and their children as well as for the men, who are often just
parasites on the women. The euphemism in economics for these societies
is “female farming systems”. These share many characteristics with our
industrial “underclass” in which women have no ecological force pushing
them into long term stable pair bonds.

Notice that in each of the above descriptions there are two hands
clapping: in cad/fast social systems neither a coy female nor a dad male
does very well while in dad/coy systems neither a fast females nor a cad
male does very well. The two polar social types are deeply rooted in
contemporary politics. The zany feminism of the 1980s (“a woman needs a
man like a fish needs a bicycle”) precisely advocated the cad/fast
setup. Our religious right with its chatter about “the natural family”
and “stable marriages” and the like pushes hard for a dad/coy world.

Back to our social engineers who know biology. They share a goal of a
society in which dad males mate with coy females because children enjoy
the care and security of a stable home and streets safe from gunfire.
The new policy is simple: welfare payments are to be given only to
males.

This policy would mimic, they think, the ecology of most dad/coy
societies. How would this work out? In a new post we can imagine how the
new policy can be modified when the engineers are given a sense of human
decency and responsibility for human well being.

Part II to follow ……

