+++
title = "Some Remarks on the Mode"
full_title = "Some Remarks on the Mode of Argumentation in Indian Philosophy"
date = "2014-03-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/12/some-remarks-on-the-mode-of-argumentation-in-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/12/some-remarks-on-the-mode-of-argumentation-in-indian-philosophy/).

Some Remarks on the Mode of Argumentation in Indian Philosophy

Sanskrit works on philosophy are full of arguments with rival schools.
And there is one point in these arguments that seems a bit puzzling. It
was quite natural, that one tried to dismiss the rival opinion. And of
course the best way to do it, was to demonstrate the logical
inconsistency of the opponent’s theory or the fallacies in his
argumentation. Still it was not rare, that the real reason for the
opponent to hold his opinion was not in the defects of his reasoning.
Different schools discussed the same problem from different points of
view, relying on different backgrounds.

E.g. the Vaiśeşikas claimed, there are two types of relation (samavāya
and saMyoga), because they had to explain permanent ontological
relations (e.g. of dravya and guņa) on the one hand and unstable
relations (e.g. relations of the atoms) on the other. Semantic relation
initially was not interesting for the Vaiśeşikas. But once they had to
express their opinion on this subject, they claimed, semantic relation
did not exist. The only reason for this claim was, that the existence of
semantic relation did not fit their realist world-view.

Still the opponents of Vaiśeşika (Bhartŗhari, Dharmakīrti), while
arguing on relation, never tried to understand the real reasons for
postulating such views. They just used some of the Vaiśeşika’s
statements extracted from the context, bringing them to regressus ad
infinitum etc.

It seems to me, this mode of arguing dominated in Indian philosophy.
Bhartŗhari sometimes tried to understand the reasons of his opponents to
hold this or that opinion, but this was most probably because of the
inclusivist tendency of Grammar (sarvapārşadaM hīdaM śāstram). Perhaps
the Jain anekāntavāda was another exception of the rule.

**And how do you experience the way Indian philosophers dealt with rival
ideas?**
