+++
title = "Linguistic accommodation"
full_title = "Linguistic accommodation and philosophical debate"
date = "2014-03-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/25/linguistic-accommodation-and-philosophical-debate/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/25/linguistic-accommodation-and-philosophical-debate/).

Linguistic accommodation and philosophical debate

As I
[noted](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/19/the-languages-of-indian-philosophy/)
some time ago, the principal language of Indian philosophy was Sanskrit.
For some thinkers, Sanskrit’s status as a philosophical language was a
direct consequence of its privileged position with respect to meaning
and truth: the Sanskrit language was itself eternal, and its words
possessed an originary (*autpattika*) connection to meanings that are
themselves eternal, and in other languages both the words and their
connection to meanings are unstable, degraded, and fundamentally
untrustworthy. For Buddhists and Jains, however, Sanskrit was just a
language. They rejected the eternality of language, and especially of
the Sanskrit language, and denied that Sanskrit’s relationship with
truth was more direct than that of any other language.

But they still wrote in Sanskrit. Buddhists started writing in Sanskrit
before Jains, but by the middle of the 1st millennium CE, almost
everything that could count as philosophical discourse in India was
composed in Sanskrit. There are good reasons to believe that the
transition to Sanskrit broadly coincided with a reorientation of all
philosophical schools from an “inward” to an “outward” perspective, that
is, an engagement with philosophical opponents outside of one’s own
tradition (see Eltschinger 2013 for a convincing account of this
reorientation in sixth-century Buddhism). In some respects this
transition is completely unremarkable—intersectarian debate requires an
intersectarian language, and Sanskrit was the only viable candidate—and
indeed very few authors actually remarked on it. But for Buddhists and
Jains, writing in Sanskrit might be seen as acceding to the very
ideology of language that had been used to denigrate and reject their
own scriptures, or even as a violation of their preexisting commitments
to vernacular language practices.

The 11th-century Jain philosopher Prabhācandra offers one way of
thinking about the connection between the philosophy of language and the
language of philosophy: provisional acceptance (*abhyupagama*). In his
*Moon for the Night-Blooming Lily of Reasoning* (*Nyāyakumudacandra*), a
detailed commentary on Akalaṅka’s*Three Very Short Treatises*
(*Laghīyastraya*), a *pūrvapakṣin* claims that only Sanskrit words are
correct (*sādhu*). One of the arguments the *pūrvapakṣin* is that even
if you do not accept another person’s sacred texts, in order to convince
other people, you still have to accept some mode of argumentation that
could establish the validity of those texts, otherwise we’d have to
leave all of our arguments aside and try to convince each other with
mental constructs and hand-gestures:

> śāstraprāmāṇyam anabhyupagacchatā ‘pi parapratyāyanāya
> sādhanadūṣaṇaprayogaḥ tatprāmāṇyaprasādhano ‘vaśyābhyupagantavyaḥ,
> tadanabhyupagame
> svaparapakṣasādhanadūṣaṇaprapañcapratyastamayaprasaṅgāt, kevalair
> manovikalpaiḥ aṅgasaṃjñābhir vā parapratyāyanānupapatteḥ.

Prabhācandra does not circle back around to this argument in the
*siddhānta*. How could he? He is a Digambara monk, arguing at length
against Mīmāṃsakas about the privileged status of the Sanskrit language
and the Sanskrit grammar, and defending the communicative power of
Prakrit and the legitimacy of vernacular language practices—but he’s
doing all of this in Sanskrit. The strategy of provisional acceptance
(*abhyupagama*) is immensely important to Indian philosophy in general:
It’s necessary when, as if often the case, you don’t accept all of your
opponent’s presuppositions but you nevertheless want to argue that those
presuppositions would force him into different conclusions. Here,
Prabhācandra’s *pūrvapakṣin* turns it into a gesture of accommodation
that makes philosophical debate possible in the first place. Perhaps
it’s stretching it too far, but this seems tantamount to the realization
that discourse, philosophical discourse included, never occurs in a
completely neutral space, but requires participants to acknowledge and
adapt to social facts and asymmetries of power. And one of the
implications of this realization is that you can’t simply wait around
for hundreds of years for people to start speaking your language.

**What other reflections do Indian philosophers offer on their own
language practices? Are there other cases in which provisional
acceptance (*abhyupagama*) serves as a strategy of accommodation? How
does *abhyupagama* in this case relate to the Buddhist idea of skillful
means (*upāya-kauśalya*)?**

References: Eltschinger 2013, “Buddhist Esotericism and Epistemology:
Two Sixth-Century Innovations as Buddhist Responses to Social and
Religio-Political Transformations,” pp. 171-273 in E. Franco (ed.),
*Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy* (Vienna).

Prabhācandra’s *Nyāyakumudacandra*: ed. by Mahendrakumāra in the
Māṇikcand Digambar Jain Granthamālā (Bombay 1938).
