+++
title = "Was Yāmuna the real"
full_title = "Was Yāmuna the real founder of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta?"
date = "2014-03-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/14/was-yamuna-the-real-founder-of-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-on-mesquita-1971-and-1973/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/14/was-yamuna-the-real-founder-of-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-on-mesquita-1971-and-1973/).

Was Yāmuna the real founder of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta? (On Mesquita 1971 and 1973)

Yāmuna (967–1038 according to Mesquita 1973) is one of the chief figures
of the philosophy later known as Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta. In fact, to me
one of the most intriguing questions regards his role in the formation
of this school. It is only with Rāmānuja (who lived two generations
after Yāmuna) that the school becomes clearly Vedāntic and it is not by
chance that it is only Rāmānuja who decided to write a commentary on the
*Brahmasūtra*. Moreover, not all of Yāmuna’s works are completely
preserved (and their loss is not at all recent: as proved by Roque
Mesquita (1973, 189–190) they were unaccessible already by the time of
Veṅkaṭanātha, 1269–1370). Nonetheless, Yāmuna was a gifted philosopher
and whenever one digs in his works looking for the background of one or
the other tenet of Rāmānuja or Veṅkaṭanātha, one usually succesfully
identifies a passage in Yāmuna which inspired Rāmānuja and Veṅkaṭanātha.

Still, Yāmuna, especially in his juvenile works, is still under the
influence of a non-Vedāntic (and perhaps Naiyāyika) approach to
Pāñcarātra (which might be due to the influence of his grandfather
Nāthamuni, who wrote a lost Nyāya work). For instance, as convinvingly
explained in Mesquita 1971, Yāmuna starts with the idea that God’s
existence can be proven through inference (as with the Naiyāyikas) and
only later moves on to the thesis that it can be proven only through the
Sacred Texts (as with Mīmāṃsakas and Vedāntins). Thus, it seems that at
least in part the history of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta has been conditioned
by a choice occurring during Yāmuna’s lifespan.

Mesquita’s analysis presupposes his accurate reconstruction of the
internal sequence of Yāmuna’s works, mainly based on internal
references:

1.  *saṃvitsiddhi*
2.  *ātmasiddhi*
3.  *īśvarasiddhi*
4.  *puruṣanirṇaya*
5.  *āgamaprāmāṇya*

The three *siddhi*s are incomplete, whereas the *Puruṣanirṇaya* is lost.
What could it have contained, given that there was already a text
bearing almost the same title (*puruṣa-nirṇaya* seems a synonym of
*īśvara-siddhi*)? Mesquita reconstructs part of its contents through
quotations and references to it in Rāmānuja and especially Veṅkaṭanātha.
It appears that the *Puruṣanirṇaya* might be the result of Yāmuna’s
dynamic re-shaping of his initial project when he started his
*Ātmasiddhi*. In fact, in the opening of the latter, he said he would
have dealt also with God’s existence, a subject which must have been
—within the *Ātmasiddhi*— abandoned, given that he then wrote a further
work on this topic, the *Īśvarasiddhi*. The *Puruṣanirṇaya* might have,
similarly, dealt with topics announced in the *Ātmasiddhi*. More
interestingly, it might have contained the shift from the inference to
God’s existence to the evidence out of the Sacred Texts alone (Mesquita
1973, p. 192). On top of that, it might have contained the argument
about the identification of the Sacred Texts’ “God” with Viṣṇu.

**Was Yāmuna for Rāmānuja like Utpaladeva for Abhinavagupta? And who is
before your favourite Indian philosopher?**

  
On Yāmuna’s, Rāmānuja’s and Veṅkaṭanātha’s distinct contribution to
“Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta” see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/11/18/pancaratra-and-vedanta-a-long-and-complicated-relation/)
post.

(Friday is my day for broad readings. You can find my weekly and monthly
blogging plan
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/09/03/monthly-planning/ "Monthly planning")).  
(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
