+++
title = "Can one establish the"
full_title = "Can one establish the existence of an omniscient?"
date = "2014-03-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/10/426/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/10/426/).

Can one establish the existence of an omniscient?

…or can one just say that his existence cannot be denied?

During his commentary on Maṇḍana Miśra’s *Vidhiviveka* (henceforth VV),
1.14–15, Vācaspati Miśra focuses on the possibility of the existence of
omniscients. Why so? Because the VV is a Mīmāṃsaka text and the whole
Mīmāṃsā enterprise depends on the idea that the Vedas are the only way
to know about dharma. Thus, the existence of omniscient being, who would
have direct access to dharma, would automatically invalidate the Mīmāṃsā
epistemology. Consequently, the VV and its commentary need to stage from
the beginning a debate between a Buddhist Pramāṇavādin (favouring
omniscients) and a Mīmāṃsaka (denying them). During his commentary on VV
1.14, the last word is left to the Pramāṇavādin and Vācaspati seems to
display some familiarity with Pramāṇavāda material, since he quotes from
Dharmakīrti and discusses the existence of concrete omniscient beings
(such as the Buddha), rather than the abstract possibility of
*yogipratyakṣa*\*. Part of the discussion is agreeable and
well-structured:

1.  The omniscient one exists
2.  Because there are no means to deny his existence and because there
    are means to positively establish it
3.  Discussion of the former, featuring sense perception and then
    inference
4.  Discussion of the latter, featuring sense perception

The discussion of 3. is rich and interesting, with the Mīmāṃsaka arguing
for the necessity of desire for communication (this is Kumārila’s
position) and the Pramāṇavādin replying that the compassion which moves
the Buddha to help others is not a desire (*rāga*). A more technical
discussion about the impossibility to formalise a syllogism denying the
omniscient is also present.

The odd point about the discussion, however, comes after it, at point 4,
since Vācaspati does not seem indeed to give any positive motivation for
the existence of an omniscient one (although he promises that he will
discuss it again later —I do not yet know whether he keeps his promise).
Accordingly, the discussion of 4. is also negative in nature:

> Nor is it the case that there are no positive evidences. To elaborate,
> such an \[absence\] should be either absence of perceptual
> \[evidence\] or of \[evidence\] from all (other?) instruments of
> knowledge. In turn, the absence of perceptual \[evidence\] regards
> either itself or all \[the rest\]. Even if it regards itself, then it
> can be either characterised by the fact that \[the absence of
> perception regards\] something perceptible, or \[the absence of
> perception\] is not characterised (by either perceptibility or
> anything else). To begin with, the absence of perceptual evidence of
> itself as regarding something perceptible does not prove the absence
> of an omniscient. Because the \[omniscience\] has a remote (i.e.,
> *parokṣa*) nature and, thus, cannot have its \[perceptual\] reality
> arise, as it is well known. And the absence of the whole
> sense-perception is not established, because the \[absence of
> perceptual evidence\] which is not \[further\] characterised is wrong.
> For, it is not the case that the entire perception of a normal (i.e,
> not omniscient) human being (*arvāgdṛś-*) is absent, for this is not
> established.
>
> (*nāpi sādhakapramāṇābhāvaḥ. tathā hi sa pratyakṣābhavo vā
> sakalapramāṇābhavo vā syāt. pratyakṣābhāvo’pi cātmanaḥ sarveṣām vā
> yadātmanaḥ tadāpi dṛśyatāviśeṣaṇaḥ nirviśeṣaṇa vā. na tāvad
> ātmapratyakṣanivṛttir drśyatāviśeṣaṇā sarvajñābhāvasādhanī, tasya
> svabhāvaviprakarṣinas tattvānupapatteḥ prasiddhatvāt. nirviśeṣanāyāś
> ca vyabhicārāt samastapratyakṣanivṛtteś cāsiddhatvam. na khalv
> arvāgdṛśaḥ sakalapratyakṣanivṛtti asiddhatvāt*, Stern p. 457.)

*nirviśeṣaṇa* possibly refers to sorts of perception which do not need a
perceptible object, such as intellectual intuition (*yogipratyakṣa*).

**Do you have any experience with a *nirviśeṣaṇa ātmapratyakṣābhāva*?
And more in general, are there positive arguments for the existence of
an omniscient?**

\*I am currently reading this text with Marco
[Ferrante](https://oeaw.academia.edu/MarcoFerrante) and Cristina
[Pecchia](http://www.ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mitarbeiter/Pecchia). I owe this
last comment to her, whereas I probably owe to Marco almost all the
rest. I never write it in my articles, but just in case: All errors
remain mine.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
