+++
title = "Veṅkaṭanātha’s"
full_title = "Veṅkaṭanātha’s contribution to Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta"
date = "2014-03-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/18/ve%e1%b9%85ka%e1%b9%adanathas-contribution-to-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/18/ve%e1%b9%85ka%e1%b9%adanathas-contribution-to-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta/).

Veṅkaṭanātha’s contribution to Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta

Veṅkaṭanātha (traditional dates 1269–1370 (see Neevel 1977 for a
convincing explanation of these too long life spans) is a complex figure
who can be interpreted in different ways according to the facet one is
focusing on. What is sure is that what *we* refer to as Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta has been largely influenced by the shape he gave to it. For
instance, the traditional lineage of teachers of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
groups together teachers who bear some vague family resemblance among
each other, but who are all directly linkable to Veṅkaṭanātha’s view of
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta.  
The main philosophical outlines of Veṅkaṭanātha’s Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
are:

1.  the Vedāntic viewpoint
2.  the emphasis on Pūrva Mīmāṃsā
3.  the incorporation of Pāñcarātra
4.  the incorporation of the Āḻvārs’ theology

The development of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta as a vedāntic school is clear
as one looks back at Veṅkaṭanātha’s predecessors, but it is important to
notice that what seems a posteriori like a clear Vedāntic school would
not probably have appeared as such to its contemporaries. In fact,
Yāmuna’s relation to Vedānta is complex. He quotes from the Upaniṣads in
the *Ātmasiddhi*, and he starts it listing the Vedānta teachers he wants
to refute (including Bhartṛhari and Śaṅkara), so that one might think
that he is keener to “purify” Vedānta than he cares about “purifying”
Nyāya. At the same time, at least in the *Ātmasiddhi* (see Mesquita
1971, pp. 4–13) Yāmuna accepts an anti-Vedāntic proof for the existence
of God, namely the inference (whereas Pūrva and Uttara Mīmāṃsā agree
that God can only be known through the Sacred Texts) and the
*Āgamaprāmāṇya* seems to have a completely different focus. Rāmānuja is
more straightforwardly part of a Vedāntic approach (this is, in my
opinion, also the reason why he has been often considered the “founder”
of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta —a term which he and Yāmuna still ignore). As
for Nāthamuni, his relation to Vedānta can only be presupposed out of
what we know of him through his successors, given that his works have
been lost. Their titles focus, however, on Nyāya and Yoga (and not on
Vedānta).

As for No. 2, we know nothing about Nāthamuni’s relation to Mīmāṃsā, but
we know that at least one trend within Vedānta (as testified by
Śaṅkara’s commentary on the *Brahmasūtra*) claimed that the study of
Pūrva Mīmāṃsā was not necessary. Yāmuna’s relation to Pūrva Mīmāṃsā is
double-faced, but Pūrva Mīmāṃsā authors seem to be his targeted
objectors in the sense that he wants to convince them of the legitimacy
of the Pāñcarātra transmission (although often recurring to their same
arguments) and he by and large adopts Nyāya strategies (such as the
reference to God as the authoritative source of the epistemologic
validity of the Pāñcarātra, or the use of inference to establish God’s
existence). The situation changes, perhaps during Yāmuna’s own life,
certainly with Rāmānuja, who steers in direction Vedānta and, thus,
comes closer to the Pūrva Mīmāṃsā. So close that he programmatically
states at the beginning of his commentary on the *Brahmasūtra* that not
only the Brāhmaṇa part of the Veda needs to be studied, but that its
study is part of the same teaching with the Vedānta. Veṅkaṭanātha takes
advantage of this (perhaps causal) remark and understands its deep
implications: he can thus state that the whole of Pūrva Mīmāṃsā and the
whole of Uttara Mīmāṃsā constitute a single teaching (*ekaśāstra*).

No. 3 and 4: Furthermore, Veṅkaṭanātha used the same model, I think, to
incorporate into the system further elements. He reaches back to the
Pāñcarātra, which had been defended by Yāmuna but rather neglected by
Rāmānuja and, more strikingly, to the hymns of the Āḻvārs. It is in this
sense more than telling that Veṅkaṭanātha (as first among the first
teachers of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta) decided to write also in Tamil and to
write theology also in poetical form, as the Āḻvārs had done.

**Did you ever try to reconstruct what had happened in a single school
within some generations of teachers and pupils? What did you find out?**

On Yāmuna’s role in what came to be known as Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta,
check
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/14/was-yamuna-the-real-founder-of-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-on-mesquita-1971-and-1973/ "Was Yāmuna the real founder of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta? (On Mesquita 1971 and 1973)")
post (and its comments), on Pāñcarātra and Vedānta, see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/11/18/pancaratra-and-vedanta-a-long-and-complicated-relation/)
post. For more on Veṅkaṭanātha, check
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/category/sanskrit-philosophy/visi%E1%B9%A3%E1%B9%ADadvaita-vedanta-sanskrit-philosophy/ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADanathavedanta-desika/)
tag. (cross-posted also on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
