+++
title = "Moral Standing and Yoga"
full_title = "Moral Standing and Yoga"
date = "2014-03-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/07/moral-standing-and-yoga/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/07/moral-standing-and-yoga/).

Moral Standing and Yoga

To have moral standing is to be the kind of thing that should be taken
into account in ethical deliberation. Asking the question of moral
standing raises the prospects of there being many kinds of things that
count, and in different ways.

One standard account that we find from Hedonic Utilitarians like Peter
Singer and Bentham is the idea that someone counts, ethically, if they
can suffer (Singer 2012). Animals count because they can suffer. I like
the hedonic account, but it has problems. On this account, if I overcome
suffering, I would no longer be in the category of things who should be
taken seriously. This disincentivises me from overcoming suffering.
That’s strange.

Another ubiquitous account of moral standing is unabashedly
anthropocentric. The silly version of this theory says that anything
that is human is important or should be respected. This is silly because
tumors, acne and dandruff can be human: we should not respect them (cf.
Marquis 2007, 441). Perhaps to avoid these problems, refined
anthropocentrists argue that to ethically count one must be able to
reason, and this requires the kinds of representative abilities humans
have (Gauthier 2007, 623; cf. Korsgaard 1996, 93; cf. 2007). Tumors
wouldn’t count on this account, but adult humans would. Historically,
one finds this account in Kant, who not only identified moral standing
with the ability to be like him (think in the manner of the categorical
imperative) but correlatively argued that we have no obligations to
nonhuman animals, but we should be nice to them so we don’t developed
dispositions of cruelty towards humans (Kant 1996, 6:443; 1974,
5:298-303). The reason we have no obligations to nonhuman animals on
Kant’s account is that they do not reason like Kant (in accordance with
the categorical imperative). Of course, this puts babies and the senile
at a disadvantage too. On Kant’s account, if I can spare humans my
cruelty while I torture puppies for fun, I would be doing nothing wrong
(Wood 1998, 194-5). By parity of reasoning, the same would apparently
hold true for babies and the senile.

Kant is correct for identifying moral standing with reason, for this
does indeed separate tumors from people: tumors are not reasonable, but
people should be. But Kant gets reason wrong. Here I note one problem.

There are at least two approaches that one can take to reason. One can
treat it as a norm or a standard to judge cognitive behavior, or one can
treat it as the facts of how we reason. If reason is a norm and if
reason defines persons, then we could identify a person as the kind of
entity that has an interest in being reasonable—whether they are able to
be reasonable or not. Dogs, small babies and the senile have an interest
in being reasonable, hence they would be persons, whether they are
reasonable or not. If reason is the same as how we (adult humans) think
and if to be a person is to be reasonable, then anything that deviates
from our psychology would not be a person.

Which account of reason is correct: the normative account or the account
that identifies reason with our psychology? If it is possible for us to
be irrational, then reason cannot be identical with the laws of our
psychology for the laws of our psychology are compatible with
irrationality. This is old news in the history of philosophy (Frege
1894, 1980; Husserl 2001, vol.1, p.41). What is often not noticed is
that if this criticism of psychologistic accounts of reason is correct,
naturalistic, descriptive and speciesist accounts of logic are in
trouble. Accounts of personhood based on these accounts of reason are
also in trouble.

**Enter the Yoga Sūtra**

The Yoga Sūtra account of moral standing starts the book off, finishes
it, and peppers the intercessions. To get to it, we need a bit of sūtra
sleuthing.

At the start, Patañjali tells us that:

• Yogaścittavṛttinirodhaḥ (I.2)  
• Tadā draṣṭuḥ svarūpe’vasthānam (I.3)  
• Vṛttisārūpyamitaratra (1.4)

In my translation (Patañjali 2008) I translated this as:

• Yoga is the control of the (moral) character of thought.

• Then, the seer can abide in its essence.  
• Otherwise, there is identification with the character of thought.

At the end of the YS, Patañjali tells us,

Puruṣārthaśūnyānāṁ guṇānāṁ pratiprasavaḥ kaivalyaṁ svarūpapratiṣṭhā vā
citiśaktiriti (IV.34)

I translated this as:

• With no other goal of the person remaining (for they have all been
fulfilled), the qualities (of Nature) resolve themselves back into the
flow (of Nature). Then (the person) stands only on its own form, or on
(pure) power of knowing. This is Isolation. That is all.

I think now that this final reference to standing on one’s own form
(IV.34), and the earlier reference to abiding in one’s essence (I.3) are
referring to the same state. And the connection is the idea of
abstraction: *kaivalya*. I used to believe that *kaivalya* is the Yoga
Sūtra term for “autonomy.” But I’m starting to believe that it really is
abstraction (and that autonomy is to be understood in terms of
abstraction). What’s the connection between abstraction and abiding in
one’s own essence?

The first three lines explain it. When we control our relationship to
thought (I.2), we live a life that is authentic (I.3). Failing this
control, we identify with how things seem to us. Or, put another way,
when we live a life that reflects who we are (I.3), we abstract
(*kaivalya*) from the things we contemplate (I.2), and when we fail to
abstract, we identify with what we contemplate (I.4).

If I were to provide a gloss (something like a paraphrase), it would
look like this:

• When we put critical distance between ourselves and thought-content
(I.2)  
• We live a life that reflects our rational essence (I.3, and IV.34)  
• Otherwise, we identify with our thoughts (I.4)

**What is a Person**

This account of the authentic life implies something about what people
are. A person is something that has an interest in being abstract, which
is to say, not identifying with thoughts and feelings. Put another way,
a person is something with an interest in abstracting from contexts and
content. If logic is the abstraction from all content, then the Yoga
Sūtra position is that people are ideally logical, and have an interest
in being logical.

In real terms, what is a person? Tumors wouldn’t be a person: there is
no obvious sense in which they have an interest in abstracting. From a
tumor-y point of view: they have an interest in not abstracting from
their host. But persons, in contrast, have an interest in abstracting,
and when they can abstract from tumors, they are free from cancer! The
kinds of entities that have an interest in abstracting from contexts and
content are critters like us: animals! Indeed, it is difficult to
identify health for a person (animal) except to note that an animal is
healthy when they can control their relationship to content in their
environment. Illness for animals (persons) just is the impeding of the
ability to abstract from content.

Plants would apparently be special cases: they have interests, but it is
difficult to understand these interests in terms of being able to
abstract from contexts and contents. They need a to stay put in a
convenient environment. They are more like tumors. Indeed, perhaps
tumors are just special kinds of plants (or perhaps plants are
relatively manageable tumors)!

For similar reasons, a good case could be made that Planets too would be
people… I will leave that for another post.

**References**

Frege, Gottlob. 1894. “Rezension von: E.G. Husserl, Philosophie der
Arithmetik I.” *Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische
Kritik*:313-32.

———. 1980. *The Foundations of Arithmetic: a Logico-Mathematical Enquiry
into the Concept of Number*. Translated by J.L. Austin. 2nd rev. ed.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Reprint, Breslau: W. Koebner.

Gauthier, David. 2007. “Why Contractarianism?” In *Ethical Theory*,
edited by Russ Shafer-Landau, 620-630. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

Husserl, Edmund. 2001. *Logical Investigations*. Translated by J.N.
Findlay. 2 ed. 2 vols, *International Library of Philosophy*. London;
New York: Routledge.

Kant, Immanuel. 1974. *Critique of Judgment*. Translated by J.H.
Bernard, *Hafner Library of Classics*. New York; London: Hafner Press,
Collier Macmillan.

———. 1996. *The Metaphysics of Morals*. Translated by Mary J. Gregor.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Korsgaard, Christine M. 1996. *The Sources of Normativity*. Edited by
Onora O’Neill, *1992 Tanner Lectures*. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

———. 2007. “Facing the Animal You See in the Mirror.” *Harvard Review of
Philosophy* no. 16:2-7.

Marquis, Don. 2007. An Argument that Abortion is Wrong. In *Ethical
Theory: An Anthology*, edited by Russ Shafer-Landau. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Pub.

Patañjali. 2008. *Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtra. Translation, Commentary and
Introduction* by Shyam Ranganathan. Delhi: Penguin Black Classics.

Singer, Peter. 2012. “All Animals are Equal.” In *Ethical Theory: An
Anthology*, edited by Russ Shafer-Landau, 361-371. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.

Wood, Allen. 1998. “Kant on Duties Regarding Nonrational Nature.”
*Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplement* no. LXXII:189-210.
