+++
title = "The accidental Gītā"
full_title = "The accidental Gītā"
date = "2014-03-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/).

The accidental Gītā

A strange coincidence surprised me as I designed this spring’s [course
in Indian
philosophy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/02/understanding-understanding/)
– but one that I suspect is quite significant. The coincidence resulted
from three of my primary concerns in selecting content for the course
syllabus, and I’ll start with those. One of those was, whenever
possible, to focus on primary texts – texts actually written by Indian
philosophers.

A second primary concern was to stress the connections between
theoretical and practical philosophy. Too often, Indian epistemology and
metaphysics are seen as purely abstract activities with little relation
to one’s ethical conduct or even one’s ultimate liberation, and Indian
reflection on practical matters is taken to have little background in
that theoretical work (as in Damien Keown’s needlessly pessmistic
[reflection](http://books.google.com/books?id=mH2HBJXnFD0C&pg=PA40&lpg=PA40&dq=damien+keown+%22buddhism+morality+without+ethics%22&source=bl&ots=azTA7ue1bs&sig=0Rky-dARaOY5TilicZEcpILSCdU&hl=en&sa=X&ei=LSYCU860IKmR0QHTpYD4Dw&ved=0CCcQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=damien%20keown%20%22buddhism%20morality%20without%20ethics%22&f=false)
that there is no such thing as Buddhist normative ethics). It is no
wonder that Indian philosophy is so little studied when even those who
study it sometimes think its [questions tend not to
edification](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/08/in-praise-of-questions-which-tend-not-to-edification/).

My reading of Śāntideva convinced me that this is absolutely not the
case. Metaphysics is a pervasive concern of his most celebrated text
(and one of the most widely read works of Buddhist ethics), the
Bodhicaryāvatāra – not only in the ninth chapter, which focuses on it,
but in the other more widely read chapters as well. (I gave a talk on
this topic at the [SACP](sacpweb.org) a few years ago, and am planning
on expanding it into a paper for publication soon.) I have come to
believe that this is the case more widely in Indian philosophy as well.
It’s not always easy to see what the practical implications of Indian
theoretical thought are, but I think that they are there, and it was
hugely important to me that my course bring them out.

My final primary concern was to bring in modern Indian philosophy, in
order to excite student interest and let them know it is not a dead
tradition. For this purpose I had students read the most widely read
modern Indian thinkers – Aurobindo Ghose (Sri Aurobindo) and Mohandas
Gandhi – as well as Paul Hacker’s provocative [“Schopenhauer and Hindu
ethics”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/schopenhauer-and-the-tat-tvam-asi-ethic/),
to let them know that the continuity between classical and modern Indian
thought is not always as clear as it seems. (I read [Andrew Nicholson’s
*Unifying
Hinduism*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/01/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/)
just before starting the course, and it occurred to me to try and have
the students read some late medieval/early modern thinkers so they could
have a chance to see where the real continuities are. But it was hard
enough to find half-decent translations of celebrated thinkers like
Śaṅkara and Rāmānuja; I couldn’t imagine trying to find something for
the students to read from someone as obscure as Vijñānabhikṣu.)

Now to the apparent coincidence. When I had put together a set of
readings according to these guidelines, it turned out that *the second
half of the course content all came back to the [Bhagavad
Gītā](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhagavad_Gita)!* And that even though
I was going to teach the Gītā itself merely in the *first* half. More
than half of the course would relate directly to the Gītā, without my
planning this.

Gandhi’s love of the Gītā is well known, and Aurobindo wrote on it as
well. Interpretations of the Gītā (especially in
[Vivekananda](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vivekananda) and
[Radhakrishnan](http://www.iep.utm.edu/radhakri/) play a major part in
Hacker’s story of Schopenhauer’s reinterpretation of Hindu ethics. This
part is perhaps not so surprising: it is well known that the Gītā has
become one of the most prominent texts of modern Hinduism, perhaps *the*
most prominent. (My surviving Indian uncle, an irrepressibly jovial man
of whom I’ve always been fond, loves the text so deeply that he named
his daughter after it.)

In the premodern setting I wanted to make sure students knew
[Śaṅkara](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adi_Shankara) and
[Rāmānuja](http://www.iep.utm.edu/ramanuja/), with their very different
visions of human liberation. Both wrote commentaries on the Gītā.
Rāmānuja’s theistic but worldly ethics seem like a relatively natural
fit for the text. Śaṅkara’s view that the world is illusion seems less
so. And yet, while searching for texts in which Śaṅkara most clearly
articulates that view, I found it best expressed *in his commentaries on
the Gītā*, on chapters 5 and 13. So, it turned out, we would read
Śaṅkara, Rāmānuja, Hacker, Aurobindo and Gandhi, and *all* of them wrote
on the Gītā – this right after reading the Gītā itself!

This all struck me because it has become a scholarly commonplace to say
the Gītā is not as important as modern Hindus think it is. [Anne
Monius](http://www.hds.harvard.edu/people/faculty/anne-e-monius), for
example, taught an entire course on “Hindu ethics” without any reference
to it. But in my own investigation of what is interesting and accessible
in Indian philosophy, it turned out that most roads led back to the
Gītā. I think this matters.

The Gītā can be a hard text to love. Its most prominent message of “do
your duty without concern for the consequences” is a hard sell in a
utilitarian society like ours. Kant says something similar, of course,
but Kant’s ideal of duty is closely tied to a similarly modern ideal of
individual autonomy. The Gītā ties us to duties of caste and social
station – and that’s to say nothing of the specific action being urged
on Arjuna in the text, of going out and killing all his cousins. (I know
one prominent professor, somewhat prone to hyperbole, who has described
this as an act of genocide.)

And yet one mustn’t discount just how inspiring its message has been to
so many. These days perhaps the most striking is Gandhi himself.
Whatever one’s criticisms of Gandhi, one cannot exactly accuse him of
being a warmonger. And yet somehow this text that advocates warlike acts
was his favourite text and his inspiration. Perhaps more surprisingly
yet, this wasn’t even a result of longstanding faith in the traditions
he was raised in. He did not grow up with the Gītā; in his autobiography
he notes he first read it in England, at the suggestion of the
[Theosophical
Society](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theosophical_Society). He was
inspired by the Gītā when he encountered the ideas in the text itself.
It seems clear to me that, however much we might disagree with this
text, there is something in it well worth our paying attention to.
