+++
title = "PhD programs in Indian"
full_title = "PhD programs in Indian Philosophy part 2 Europe"
date = "2014-03-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/26/phd-programs-in-indian-philosophy-part-2-europe/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/26/phd-programs-in-indian-philosophy-part-2-europe/).

PhD programs in Indian Philosophy part 2: Europe

This post is the European continuation of Andrew Nicholson’s
[one](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/17/the-philosophical-rasika-report-listings-of-ph-d-programs-in-indian-philosophy-part-i-north-america/).
Andrew is also the one who prompted me to write a European list.

Indian philosophy is taught in at least two different places in Europe:
(South) Asian (or Oriental or Indological) Studies and —less often—
Philosophy departments. The dominant trend of US universities, where
Indian philosophy is taught predominantly in Religious Studies
departments is only evident in the UK. Departments of Asian Studies, of
Oriental Studies or of Indology, often have a philological focus (so
that knowing Sanskrit or other relevant languages is strongly
recommended, although not compulsory), whereas studying Indian
Philosophy in a Philosophy department may imply having to avoid
Sanskrit.

Further elements for non-European students and scholars:  
1) university fees are by and large very low in Europe (between nothing
and 1,500 E per year for full-time students) and in many countries
funding is available.  
2) the main point of a PhD course in Europe is the final output, i.e.,
your dissertation. You might have to attend classes (or not), but the
main focus should remain the fact of becoming an independent researcher,
and this is proved by your ability to write a book on your own.  
3) do not choose a certain department on the basis of your expectations
to have a career in Indian Philosophy. Write a PhD in Indian Philosophy
(only) because you are interested in it. There are little or no SLACs in
Europe and in this sense you cannot really plan a career as a university
teacher of Indian Philosophy in Europe (you might have a few more
chances as a researcher, but this involves being willing and able to do
research with others, or alone and to apply for fundings).

Now, a disclaimer: the European landscape of research related to Indian
philosophy os variegated. I have surely forgotten many institutions (for
instance, as far as I know, there is no one working on Indian philosophy
in Spain, Portugal, Greece, Malta…is this really the case?) and have not
been exhaustive in the case of others (for instance, I have been unable
to gather exhaustive informations concerning Croatia and Hungary). **I
rely on readers for emendations and supplements.**

The elements which will be listed, beside the universities, are: AOS,
whether funding is possible and whether it is possible to write one’s
PhD thesis in English. In all cases, no information does not mean that
it is impossible, it only means that I have no information about it.

-   AUSTRIA (possibility to write a PhD thesis in English)

University of Vienna (Institute of South Asian, Tibetology and Buddhist
Studies) Sanskrit philosophy, Āyurveda, Sanskrit philology, Buddhist
philosophy, especially Pramāṇavāda and Mādhyamaka, Tibetan philosophy)

-   BELGIUM (possibility to write a PhD thesis in English)

Brussel, Vrije Universiteit (Antwerp FVG, Faculty for Comparative Study
of Religions) (Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Jainism, Indian Philosophy,
especially Vedānta schools, Kaśmīr Śaivism) 2 funding posibilities: FWO
(regional) and BOF (university)

Ghent (dept. of languages and cultures of South and East Asia) (Jainism,
Buddhism, Indian Philosophy)

-   CROATIA

Zagreb (Humanities) (Upaniṣads, Vedānta)

-   CZECH REPUBLIC

Charles University of Prague (Institute of South and Central Asian
Studies) (Philosophy and Literature)

-   FRANCE (French needed)

Paris, EPHE (5th section, “Sciences Religieuses”) (Sanskrit philosophy,
especially Abhinavagupta and Vedānta), limited possibility for fundings

Paris-I Panthéon Sorbonne (Comparative Indian Philosophy) NO Sanskrit

Lille III (Tantrism)

-   GERMANY (special emphasis on Sanskrit texts, so that critical
    editions (also) of philosophical texts are possible also at other
    locations) (in all cases below, the universities have an “institute
    of Indology” or something similar)

Göttingen (Indian religions, including Veda, Pāli, Epics…)

Hamburg (Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika, Tantrism, Kaśmīrī Śaiva Philosophy, Mahāyāna,
Tibetan Buddhism)

Halle (Sanskrit Philosophy, especially Mokṣopāya and Kaśmīrī philosophy)

Heidelberg (Pramāṇavāda)

Leipzig (Sanskrit Philosophy, especially Pramāṇavāda)

Mainz (Buddhist Philology in Central Asia)

Marburg (Śaiva and Kashmirī philosophy, Mokṣopāya, Buddhist Philosophy)

Münich (Buddhism, Tibetan religions)

-   HUNGARY

Budapest, Eötvös Loránd University (dept. of Indo-European Studies)
(Sanskrit philology)

-   ITALY (possibility to write a PhD thesis in English)

Cagliari University (faculty of Humanities) (Sanskrit philosophy,
Vyākaraṇa), full funding for 3 years possible

Milan University (aesthetics), full funding for 3 years possible

Naples University (Oriental Studies) (Sanskrit philosophy, especially
Śaivism, Buddhism and Tantrism in general, Sanskrit philology), full
funding for 3 years possible

Rome, Sapienza University (Oriental Studies) (Sanskrit Philosophy,
especially Śaivism, Pramāṇavāda, Tantrism and Vyākaraṇa, Sanskrit
philology), full funding for 3 years possible

Turin University (Oriental Studies) (Indian religions and philosophy,
especially Advaita Vedānta and Buddhism), full funding for 3 years
possible (1 new funded position every year)

Venice University (Asian and African Studies) (Indian religions and
philosophy, especially Vedānta, Sāṅkhya, Yoga, Dharmaśāstra, Sociology
of Indian religions), full funding for 3 years possible

-   NETHERLANDS

Leiden (Institute for Area Studies) (Buddhist Philosophy)

-   POLAND

Krakow (Pedagogical University, dept. of Philosophy) (Indian Philosophy,
especially Buddhism, Sāṅkhya, Yoga, contemporary Indian philosophy)

Krakow (Jagiellonian University, dept. of Oriental Studies) (Indian
Philosophy, especially early Advaita Vedānta and Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta,
Vaiṣṇavism)

Poznan (Languages and Literature) (Indian Philosophy, especially ethics)

Warsaw (dept. of South Asian Studies) (Indian Philosophy, especially
Jainism, Mīmāṃsā)

-   RUSSIA (possibility to write a PhD thesis in English at St.
    Petersburg)

Moscow (institute of Philosophy) (Indian philosophy, especially
Vaiśeṣika)

Moscow (Moscow State University) (Vyākaraṇa, Sanskrit Philology)

Moscow (Russian State University for Humanities) (Jainism, Indian
Philology)

St. Petersburg (St. Petersburg State University) (Bhartṛhari, Vyākaraṇa,
Buddhism, some Indian philology)

St Petersburg (Institute of Oriental Manuscripts (Buddhist philosophy,
Kaśmīri Śaivism, Bhartṛhari, Tibetan Buddhism)

-   SWEDEN

Stockholm (Oriental languages) (Indian Philosophy, especially Nyāya and
Buddhism)

-   SWITZERLAND (possibility to write a PhD thesis in English)

Lausanne (Section on languages and cultures slavic and of South Asia)
(Buddhist studies, contemporary Indian philosophy)

Zürich (Hinduism, contemporary Hinduism, Ethics, Ethics of Medicine)

-   UK (much higher fees, up to 4,000 pounds per year) (some
    possibilities of fundings through the University, the Colleges and
    private institutions)

Bristol (centre for Buddhist studies) (Theravāda Buddhism, Chinese
Buddhism, Zen Buddhism)

Cambridge (Asian and Middle Eastern Studies) (Sanskrit Philology,
Vyākaraṇa, Mīmāṃsā, Buddhist Studies)

Cambridge (Divinity) (Vedānta)

Cardiff (Religious and Theological Studies) (Buddhist studies and
philosophy)

Dundee (Philosophy) NO SANSKRIT

Durham (Philosophy) (Metaphysics and Philosophy of Language, especially
in Madhyamaka Buddhism)

Edinburgh (South Asian Studies) (Indian Philosophy, especially Jainism)

Kent (Religious Studies) (Buddhism, Vedānta)

Lancaster (Religious Studies; Philosophy) (Indian Philosophy, especially
Vedānta)

Leeds (Theology and Religious Studies) (Sāṅkhya, Pātañjala Yoga)

Liverpool (Philosophy) (Vedānta, contemporary Indian philosophy)

London, King’s College (Philosophy) (logic, epistemology, metaphysics
and philosophy of language in India, Greek and modern Western
philosophy) NO SANSKRIT

London, SOAS (Religion; South Asia) (Buddhist studies, Tibetan Buddhism,
Yoga, Jainism)

Manchester University (Arts, Languages, and Cultures) (Indian
philosophy, especially Vedānta)

Oxford (Oriental Studies) (Indian philosophy, especially Vyākaraṇa and
Mīmāṃsā, Sanskrit philology, Sanskrit scientific literature)

Oxford (Theology and Religion)

Oxford (one might also want to get in touch with the Oxford Center of
Buddhist Studies and the Oxford Center of Hindu studies for external
tuition)

Sussex (Philosophy) (Indian Philosophy, especially Nyāya, Vedānta)

York (Philosophy) (Indian ethics and Indian Buddhist philosophy), NO
SANSKRIT

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: I am really obliged to the following people for their
help: Daniele Cuneo, Evgeniya Desnitskaya, Camillo Formigatti, Jonardon
Ganeri, Marzenna Jakubczak, Gianni Pellegrini, Isabelle Ratié, Agnieszka
Rostalska, Alex Watson

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
