+++
title = "Will the journey ever"
full_title = "Will the journey ever come to its goal? On Clooney 2013"
date = "2014-03-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/21/will-the-journey-ever-come-to-its-goal-on-clooney-2013/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/21/will-the-journey-ever-come-to-its-goal-on-clooney-2013/).

Will the journey ever come to its goal? On Clooney 2013

Several years ago I had some pain in convincing a friend working on
Husserl that the “phenomenologist” J. Mohanty which he knew too well was
the same as the scholar of Sanskrit Philosophy J.N. Mohanty (I had
similar problems in convincing the same person that *avatar* is a
Sanskrit word). Just like there are two Mohantys, with two different
target audiences, so there are two F.X. Clooneys. Scholars of Indian
Philosophy will know mostly the author of *Thinking Ritually* and of
further essays on Mīmāṃsā and Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta (1986, 1988),
whereas Catholic and other Christian theologians and believers will know
mostly his works dedicated to comparative theology (1996, 2005, 2008,
2010, 2014).

In the former works, Clooney conforms to the common rules of academic
writing (disembodied, impersonal, “scholar”), although an attentive
reader might detect also in them a hue of the latter Clooney (for
instance, in his insistence on listening to Jaimini’s voice and
detecting it within the *Pūrva Mīmāṃsā Sūtra*). The “theological”
Clooney is passionate, engaged in what he writes and sensitive to the
transformative enterprise of writing. One even gets the feeling that he
might think that writing is a performance on something
yet-to-be-estbalished (*sādhya*, to go back to the Mīmāṃsā terminology),
rather than a description of already settled (*siddha*) conclusions.

Consequently, as a reader of *[His hiding place is
darkness](http://www.sup.org/book.cgi?id=21453)* one is split by two
different feelings. On the one hand the positive feeling on being on a
journey with someone who is also on the same path, on the other the
frustrating feeling not to be able to come to a scholarly sound
conclusion. The book is, in fact, programmatically unsettled and
unsettling. Nor could it be differently, since it puts side by side the
Old Testament’s *Song of Songs* and the Tamil *Tiruvāymoḻi* (“The holy
word of mouth”), song 1.4 and 1.5, without having previously established
any essential similarity between the two. Rather, Clooney just chose
them out of inspiration, in a way which could be compared to J.
Derrida’s approach to texts in themselves, without the safeguard of
their historicisation, without a safety net and in fact Clooney starts
the book with two long juxtaposed excerpts of the two texts. And
similarly ungrounded is also the juxtaposition of Jorie Graham’s poetry
in the first chapter (tellingly called “Act One”). The Tamil text comes
from the *Tiruvāymoḻi*, which is part of the *Divya Prabandham*, the
collection of songs of the Āḻvārs, poet-saints who composed their
mystical poems in South India, in the first millennium of the CE (the
date is very controversial, also due to the desire of the Śrī Vaiṣṇava
community to directly link the Āḻvārs to Nāthamuni, traditionally
recognised as the compiler of the *Divya Prabandham* and whose date of
death seems to have been 923).

Although the Aḻvārs were considered by the later tradition as inspired
mystics, and revered as founders of the Śrī Vaiṣṇava religion, the songs
chosen by Clooney are written from the perspective of a young girl who
burns for love for God, Viṣṇu, but cannot find Him. She is desperate and
in her desperation she blames herself for her sins, due to which she
cannot come closer to Him, the people who do not pity her, and last even
God Himself who, notwithstanding His merciful nature does not come to
her. Clooney noticed the similarity in the religious application of the
motif of a young girl’s passionate love and of her desolation once the
lover has disappeared and put the text side by side with the portions of
the *Song of Songs* in which the girl is left alone and laments her
solitude.

Clooney offers helps and guidances, such as his translations of the
Tamil text, his frequent reference to contemporary exegesis of the *Song
of Songs* and, more importantly according to me, quotations and
interpretations from religious commentaries of the one and the other
text. Nonetheless, Clooney programmatically avoids to settle the issues
he opens. There is no solution to why the girl in the *Song of Songs* at
once sends her lover away at night, only to repent soon thereafter, nor
to why the daughters of Jerusalem laugh at her. Even more disturbing is
that there is no solution of the problem of the co-existence of two
exclusivist religions which both see themselves as the only one but
share striking similarities and coexist in a contemporary world in which
exclusivist faith seems no longer possible —and probably not even
desirable.

Notwithstanding the above, also an academic audience can profit of *His
hiding place is darkness*. I have, for instance, appreciated Clooney’s
ability to detect from the classical commentary on *The holy word* all
elements which enabled one to see the purpose and meaning of seemingly
merely decorative poetical elements. For instance, the reader discovers
in this way that Viṣṇu is not by chance said to lie on his snake-bed.
His lying on it means that He is not far, He is close to the world
because He cares for it. Thus, His failing to soothe the loving girl
appears even more cruel. Similarly, the girl’s pausing on the plumage of
the cranes she chooses as the messengers of her love to Viṣṇu is a sign
of her pausing on their capacity to reach Him fast.

More in general, Clooney’s way of seeing poetry as theology throws
indirectly light on why so many Indian theologians decided to write
poems and not (or not only) treatises. Theology enabled them different
perspectives. If Clooney is right, at least one of the reasons for
choosing the poetical medium is its theopoetic ability. The term comes
from the theologian Urs von Balthasar and indicates a poem’s ability to
dynamically enliven rather than represent.

**This might also be the reason why, I believe, Veṅkaṭanātha chose to
write also poems. What about other Indian authors?**

For more on the probem of why Indian authors write in verses, have a
look at the comments to
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/12/some-remarks-on-the-mode-of-argumentation-in-indian-philosophy/)
post.  
Friday is my day for broader reading, see my monthly planning
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/09/03/monthly-planning/).  
(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
