+++
title = "Philosophy and Theology"
full_title = "Philosophy and Theology – Let’s be clearer"
date = "2014-03-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/07/philosophy-and-theology-lets-be-clearer/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/07/philosophy-and-theology-lets-be-clearer/).

Philosophy and Theology – Let’s be clearer

In a previous post, I[ndian Philosophers in One
Paragraph](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/25/indian-philosophers-in-one-paragraph/),
we discussed who should be included in a list of India’s all time great
philosophers. People like Śaṅkara and Rāmānuja were included. Here I
wanted to raise an issue that has bothered me since the very first time
I read Śaṅkara in a second year undergraduate Sanskrit course at the
University of California in Santa Barbara, and about which I wrote an
article for the [Journal of the American Academy of
Religion](http://jaar.oxfordjournals.org/content/81/2/427.full?sid=d88f8d7f-8d45-4e7a-aaed-4a3643d944eb).

I think Indologists, philosophers and theologians who examine Indian
texts, and religious studies scholars could more carefully distinguish
*philosophy* from *theology*, even if the two are not mutually exclusive
and have considerable overlap. This is especially true in a “Hindu”
context (I acknowledge the difficulty of that word). The differences
between philosophy and theology are generally well known and respected
in the larger worlds of Christian theology and Western philosophy, yet
such distinctions are less frequently known and respected among those
who work on Indian texts.

In brief, *philosophy* uses anumāna and tarka in the course of
argumentation, whereas *theology* engages and interprets śabda-pramāṇa
(conceived of as a revealed source of knowledge) in the course of
argumentation.

Philosophers like Udayana, Gaṅgeśa or the early *Yogasūtra* commentator
Vyāsa, use anumāna and tarka as the primary methods for establishing
their point. Śabda, conceived as an unauthored or a divinely authored
śāstra, is quoted only after a position was argued for by means of
anumāna or tarka, if at all. Scripture may motivate their reasoning, but
it does not form the basis of their reasoning. On the other hand
theologians like Śaṅkara, Rāmānuja, Kumārilabhaṭṭa, etc. see their roles
as interpreting a revealed śāstra. Anumāna and tarka serve the purpose
of illuminating a fault-free śāstra’s meaning, and using śabda to
establish an interpretation of śabda is considered reasonable.

Whereas philosophy proceeds rationally, theology does so exegetically.
In the West too (for at least 500 years), the word philosopher refers to
people who use reason to think about epistemology, metaphysics, etc. and
not to people who see their primary roles as that of a scriptural
exegete. The words theology and theologian were reserved for that. These
two very different approaches to the use of reason are often conflated
by scholars work on Indian texts, and at great cost.

A disregard for the difference can mislead. While pursing a BA in
(Western) Philosophy I took Sanskrit as well. Śaṅkara had been discussed
as one of the most important Hindu *philosophers*. I felt like I had a
pretty good idea of what philosophers did, having taken specialized
courses on Plato, Aristotle, Hume, Kant and Quine. When I started
reading Śaṅkara, however, it clearly was *not* philosophy and he was
clearly *not* a philosopher. If Śaṅkara was a philosopher, he was unlike
every philosopher I had studied. The text we read was, I believe, from
his *Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad Bhāṣya*. Śaṅkara was trying to illuminate
the meaning of the root text in light of his Advaitavāda. None of the
philosophers I read spent any time carefully interpreting Biblical
texts. It wasn’t until later when I read that Śaṅkara was a theologian –
a scholar who accepts apauruṣeya-śabda as pramāṇa – that his project
began to make sense.

If we don’t adequately distinguish the philosophers from the theologians
we run the risk of confusing newcomers to the subject who already know
about Western intellectual history.
