+++
title = "Book Notice Hinduism and"
full_title = "Book Notice Hinduism and Environmental Ethics Law, Literature, and Philosophy by Chris Framarin"
date = "2014-03-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/14/book-notice-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-law-literature-and-philosophy-by-chris-framarin/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/14/book-notice-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-law-literature-and-philosophy-by-chris-framarin/).

Book Notice: Hinduism and Environmental Ethics: Law, Literature, and Philosophy by Chris Framarin

Chris Framarin’s new book,*Hinduism and Environmental Ethics: Law,
Literature and Philosophy, was*released by Routledge in Feb 2014. The
introduction and a review follows.



The Introduction of the Book:

The literature on Hinduism and the environment is vast, and growing
quickly. Much of this literature is concerned, at least in part, with
the question of whether certain Hindu texts and traditions prescribe the
proper treatment of nature.

Scholars writing on this topic often disagree over whether a specific
text or tradition prescribes the proper treatment of nature. They tend
to agree almost unanimously, however, that in order for a text or
tradition to prescribe the proper treatment of nature, it must attribute
“direct moral standing” to animals and plants. To say that an animal or
plant has direct moral standing is to say that human agents morally
ought to consider the animal or plant for its own sake in deciding what
to do.

In the first half of this book, I subject this literature to careful
scrutiny. First, I argue that the standard arguments *against* the claim
that certain Hindu texts and traditions attribute direct moral standing
to animals and plants are unconvincing. While *ahiṃsā* (non-harm) toward
animals and plants is often cited as a means to the attainment of
*mokṣa* (liberation), it cannot be that animals and plants matter *only*
as a means to the attainment of *mokṣa*. Although many Hindu texts and
traditions describe the saṃsāric world as overwhelmingly painful and
best abandoned, this cannot entail that living entities within the
saṃsāric world are entirely unimportant. And even if some Hindu texts
and traditions seem to describe the saṃsāric world as entirely illusory,
this cannot entail that living entities within the saṃsāric world lack
direct moral standing.

Second, I argue that the standard arguments *for* the claim that certain
Hindu texts and traditions attribute direct moral standing to animals
and plants are unconvincing as well. Some of these arguments claim that
certain Hindu texts and traditions entail that all of nature is
interconnected, and hence that all of nature – including animals and
plants – has direct moral standing. Others cite relations between
individual living entities, on the one hand, and *brahman* and/or the
*ātman*, on the other. I argue that each of these arguments is
unconvincing.

In the second half of the book, I advance an original argument for the
claim that certain Hindu texts and traditions attribute direct moral
standing to animals and plants. I consider important passages from three
seminal Hindu texts – the *Manusmṛti*, the *Mahābhārata*, and the
*Yogasūtra* (works of law, literature, and philosophy, respectively) –
and argue that all three attribute direct moral standing to animals and
plants (1) because they are sentient (that is, they are capable of
having experiences of pleasure and pain), (2) because they are alive,
and (3) because they possess a range of other relevant attributes and
abilities. I also argue that this interpretation avoids the objections
that undermine the more standard interpretations.





Review of the Book:

“This is an important new contribution from a scholar who has already
established an impressive track record in the field. It takes a
sophisticated environmental ethics approach to seminal Hindu texts,
breaking new ground, especially on the question of the moral standing of
non-human life. A must-read for anyone wishing to understand Hindu
attitudes toward the natural world.”

– Lance Nelson, University of San Diego
