+++
title = "Simple Mobility Models"
full_title = "Simple Mobility Models II"
date = "2014-03-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/29/simple-mobility-models-ii/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/29/simple-mobility-models-ii/).

Simple Mobility Models II

![Sweden](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/03/sweden2.png?w=400&h=600 "sweden.png")

This is a sequel to the [previous
post](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/24/simple-mobility-models)
exploring quantitative genetic models of income inequality motivated by
the findings in Gregory Clark’s new book [\[1\]](1 "see footnote").

A simple quantitative genetic model must rely on the assumption of an
underlying normal distribution of something, EQ we can call it, that is
the additive genetic part of whatever determines income. We can impute
this since, now, we have no way to measure it. Like IQ originally, and
like our construction of AQ,’amish quotient’,
[here](//westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/02/07/inferring-an-aq), we could
come up with an estimator if we could measure what we think we ought to
measure. For the moment we assume that there is such a direction in
character space. An immediate problem is that income is far from
normally distributed but we can impute a mapping from the observed
income distribution to EQ. Income percentiles are well known and
published for many countries. The figure is derived from Swedish data
given by Björklund and Jäntti [\[2\]](2 "see footnote").

The the top panel shows the conventional Lorenz curve for the Swedish
data: the horizontal axis is income rank and the vertical axis is the
percentile of national income at that rank, i.e. it is a conventional
cumulative distribution of income. The circles show data points along a
green line which is a spline through the data points.

The bottom panel has the same vertical axis but the distribution along
the horizontal axis is the imputed normal distribution of EQ. For
example the 50th percentile of income maps to the mean of the imputed
distribution, the 84th percentile maps to +1 standard deviation of a
standard normal, the 16th percentile maps to –1 standard deviation, and
so on. This figure gives us estimate of the income of a person given his
value of an underlying normally distributed EQ, shown as superimposed on
the figure. The virtue of this is that we can instantly apply a
century’s worth of quantitative genetic theory and knowledge.

In each panel a computed offspring distribution is shown as a bar two
standard deviations wide with a line to the parents’ EQ at each
mid-quintile, i.e. at percentiles 10,30,50,70,and 90. The lines are not
vertical because of regression to the mean.

Given a quantitative genetic model we know, for example, that offspring
of a couple should be distributed symmetrically around the mid-parent
value, regressed toward the mean.  
A clear exposition of this is in a post in Steve Hsu’s blog , with a
contribution from James Lee,
[here](http://infoproc.blogspot.com/search/label/assortative%20mating).
This particular figure is computed with an additive heritability of 0.9
and a spousal correlation of 0.9. These are both at the high end of
plausibility, as suggested by Clark’s data. We also should remember that
family (cultural) transmission, of wealth or values or whatever is
likely indistinguishable from genetic transmission and will increase the
heritability.

From this we can compute, and perhaps derive explicit expressions, for
the long term movement, i.e. EQ, of one’s descendants. It should not be
difficult to derive longer term expectations from a model like that in
the bottom panel. For example starting at some initial EQ the
distibution of descendants’ EQ should be distributed in subsequent
generations along the EQ distribution, the X axis of the bottom panel,
according to some reaction-diffusion process similar to the
[Fisher-Komogorov
equation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_equation) where the
diffusion is given by the the incomplete assortative mating and the
heritability less than unity. The deterministic part would describe the
greater number of surviving offspring with high EQ as documented in
Clark’s *Farewell to Alms* [\[3\]](3 "see footnote").

To paraphrase what we hear often in the social sciences, there is
no*need* to invoke any social or cultural transmission at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1.  Clark, G., 2014. The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History of
    Social Mobility. Princeton University Press.
    [↩](1 "return to article")
2.  Intergenerational income mobility in Sweden compared to the United
    States. A. Björklund and M. Jäntti.  
    The American Economic Review (1997):1009–1018.
    [↩](2 "return to article")
3.  Clark, G., 2007. A Farewell to Alms. Princeton: Princeton University
    Press. [↩](3 "return to article")

