+++
title = "Reinterpreting the"
full_title = "Reinterpreting the Sigālovāda’s prohibition on theatre"
date = "2021-10-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/10/10/reinterpreting-the-sigalovadas-prohibition-on-theatre/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/10/10/reinterpreting-the-sigalovadas-prohibition-on-theatre/).

Reinterpreting the Sigālovāda’s prohibition on theatre

I was delighted to see [Justin
Whitaker](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/) responding to
[my post on the Sigālovāda
Sutta](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/08/the-sigalovadas-vicious-mean)
–both in a
[comment](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/08/the-sigalovadas-vicious-mean/#comment-41409)
and in a [separate post of his
own](https://www.buddhistdoor.net/features/sitting-with-sigala-a-modern-laypersonrsquos-buddhist-ethics).
Justin and I first found each other long ago over our shared interest in
Pali Buddhist ethics, and he was one of my [more frequent
interlocutors](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/tag/justin-whitaker/) in
the early days of Love of All Wisdom, so it’s great to see him back
around. I recall Justin citing the Sigālovāda favourably several times
in earlier conversations, so perhaps it’s not surprising that my
broadside against it is what brought him out of the woodwork!

Justin’s
[post](https://www.buddhistdoor.net/features/sitting-with-sigala-a-modern-laypersonrsquos-buddhist-ethics)
says, “For Lele, the text is problematic precisely because it does not
push the reader to monasticism and a singular focus on ending
suffering.” I think this is a bit misleading as a description of my
position. After all, as I think Justin knows, I’m [*against* a singular
focus on ending
suffering](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).
I don’t necessarily see monasticism as the ideal human life; I’ve now
taken
[two](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/)
major
[steps](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/08/in-which-i-come-out/)
that might make me ineligible for monkhood, and I don’t regret either of
them.

So the problem I see with the Sigālovāda is not that it doesn’t push the
reader to monasticism. Rather, it’s that for people who *aren’t* monks,
the advice it offers is terrible! It portrays a sad and dreary life that
offers precious few advantages *over* monkhood. I think monkhood is a
valuable and wonderful life choice; I admire a life aimed entirely at
the cultivation of virtue, and the perspective that those who pursue it
can bring to those who don’t. But If we’re *not* going to be monks, I
submit, then we *should* be out going to the theatre, singing, dancing
–and waking up well after sunrise as a consequence of having done these
things the night before. If we don’t trust worldly pleasures, we should
be monks; but if we *do* trust those pleasures, then by all means we
should *embrace* them.

Justin adds in his
[comment](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/08/the-sigalovadas-vicious-mean/#comment-41409),

> For a person like Sigala, and surely many of us today, progress could
> be best accomplished by reducing (or foregoing) certain of life’s
> little pleasures. Perhaps no longer “frequenting theatrical
> performances” could mean going a bit less often, using the new free
> time to study or practice or help friends. Seeing the benefit of those
> over the theatre, perhaps Sigala would give it up altogether in much
> the same way some of us today give up certain social media platforms
> or their television sets.

I could read this interpretation of Justin’s in two ways. One, we
gradually come to see that worldly pleasures are less valuable than
activities that cultivate virtue, such as studying, practising, helping
friends. We start to engage in worldly pleasures less, as a sort of
training wheels to not engaging in them at all. The latter is the real
goal – at which point, again, we might as well be monks! If we really
want to give up those things that are not studying, practising and
helping, then we’ll want to take up the vocation that allows us to
engage in these latter activities full-time.

Alternately, the interpretation could be saying that the real point of
the Sigālovāda’s discouragements is just to encourage us to *moderate*
our involvement in worldly pleasures, taming our desires for them and
doing them a little bit less in favour of other pursuits of
self-cultivation. On this second approach, our moderation *might* lead
us to give a few of those pleasures up altogether, but it wouldn’t
necessarily lead us there, and it’s totally fine if it doesn’t.

I could see taking an approach like this second one as a
reinterpretation of the Sigālovāda to make it fit with our other
commitments – as we might [reinterpret karma without the
supernatural](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/).
But it is a *re*interpretation, for it’s not what the Sigālovāda
actually *says*. The sutta says that the noble disciple just *does not
pursue* “frequenting theatrical shows”, period – along with drinking or
“sauntering in streets at unseemly hours” (both pastimes I rather
enjoy). Moderation isn’t the issue; you’re not supposed to do these
things *at all*. So the text in its own terms seems to require the first
interpretation – in which case, again, you might as well be a monk.

Now I don’t mean to *disparage* that reinterpretation. For I think [we
Buddhists *need*
reinterpretations](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/11/bultmann-for-buddhists/)
of problematic passages in our scriptures. When we see passages that
encourage the subordination of women or queer people, or that say the
sun and the moon revolve around Mount Meru, we should not take them
literally, but we also don’t want to simply throw them out. Thus I noted
that the vinaya passages subordinating women and prohibiting queer
people were there to maintain the social reputation of the saṅgha, and
that in the modern era [that goal would be better served through
equality and
inclusion](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/09/on-traditional-wisdom-and-qualitative-individualism/).

My point, though, is that the Sigālovāda *is* one of those problematic
pieces that requires reinterpretation. (From our perspective, we should
consider it entirely [*neyyattha*, not
*nītattha*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhist_hermeneutics)!) It’s
worth trying to revise its message in a modern way, just as we would
with passages about the cosmology about Mount Meru. The issue is that as
it stands, *without* reinterpretation, the sutta is bad advice to
follow. And so we shouldn’t make it the centrepiece of Buddhist lay
ethics.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/10/reinterpreting-the-sigalovadas-prohibition-on-theatre)
