+++
title = "Permissions for"
full_title = "Permissions for Prabhākara"
date = "2021-10-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/10/12/permissions-for-prabhakara/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/10/12/permissions-for-prabhakara/).

Permissions for Prabhākara

Is it possible to command someone who is already inclined to act
according to Prabhākara?

Bṛhatī ad 6.1.1 says *na pravṛttapravartane prayogaḥ āmantraṇādiṣu
vyabhicārāt*, literally: “\[Exhortative endings\] are not used to
promote people who are already active, because of the deviant case
(vyabhicāra) of invitations”.

In fact, Prabhākara appears to believe that commands are always imparted
on someone who is not yet active and who becomes active upon hearing
them. The addressee of a command desires something already and
recognises themselves as the addressee through such desires (see Freschi
2012), but they are not active until they become enjoined.

Now, if Prabhākara means that active people are never promoted to act,
why are āmantraṇas a good example? Orders (ājñā) are not used as a
standard example because their being a clear case of promoting someone
not already active had been attacked by the opponent in the previous
line.

As for āmantraṇa, the situation with āmantraṇa is ambiguous, but
Śālikanātha takes it as connected to a command uttered among peers
(thus, it is not a clear case of a command uttered for people who are
not already active). Moreover, what is the role of the vyabhicāra
argument? How can a vyabhicāra argument be used to convince someone that
something is \*always\* the case? A vyabhicāra can be used to show that
it is incorrect to claim that “All As are B”, since there is at least
one A that is not a B, but it can’t be used to corroborate “All As are
B” by showing a further case of an A that is indeed B. In other words,
why speaking of “vyabhicāra” and not of “yathāmantraṇeṣu” or the like?
The only possible explanation seems to be to think of āmantraṇādiṣu
vyabhicārāt as “because the case of invitations, etc., deviates from the
\[opponent’s\] claim”. 

Still, if it is impossible to command someone who is already inclined to
act, how can Prabhākara make sense of permissions? When we are already
about to light a cigarette and look around and ask whether it is OK and
someone tells us “No problem, go ahead!”, isn’t the “go ahead” a command
directed to someone who is already active? Could Prabhākara perhaps say
that a command cannot enjoin someone who is already active because it
would miss the apūrva element?
