+++
title = "LowHanging Fruit"
full_title = "LowHanging Fruit Nyekulturny"
date = "2015-01-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/01/08/low-hanging-fruit-nyekulturny/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/01/08/low-hanging-fruit-nyekulturny/).

Low-Hanging Fruit: Nyekulturny

A fundamentally new antibiotic, teixobactin, has been discovered, that
may be useful against MRSA and other Gram-positive bacteria. It works
in mice. A good thing, since antibiotic resistance is increasing
common, while pharmaceutical companies don’t have much interest in
developing antibiotics, since they are curative.

The methodology is what’s really interesting. Kim Lewis and Slava
Epstein sorted individual soil bacteria into chambers of a device they
call the iChip, which is then buried in the ground – the point being
that something like 98% of soil bacteria cannot be cultured in standard
media, while in this approach, key compounds (whatever they are) can
diffuse in from the soil, allowing something like 50% of soil bacteria
species to grow. They then tested the bacterial colonies (10,000 of
them) to see if any slammed *S. aureus –* and some did.

I get the impression that many people believe that these bacteria cannot
be cultured – the word “unculturable” is often used. Actually, although
they have not been grown in the lab, that hardly means it is impossible
to do so: it’s just that that no one has figured out how.
Microbiologists, over the years, have figured out the special dietary
requirements of many organisms. With honorable exceptions like Lewis’s
work, advances in this area seem to have slowed down.

I could be wrong, but I wonder if part of the explanation is that
microbiology – the subject – is in relative decline, suffering because
of funding and status competition with molecular biology and genomics
(sexier and less useful than microbiology) . That and the fact that big
pharma is not enthusiastic about biological products.

