+++
title = "Bad War"
full_title = "Bad War"
date = "2015-01-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/01/06/bad-war/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/01/06/bad-war/).

Bad War

[![Bad
war](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/bad-war.jpg?w=640&h=492)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/bad-war.jpg)

The idea that soldiers are loathe to kill in battle – that they shot to
miss in the Civil War, that only 15% of Americans riflemen in WWII ever
used their weapons, etc – reminds me of the young lady (a graduate
student in anthropology) who suggested that male dogs do in fact help
take care of puppies, but nobody had ever noticed this over the past few
thousand years.

If it had actually existed, low fire ratio would have been ***the***
tactical issue.

Imagine that the vast majority of soldiers just couldn’t bring
themselves to kill. Every low-level commander – every sergeant, every
lieutenant, every centurion – would have noticed this, and they wouldn’t
have liked it. I have to think that experienced commanders would have
noticed it as well. They would have complained about it, and raising
that 15% figure would have been the key objective of military training.
Do you think that Hannibal, or Frederick the Great, or Napoleon would
have put up with empathy in the ranks? I don’t think so. Do you think
Marine commanders at Guadalcanal would have shrugged aside a 15% fire
ratio, on the grounds that jarheads are just that way? Would commanders
have managed to censor every account of close combat in a way that
seamlessly removed all mention of this crucial problem? I’ve read
plenty of personal accounts of war – somehow all leave out the bit about
the majority of soldiers refusing to kill. They mention different
feelings – for
[example](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1629142034/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1629142034&linkCode=as2&tag=the10000yeaex-20):

“I turned to see a Jap racing across in front of the bunker, a sword
flourished above his head. He was going like Jesse Owens, screaming his
head off, right across my front; I just had sense enough to take a split
second, traversing my aim before I fired; he gave a convulsive leap, and
I felt that jolt of delight – I’d hit the bastard! – and as he fell on
all fours the Highland officer with whom I’d played football dived on
him from behind, slashing at his head with a kukri.”

Sure, they were both Scotsmen, but I think this is not far from the
military norm.

The illustration of pike mercenaries is by Holbein. You might enjoy
[reading](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0850453348/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0850453348&linkCode=as2&tag=the10000yeaex-20)
about the battle of [St. Jacob an der
Birs](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_St._Jakob_an_der_Birs),
where 1500 Swiss pikemen saw 20,000 French troops across the river. They
charged, which was their way of expressing the natural human
disinclination to kill in battle.



