+++
title = "Buddhaghosa on seeing"
full_title = "Buddhaghosa on seeing things as they are (1)"
date = "2018-04-15"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/15/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/15/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1/).

Buddhaghosa on seeing things as they are (1)

[Earlier this
year](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/01/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/)
I examined the classic Pali Milindapañhā dialogue and its claim that
while one can speak of oneself as a “convention” (*vohāra*), ultimately
(*paramattha*) a person is not found. I referred in passing to the
[Visuddhimagga](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visuddhimagga) (Path of
Purification), the most famous work of the great Theravāda philosopher
[Buddhaghosa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhagho%E1%B9%A3a), as
following this understanding. And I noted that on this view a person, or
a chariot, can most accurately be described in reductionist terms, as
atomized parts; the ultimate reality lies beyond that convention.

Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad [took
issue](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/#comment-206692)
with this description in a comment, referring me to Maria Heim’s
forthcoming book [The Voice of the
Buddha](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/voice-of-the-buddha-9780190906658?cc=us&lang=en&)
– and to an article he wrote with Heim in *Philosophy East and West*
entitled “In a double way”. Neither of these has been officially
published yet, but I could find a preprint version of “In a double way”
on PEW’s site for “early release”.

The article claims that Buddhaghosa uses *abhidhamma* categories, such
as the five aggregates (*khandha*), not as “as a reductive ontological
division of the human being” but rather as “the contemplative
structuring of that human’s phenomenology.” (1)^([1](#fn1)) That is to
say that according to Heim and Ram-Prasad, Buddhaghosa is not trying to
talk about what exists or what human beings and other entities really
are, just about the kinds of experiences human beings have, and
especially those found in meditation. The article comes to this
conclusion through a welcome close reading of the Visuddhimagga,
something which, the authors note accurately and unfortunately, “has
rarely been attempted in competing views of him…” They add: “It would be
a welcome development in the study of Buddhaghosa if other scholars were
to offer further or contrasting interpretations – e.g., as that he
engaged in constructing a metaphysical dualism – based on such textual
analysis rather than on an a priori commitment to a picture of
*abhidhamma* and its interpreters.”

To this I reply: challenge accepted. I’m not necessarily going to defend
a *dualist* picture of Buddhaghosa *per se*; I think Heim and Ram-Prasad
are right to note that *nāma* and *rūpa*, “name and form”, are at least
interconnected. But I will defend the point that Buddhaghosa’s
understanding of *sammuti* and *paramattha* is indeed ontological and
not merely phenomenological – that is, it concerns how things *actually
are*, and not merely how they appear, in meditation or otherwise. And I
will do that through a close reading of the same passages that Heim and
Ram-Prasad themselves quote from the Visuddhimagga – noting some key
points that they miss.

The resulting discussion must therefore get technical, including a few
points of Pali grammar and the like. That will make it somewhat rough
going for nonspecialists, but my hope is that it will still remain
intelligible to such an audience. The ultimate point I am trying to make
in all of it parallels [the article I wrote for JBE a few years
ago](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/):
for Buddhaghosa as for Śāntideva, *metaphysics matters*. The way we
should act and live has something to do with the way reality is. I’m
going to address that point in three different posts, each addressing a
part of Heim and Ram-Prasad’s article. First, here, I will talk about
Buddhaghosa’s reductionism – his claim that there is no person but only
the aggregates that make the person up – and how that is not merely a
matter of phenomenological inner experience. Second, next time, I will
look at Buddhaghosa’s criticism of the *diṭṭhigata*, those who “resort
to views”, and argue that (contrary to Heim and Ram-Prasad) he is not
criticizing the very idea of having a metaphysical point of view. Third,
finally, I will talk about the distinction between conventional and
ultimate, which had provoked Ram-Prasad’s original comment.

So now to the substance. Heim and Ram-Prasad claim that Buddhaghosa is
“not so much concerned with what one knows (an epistemological state
determined by propositional content) but instead with how one knows (a
transformation in knowing the world).” (15) I think they are right that
how one knows is the most important thing for Buddhaghosa. But then how
exactly is one supposed to know? What separates good, right or
appropriate knowing from bad, wrong or inappropriate knowing? What
knowing transforms to what other knowing?

Let us take a closer look. At Visuddhimagga XVIII.28, Buddhaghosa makes
the same [chariot
analogy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/01/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/)
that the Milindapañhā makes (though without the latter’s snappy
dialogue). In Heim and Ram-Prasad’s own rendering, we see that “there
comes to be the mere common usage of ‘chariot’ (*ratho ti vohāramattaṃ
hoti*) from its parts but that an ‘examination’ (*upaparikkhā*) shows
that ultimately there is no chariot.” Buddhaghosa, unlike the
Milindapañhā, also offers several other examples of composite entities
(“just as when the fingers, thumb, etc., are placed in a certain way,
there comes to be the mere term of common usage ‘fist'”) and then gets
to the person:

> Likewise, when there are the five aggregates of clinging, then there
> comes to be the mere common usage of ‘a being’, ‘person’; but in the
> further sense, when each dhamma is examined, there is no being that is
> the foundation for assuming ‘I am’ or ‘I’. In the further sense, there
> is only name-form. The vision of one who sees thus is called ‘seeing
> correctly.’

Heim and Ram-Prasad, startlingly to me, seem to think that this passage
is “clearly” all about phenomenology, about inner experience:

> Clearly, the “examination” here is reflexive, because it is of the
> “aggregates of clinging.” “Clinging” is a phenomenological fact, this
> is what is experienced. And seeing correctly is to see through the
> experience of clinging to how the sense of being a substantial person
> occurs because of clinging to the aggregates. (HRP 15-16)

But we have just been through a similar examination of chariots, fists,
and more, which are *not* similarly put in terms of the aggregates of
clinging (*upādānakkhandha*). Seeing *these* correctly (*yathābhūta*) is
not reflexive: it is not the chariot that experiences the chariot or the
fist that experiences the fist! But the chariot and the fist are the
analogies being offered here. It seems to me that those analogies
suggest an examination that is not especially reflexive in this sense:
just as one breaks down the chariot or the fist into their parts, so one
breaks down the person (*puggala*) into *its* parts, which are the
aggregates of clinging. For that reason it is not only the person doing
the breaking who can and should thus be broke down, but any person. It’s
not just *yourself* that you can analyze into the five aggregates, but
*me*, and Buddhaghosa and Taylor Swift and anybody else.

And so, I submit, for Buddhaghosa the reduction into the aggregates is
not merely a meditation experienced within one’s own consciousness, but
an accurate description of how things are. One reduces not merely one’s
own mind and body, but all other minds and bodies, and indeed all the
rocks and trees and birdies, to the five aggregates or to name-and-form.
I think the passage just quoted lends itself well to this
interpretation, but it will be lent further support by my next two
discussions.

^(1. Page references are to the preprint version, currently available from the Philosophy East and West website with an institutional subscription. Presumably when the official article is published, the page numbers will change but the text will remain mostly the same.[↩](#ref1 "Jump back to footnote 1 in the text."))

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1)
