+++
title = "Insults, Slurs, and"
full_title = "Insults, Slurs, and Other Pejorative Speech"
date = "2018-04-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/29/insults-slurs-and-other-pejorative-speech/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/29/insults-slurs-and-other-pejorative-speech/).

Insults, Slurs, and Other Pejorative Speech

Anyone who is familiar with premodern Indian philosophy written in
Sanskrit knows that philosophers were not above using insults in their
work. J.M. Verpoorten (2002) [has a paper collecting these
insults](https://orbi.uliege.be/bitstream/2268/186660/1/Verpoorten_2002-tournures-pejoratives.pdf),
which include *akṛta-buddhi* (having an unformed mind), *paśu* (animal,
brute, beast), as well as lots of synonyms for stupid or foolish
(*jāḍya* etc). And one of the common examples used for secondary
meaning, what we might call “metaphor,” is *gaur vāhīkaḥ*, or “The
Punjabi is an ox,” which is a slur based on the stereotype that Punjabis
are dull (*jāḍya*) and lazy (*māndya*). To my knowledge, no one
discussing this example takes time to reflect on the ethical status of
such slurs, nor do Sanskrit philosophers reflect on the insults they
use, understood as a special linguistic category.

Yet the ethical implications of speech in general were at the same time
a theme in Sanskritic reflection on language. Buddhist philosophers are
famous for their having a notion of “right speech,” and Jaina
philosophers emphasize speaking truthfully, perhaps even to the
exclusion of using non-literal language (Flügel 2010). Naiyāyikas argue
that in a debate, being too much of a stickler for the literal meaning,
and ignoring how people actually use language, amounts to causistry. And
of course, in Alaṁkāra, there is much discussion over norms in poetic
speech, for instance, what is inappropriate in virtue of being too
obviously sexual and thus crude.

What I have not seen in Indian philosophy, however, is the thematization
of insults and slurs as a special category of speech meriting its own
investigation, like in contemporary analytic philosophy. The IEP has an
entry for [Pejorative Language](http://www.iep.utm.edu/pejorati/) (and
the SEP will soon have one on slurs, I believe) which gives a sense as
to why contemporary philosophers take pejoratives to merit special
treatment as a linguistic phenomenon.

Whenever such differences appear in initial reading, though, I want to
first reflect on whether the apparent difference is due to my own
ignorance of the literature. Then, if there truly is a difference, I am
curious as to what accounts for the way in which philosophical problems
are identified as problems. Here, for instance, is the idea of slurs as
distinct from insults something unknown in the premodern Indian context?
The English term “slur” is used as a verb and a noun early (17th
century) in the sense of insult, but not necessarily in the specialized
sense of conveying disparagement about a group. So, we might ask, when
does the idea of slur as it is being investigated in contemporary
philosophy arise in the English-speaking world? Likewise, what would
investigation of the verbs *kalaṁkayati* and *malinayati* show in the
Sanskrit context? Were there expressions that were “taboo” in Sanskrit
for analogous reasons as “the N-word” in modern English?
