+++
title = "An interview with Prabal"
full_title = "An interview with Prabal Kumar Sen"
date = "2018-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/06/an-interview-with-prabal-kumar-sen/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/06/an-interview-with-prabal-kumar-sen/).

An interview with Prabal Kumar Sen

This interview, part of an [occasional
series](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/category/interview/), was
conducted by email with Prof. Prabal Kumar Sen, whom I had the pleasure
of meeting at a [conference in
Kolkata](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/26/international-seminar-at-the-ramakrishna-mission-institute-kolkata/)
this January, 2018. Prof. Sen is a well-known scholar of especially, but
not only, Nyāya philosophy. He studied under such luminaries as B.K.
Matilal and Gopinath Bhattacharya, and has done significant work in
editing and publishing previously unavailable Sanskrit manuscripts.
Currently he is Honorary Research Professor at the [Center for
Indological Studies and
Research](http://sriramakrishna.org/centre-for-indological-studies-and-research)
at the Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, Gol Park, Kolkata. In
the interview below, in addition to describing the numerous projects
he’s involved in, he lays out his view of the academic training which
aspiring students of Indian philosophy ought to pursue, along with some
of his own views about philosophical matters.

**1. What are you working on right now, and what do you hope to achieve
by it?**  
(a) I have recently prepared an edition of *Siddhāntabindu* by
Madhusudana Sarasvatī (which is a commentary on *Daśaślokī* of
Śaṅkarācarya) along with English translation and elucidation. There is
considerable difference in the readings of *Siddhāntabindu* in earlier
editions, and I have tried to prepare a satisfactory edition by
comparing all these earlier editions. Some of the earlier editions
contain English translation, but that is not always sufficient for
understanding these abstruse works. I hope the elucidation provided by
me (which is based on four available Sanskrit commentaries) will be of
some help to the readers who do not know Sanskrit. (This work is likely
to be published by Indian Council of Philosophical Research in
collaboration with Motilal Banarasidas.)

I am currently busy with completing two other projects :

\(b\) The first one is the preparation of the second (and last) volume
of the English translation and elucidation of [*Vedāntaparibhāṣa* of
Dharmarāja
Advarīndra](https://books.google.com.sg/books/about/Ved%C4%81ntaparibh%C4%81%E1%B9%A3a_of_Dharmar%C4%81ja_Adhv.html?id=TJmIoAEACAAJ&redir_esc=y).
This is in continuation of a joint work. It was started by Professor
Gopinath Bhattacharya, one of my esteemed teachers, who had completed
the translation and the elucidation of some initial sections of this
text. Unfortunately, he expired without finishing his work. Many years
after his demise, his daughters requested of me to complete this work
and the first volume of this work (which contains the first fifty-one
sections of this text along with translation and elucidation) which was
published in 2013. My work on *Vedāntaparibhāṣa* was interrupted by my
work on *Siddhāntabindu* and also an injury to one of my eyes, and I
have now resumed this unfinished work.

\(c\) The second project that I have to complete is the preparation of
the edition of a section of *Nyāyamañjarī* by Jayanta Bhaṭṭa along with
Bengali translation and elucidation. This section deals with (i) the
various doctrines about the veridicality of cognitions and (ii) the
various doctrines about Illusory experiences ( which are known
respectively as *prāmānyavāda*-s and *khyātivāda*-s ).

Here, too, my aim is to make the contents of these important works
accessible to those readers who do not know Sanskrit. Till 1965,
Sanskrit was taught in many schools in West Bengal as a compulsory
subject, and the students had to study it for at least five years, which
made them capable of reading books written in simple Sanskrit.
Thereafter, the situation changed, and most of the students these days
do not have any knowledge of Sanskrit; which makes them incapable of
going through Sanskrit text, and my recent work is primarily meant for
them.

**2. How did you come to study Indian philosophy, and how is it related
to your current position?**  
While I was in school (1948-1959), I had to learn Sanskrit, the beauty
and rigor of which has always appealed to me. During my undergraduate
studies also, I had studied Sanskrit literature under the tutelage of
many eminent scholars (one of them being the late Professor B.K.
Matilal). While I was in the MA class, I had chosen Vedānta as my area
of specialisation, since my acquaintance with Sanskrit was of much help
to me. Subsequently, it became evident to me that unless I had good
grounding in Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika and Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā, I would not be able to
go through the advanced texts of Advaita Vedānta. Accordingly, I started
taking lessons in these systems from erudite and renowned traditional
scholar (*paṇḍit-*s) at the Oriental section of the Government Sanskrit
College at Calcutta. When I started teaching at the Department of
Philosophy, University of Calcutta; I was assigned many classes for
teaching Indian Philosophy. At about the same time, I found in the
residence of one of my relatives some old and rare manuscripts of
unpublished Navya-Nyāya works (the oldest of them being dated 1540
Śakabda, i.e. 1620 C.E). As per the advice of my teachers, I decided to
edit as many of these manuscripts as possible, and to try to get them
published. Thereafter, four of such works (viz.
[*Nyāyarahasya*](https://books.google.com.sg/books?id=GWjuAAAAIAAJ),
[*Ākhyātavādavyākhyā*](http://www.worldcat.org/title/akhyatavada-of-raghunatha-siromani-with-akhyatavadavyakhya-of-ramabhadra-sarvabhauma/oclc/10230730)
and *Mokṣavāda* by Rāmabhadra Sarvabhauma and *Anvīkṣikitattvavivāraṇa*
by Janakinatha Cudamāṇi) have been edited by me, and they have also been
published. I have also translated into Bengali a section of
*Nyāyamañjarī* that deals with the different theories about the meaning
of sentences in general, and the meaning of imperative sentences
(*vidhivākya*-s). The time-consuming work of deciphering these old
manuscripts, comparing them with other manuscripts in different
manuscript libraries, tracing the quotations to their sources etc. did
not leave much scope on my part for studying the recent trends of
Western Philosophy, even though I am not averse to it in any way.

I do not know for sure whether I can satisfactorily answer the second
part of your second question. As you must have noted, most of my work
till date has been entirely textual; and in such work, the personal
views of the person undertaking such work do not play any significant
role. Besides, I am not gifted enough to be a philosopher—after all, a
teacher of literature is not always a litterateur! I consider myself
more as a historian of ideas, who is primarily interested in tracing the
gradual development of various rival and yet contemporary philosophical
schools by way of mutual criticism. While undertaking such work, one
should be as impartial as possible; even though I must confess that my
early exposure to systems like Nyāya, Vaiśeṣika and Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā, and
also to the writings of philosophers like Bertrand Russell and G. E.
Moore has instilled in me a taste for Realism and Pluralism. I sincerely
believe that in principle, all things can be known, conceptualised and
described in a proper manner, even though our cognitive apparatus and
language may sometimes fail due to some sort of malfunction. In other
words agnosticism, scepticism and relativism of an extreme sort do not
appeal to me; even though I paradoxically enjoy reading the works of
Buddhists and Advaita Vedāntins, one of whose claims is that the
ultimate reality is beyond conceptualisation and verbalisation.

**3. What advice would you give to students wishing to pursue the study
of Indian philosophy?**  
Those who wish to pursue the study of Indian Philosophy may initially go
through the histories of Indian Philosophy by scholars like [S. N.
Dasgupta](https://books.google.com.sg/books/about/A_History_of_Indian_Philosophy.html?id=PoaMFmS1_lEC&redir_esc=y)
and others. The editorial introductions to the different volumes of
*[Encyclopaedia of Indian
Philosophies](https://www.mlbd.com/showbook.aspx?cat=155&id=523)* edited
by Karl H. Potter and his associates are also extremely useful. They may
also go through the summaries of the different texts that may be found
in these volumes. So far as I remember, a publisher by the name of Otto
Harrassowitz has published several short volumes that deal with the
history and bibliography of the schools of Indian Philosophy (for
example, the [volume on
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika](https://books.google.com.sg/books?id=JyJ--9uUtx0C) was
written by B. K. Matilal).

Knowledge of Sanskrit is a desideratum, since very few original works of
Indian Philosophy have been translated, and quite a few of such
translations (e.g. those by Ganganatha Jha) are in a language that has
now become archaic. In some cases (e.g. Buddhism and Jainism) the
knowledge of other languages (e.g. Pāli in the case of early Buddhism;
Hybrid Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese in the case of Mahāyāna Buddhism;
and Prakrit in the case of Jainism) would be necessary. A good exposure
to Western Philosophy can be helpful; and in some cases, grounding in
subjects like Mathematics or Linguistics can also be useful (e.g.
Jonardan Ganeri studied Mathematics, while Brendan Gillon was a student
of Linguistics; and their knowledge of these subjects has helped them in
shedding new light on many problems of Indian Philosophy).

**4. What have your major intellectual influences been, philosophical or
otherwise?** I do not know whether I have significantly influenced any
one whatsoever. Most of the bright students of my MA class had chosen
Modern Logic as their area of specialisation, and subsequently, had
worked on some problems of Modern Western Philosophy like Epistemology,
Philosophy of Language, Philosophical Logic, Applied Ethics and so on.
Some among them (e.g. Amita Chatterjee, Arindam Chakraborty and
Madhumita Chatterjee) have done also some good work in Indian
Philosophy; but none of these works has been done under my supervision,
all though at times, I was consulted on some issues. Two other students
of mine (Kuntala Bhattacharya and Soma Chakraborty) have also done some
good work, though their doctoral dissertations are yet to be printed.

In case you wanted to know by whom I have been influenced most, I have
to say that in my case, the maximum amount of influence has been
exercised by my teachers at the Oriental Section of Government Sanskrit
College, Calcutta; who taught me a number of abstruse Sanskrit texts
line by line; and one could not but admire the intellectual honestly,
seriousness and thoroughness with which they discharged their duties.
They have shown to me time and again how each system of Indian
Philosophy is based on some basic prephilosophical intuitions; and also
that once these basic views are admitted, the other doctrines of that
system logically follow from them, just as geometrical theorems
logically follow from axioms and postulates. They have also repeatedly
pointed out to me that most of these systems also have some basic and
yet vulnerable doctrines, and that once such doctrines are rejected, the
system concern breaks down like a house of cards. \[In the case of Nyāya
and Vaiśeṣika systems, one such doctrines is the admission of inherence
(*samavāya*); which has been the prime target of attack by almost all
the other systems\].

**5. What do you think you’ll do next?**  
If my health permits, then I may once again undertake some project where
either small texts, or some important section of a bigger work would be
translated with elucidation. I have already devoted a lot of time on
texts of Nyāya and Advaita Vedanta, and this time, I would prefer to
choose some text of some other system. And alternative may be to write a
small monograph on some selected problem.

**6. Where do you think the field should go next, in terms of priorities
and projects?**  
In the field of Indian Philosophy, a lot of work remains to be done at
the ground level itself, because a huge number of texts are still in the
form of manuscripts that need to be edited, published and translated.
\[In this respect Ancient and Medieval European Philosophy is in much
better position–consider, for example the amount of work that has been
done even in the field of Pre-Socratic Greek Philosophy. The first
volume of *A History of Greek Philosophy* by W. K. C. Guthrie that was
published from Cambridge University Press, and which covers a period
from Thales to Heraclitus has more than 600 pages, and its Bibliography
contains more than 900 entries in different languages.\] An enterprising
scholar may either choose to work in this area, or take up the task of
annotated translation, or work on specific problems, concentrating
either on the view of one particular school, or on a comparative
account, where the views of more than one schools can be discussed.
\[For example, one may take up the problem of Substance (*dravya*), or
Universal (*sāmānya*) or Relation (s*aṃbandha*)\]. Some works, that are
in the form of anthologies, may also be undertaken by a team of scholars
where the different chapters would be prepared by different authors
under the editorship of some competent scholar.

People interested in Indian Philosophy should note that time is running
out, because fewer and fewer people are learning Sanskrit and associated
languages, and the number of competent traditional scholars who can give
necessary and useful advice is also dwindling at an alarming rate.

**7. Finally, a question originally asked on the 3AM Interview Series:
What books do you recommend to help our readers be taken further into
your philosophical world?**  
As I have already mentioned earlier, most of my work happens to be
textual, where I have tried either to present in a published form, or to
make intelligible the views of some other person(s). Such being the
case, which book could I possibly recommend to some reader for being
“taken further into my philosophical world”?
