+++
title = "The Indian Ministry of"
full_title = "The Indian Ministry of Culture Vivekananda Chair"
date = "2018-04-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/23/the-indian-ministry-of-culture-vivekananda-chair/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/23/the-indian-ministry-of-culture-vivekananda-chair/).

The Indian Ministry of Culture Vivekananda Chair

Announcement from the University of Chicago, submitted by Kate Moore:

The University of Chicago invites applications for “The Indian Ministry
of Culture Vivekananda Chair,” a visiting professorship that allows the
University to welcome a senior scholar of significant academic
distinction in a field of study promoted by Swami Vivekananda. The
holder of this distinguished Chair will remain in residence for one
quarter of the academic year to teach, conduct research, and engage with
the intellectual community of the University.

The Chair is made possible by a generous grant from the Ministry of
Culture, Government of India, and is intended to honor the life and
legacy of Swami Vivekananda by promoting the fields of study most
relevant to his teachings and philosophies, such as human values, Indian
philosophy, and movements for social change. The Chair is also intended
to further the study of Indian culture in the United States; to advance
the understanding of the history, culture and people of India; to create
more knowledge about Indian society; and to instruct new generations of
students.

The Committee on Southern Asian Studies at the University of Chicago
welcomes suggestions of candidates whose research work falls into one or
more of the fields of study most relevant to the teachings and legacy of
Swami Vivekananda (human values, social change, and Indian philosophy),
and who possess demonstrated records of scholarly excellence and
pedagogical accomplishment. Each incumbent will ideally hold the
position for a period of two years, returning each year for one quarter.
In addition to the expected academic activities on campus, the holder
will give each year a public presentation on a topic that exemplifies,
honors, and promotes the legacy of Swami Vivekananda.

Support for the position includes salary, travel costs, local
accommodation, and coverage of expenses connected with the annual
presentation.

To nominate an interested or proposed candidate, please send a letter
giving the nominee’s name and field of study and explaining the
nominee’s scholarly eminence.

To directly apply for the position, please send a cover letter
explaining the field of study and interest, together with a CV.

Nominations or applications should be sent by email to The University of
Chicago Indian Ministry of Culture Vivekananda Chair Search Committee at
the following address:

vivekananda@uchicago.edu

Submissions should, wherever possible, be in the form of a single PDF
document and should be received by Friday, May 18, 2018.

The University of Chicago is an Affirmative Action/Equal
Opportunity/Disabled/Veterans Employer and does not discriminate on the
basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, national or ethnic origin, age, status as an individual with a
disability, protected veteran status, genetic information, or other
protected classes under the law. For additional information please see
the University’s Notice of Nondiscrimination at
http://www.uchicago.edu/about/non_discrimination_statement/.

Link with announcement also
[here](https://global.uchicago.edu/page/indian-ministry-culture-vivekananda-chair).
