+++
title = "What about the other"
full_title = "What about the other three puruṣārthas?"
date = "2018-04-11"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/11/what-about-the-other-three-puru%e1%b9%a3arthas/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/04/11/what-about-the-other-three-puru%e1%b9%a3arthas/).

What about the other three puruṣārthas?

Friends, I am looking for your thoughts on the following question.

I teach a course on Indian philosophy as part of my own course rotation,
and as a rule, I frame most of the major subdivisions of the course
according to major philosophical categories: epistemology, metaphysics,
ethics. Under the ethics heading, I tend to focus on yogic ways of life,
mindfulness, and the ways that contemplative practices speak to the good
life (part of the reason for this focus is that many students are
interested in the course because of some background connection to yoga).
But I start by talking about the 4 goals of life, and thinking about how
each of them speak to the question of ethics.

So, we all know the old saw about Indian philosophy proper being more
focused on M&E and language than ethics. Has anyone found work on, say,
thedharma-śāstras that is philosophical and can be easily incorporated
into the undergraduate philosophy classroom? Or artha orkāma? Or
*sacrifice*? I find that when I discuss them, I am doing a lot of
talking and framing, and proposing discussion ideas, but I am not tying
them to readings the way I do for the other topics in the course.

Any suggestions on how we can avoid ignoring the other aspects of Indian
ethics in the undergraduate classroom?

(Associated reading: Joel Kupperman [has persuasively
argued](https://philpapers.org/rec/KUPNR) that part of Confucius’
contribution to world philosophy is to show that personal style is not
divorced from ethics. Maybe we need to think more broadly as we reflect
on ethics in India).
