+++
title = "Not the Flu"
full_title = "Not the Flu"
date = "2020-02-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/02/11/not-the-flu/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/02/11/not-the-flu/).

Not the Flu

I’ve seen people compare the new coronavirus to influenza. Some have
said that we should worry more about the flu, since it kills every year
(maybe 10,000 in the US last year). They are mistaken. The danger in
this case is not entirely clear, but on the high end, we’re talking big
trouble, way bigger than current influenza strains.

Current flu strains seem much less severe that this new coronavirus,
much less likely to put you in intensive care or kill you. Fewer people
are susceptible to the flu: we have a vaccine, and most people already
have some degree of immunity from vaccination and past bouts with the
flu.  We have somewhat useful antiviral drugs for the flu.

2019-nCoV: it’s new, nobody is immune. As yet we don’t know of antiviral
drugs that are effective against it, although people are certainly
trying out existing ones. Perhaps we will get lucky. We will be working
on a vaccine, and that is likely to succeed eventually, but that takes
time, on the order of a year or more. Supportive care is helpful:
ventilation and oxygen can give you time to beat the virus.

Even without a vaccine or useful drugs, you can foresee an end to it –
say after most people have already had it. Fires need fuel.

It seems to spread fairly efficiently, comparable to influenza. You
have to think of two regimes of severity: what happens when A. there is
supportive care (hospitals, ventilators, oxygen) and B. when there is
not. If it becomes common enough, regionally, you go from regime A to
regime B (capacity for supportive care is limited) – and since it is
new, since nobody is immune, that might happen. Regime B looks not so
good: in Wuhan, a few percent lethality, mainly among older men.

What’s the death rate in situation A? Hard to say. For that matter,
what’s the true number of people infected? Also hard to say, but there
is reason to think it’s lot higher than the official number, which ( I
think) is limited by the number of testing kits available. That may
mean that the fraction of people infected that get terribly sick is
lower than current reports suggest – but since the majority of all
cases must be very new, maybe they haven’t had time to get that sick
yet. And then, we know that some people in Wuhan are dying without
managing to get into a hospital – and without their deaths being
counted. But is this common enough to materially change the picture?

Even if the authorities in China are telling all they know, they
themselves likely don’t know enough. Might they be lying? Sure. Lying
about the 1918 flu epidemic was routine: that’s why it’s called the
Spanish flu, since Spain was neutral and didn’t censor the newspapers.

The only thing you can be confident of is that the situation is no
\_better\_ than the official line – the current story is against
interest, very bad for business.



\[ disappeared. Odd. some mistake? restored\]

