+++
title = "Bangalore Metro card"
full_title = "Bangalore Metro card renewal con"
date = "2019-09-01"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/09/01/bangalore-metro-card-renewal-con/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/09/01/bangalore-metro-card-renewal-con/).

Bangalore Metro card renewal con

Suppose your Bangalore Metro card does not work. You realize (or rather
are told) that it has expired. You take it to the counter to fix it.

Counter lady asks for 20 Rs. You ask : “why don’t you deduct from the
card?” She says: “Better if you renew with cash.” You say: “Why?”, and
she says: “renewing from card takes some 10 minutes”.

Ok, you pay the lady. The lady cleverly takes the cash, takes the card
over to the customer care booth and with a minute gets them to renew the
card “by deducting money from the card”. She then comes and let’s you in
saying: “See – there are 402 Rs on your card.”

You go in – and only then realize : “I’ve been conned. Wasn’t there 422
Rs in my card?” Darn. You’re already on the train, and your friends are
waiting. What to do? You stew about being fooled so easily and plan your
retaliations (“*nemo me impune lacessit*“) ranging from curses (they
cheat YOU on Gauri Ganapati day?) to making a scene to police
complaints. You confirm the card transactions at the next stop.

Anyway, you then get into the mood, have fun and make the return trip.
Then you go back to the exact same station – the lady’s shift has ended
(as expected), and she is gone. But you complain at the customer care
booth. No surprise on any face – this is a regular scam it seems. Guy
talks to his supervisor on phone; gets mildly alarmed as you note the
name of the cheat lady from the conversation. Repays 20 Rs with the
scripted: “Ah – it was a mistake. Here’s the money.” You take the money
and leave.

But are later convinced to write down the account as a warning to
others.

