+++
title = "Dysgenics – General"
full_title = "Dysgenics – General"
date = "2017-04-21"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/04/21/dysgenics-general/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/04/21/dysgenics-general/).

Dysgenics – General

Genetic trends can decrease IQ, and as long as we want the fruit of
technological civilization, we have to care about that. There are three
main ways in which IQ could decrease:

I. Selection could favor lower IQ within a group. How fast?

II\. Demographic changes- groups with lower IQ could be immigrating, or
differences in birth rates could mean that smarter groups are declining
relative to other groups.

III\. Relaxed selection. It looks as if a lot of the variance in IQ is
due to rare deleterious variants generated by mutation. Over the long
run, selection has eliminated those deleterious mutations as fast as
they were generated (mutation-selection balance). Over the last few
generations, selection has weakened: a smaller fraction of babies are
dying. Even though most of those babies in the past were dying of
disease or starvation, not directly connected to baby IQ, babies in
better genetic shape were more likely to survive. Smarter people seem to
live longer because they’re in better genetic shape – ultimately because
a huge fraction of the genome is expressed in the brain and influences
intelligence. Being smarter means that on average you’re in better
genetic shape, while being in better genetic shape – having lower
genetic load – means that on average you’ll be smarter.

Weaker selection -> increasing genetic load -> lower IQ. But how fast?

All three of these processes must be happening today in the United
States. I and III are probably happening everywhere.

