+++
title = "O Canada!"
full_title = "O Canada!"
date = "2017-04-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/04/18/o-canada/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/04/18/o-canada/).

O Canada!

Imagine a country with an average IQ of 100, some average amount of
education (with some distribution), some average amount of capital per
head (with some distribution of ownership of capital). Now add
immigrants – 10% of the population – that are the same in every way.
Same average IQ, same distribution of IQ, same average amount of capital
and same distribution. They speak the same language. They have similar
political traditions. In other words, it is as if the US had just
peacefully annexed an imaginary country that’s a lot like Canada.

Would the original inhabitants gain economically from this merger?
Strikes me that this could only happen from economies of scale – since
nothing has changed other than a 10% increase in overall size. There
might be some diseconomies of scale as well. I wouldn’t expect a big
payoff. Except for Nawapa, of course.

Contrast this with a situation in which the extra 10% is fairly
different – lower average IQ, much less education on average, don’t
speak English. They don’t bring along a lot of capital. They have and
bring along their native political traditions, like everyone, but theirs
stink. I can easily see how those immigrants might have improved their
economic lot but it’s kindof hard to see how bringing in people with low
human capital benefits the original citizens more than bringing in
people with considerably higher human capital. Yet it must, because
adding more of the same clearly has a small effect, while adding in
lower-skilled must have a big positive effect. Practically all the
economists
[say](http://www.newamericaneconomy.org/feature/an-open-letter-from-1470-economists-on-immigration/)
so.

