+++
title = "Same brain"
full_title = "Same brain"
date = "2017-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/04/16/same-brain/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/04/16/same-brain/).

Same brain

I pointed out that that Daphna Joel’s work was crap – she was trying to
find ways that *can’t* distinguish between male and female brains –
that’s easy but useless. But if you can find one approach, any approach,
that reliably distinguishes male and female brains, then they’re
different. But even then, not necessarily different in ways that anyone
could ever give a shit about. Or if they are, the approach that
distinguishes male from female may not tell you much about the
behavioral differences you’re interested in.

Important differences might not show up in brain scans. For example, we
can’t see schizophrenia in a brain scan, yet schizophrenia is important.
Hearing voices that aren’t there, even when they give useful tips \[
“They’re all against you! They all must die!” \] has social
significance. Sure, there are some differences between crazy and
not-yet-crazy brains \[enlarged ventricles\], but they’re not huge and
(with what we know today) they’re not diagnostic. Yet we have good
reason to believe schizophrenia is caused by differences in the brain –
we just can’t say exactly what they are. Even when we know the
underlying genetic cause – which we do, in a few cases – we generally
don’t know the details of how that genetic flaw changed brain
development and/or activity.

You could have a psychological sex difference as drastic as
schizophrenia and we likely couldn’t identify it from a brain scan. Not
seeing it in a brain scan wouldn’t show that the psychological
difference didn’t exist. Got it?

Narcolepsy, massive daytime sleepiness, is generally caused by loss of
the neurons that secrete the neuropeptide orexin/hypocretin. Only
10,000-20,000 neurons do this, and I sincerely doubt if you could notice
the difference via MRI or CAT scans if they all disappeared.

Inability to see the physical basis via scans is often \[not always\]
the case with various kinds of brain damage or mental illness, but the
neurological basis of behavioral adaptations is also usually
unobservable via such scans. We don’t know how to detect the brain
differences that make a border collie inclined to herd, or that cause
the personality differences between a pit bull and a Labrador retriever.

What does this say to someone trying to show effective sameness of
female and female psychology by showing effective sameness of male and
brains? It can’t be done, with the tools we have. Just as well, since
that conclusion \[no differences\] is almost certainly wrong, since
natural selection routinely creates wired in behavioral differences
between the sexes. It would be surprising if that kind of natural
selection had taken an extended holiday in humans.

