+++
title = "Of “Invisible Threads”,"
full_title = "Of “Invisible Threads”, the veda and the strangest harikatha experience"
date = "2017-01-20"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/20/of-invisible-threads-the-veda-and-the-strangest-harikatha-experience/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/20/of-invisible-threads-the-veda-and-the-strangest-harikatha-experience/).


					Of “Invisible Threads”, the veda and the strangest harikatha experience				



[ January 20, 2017 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/20/of-invisible-threads-the-veda-and-the-strangest-harikatha-experience/ "Permalink to Of “Invisible Threads”, the veda and the strangest harikathaexperience")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/20/of-invisible-threads-the-veda-and-the-strangest-harikatha-experience/#respond)

# Of “Invisible Threads”, the veda and the strangest harikathaexperience

*The author would like to thank
[@Pinaki](https://twitter.com/pinakasena)**for helping with the editing
and improving the structure with his invaluable input to the text.*

Continued
from[Here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/16/gotra%E1%B8%8Dambara-much-noise-about-gotra/):

satyasoma: But underneath the melancholy of it all, there is something
quite strikingly beautiful about the way you put it, no? With 2500
kilometres separating the patrilineal descendant of**somastambha**and
the prospective students of the*jaiminīyabrāhmaṇa*sitting in an
impoverished*pāṭhaśālā*, it is hard not to infer a deep and profound,
yet subtle sense of pan-bhāratiya unity, a unity whose existence has
been denied and our celebration of it, falsely invalidated.

rudradatta: Indeed, I did not mean to end my observation on a sad note.
What I said with respect to the memory of somastambha’s name is just one
of innumerable threads constituting this woven work, the warp and woof
of dharma. Everyone knows about the dvādaśa jyotirliṅga-s for the
śaiva-s, the divyadeśa-s of the śrī vaiṣṇavas or the śaktipīṭha-s of the
śākta-s, covering the whole of bhārata or even what we call,
akhaṇḍabhārata.

satyasoma: Would that not suffice, rudra? Or should I humour you and
allow you to go on, in the unfailing hope that it will lead to something
more than what I expect?

rudradatta: Allow me, soma. Thus, you have the[Balinese brāḥmaṇas
recognizingskandaasrohitakasupriyāya](https://twitter.com/blog_supplement/status/815064789344985088)when
praising him by several epithets in a*stuti*. The association of skanda
with rohitaka (Rohtak, Haryana), I encountered in the*mahābhārata*as
the following verse from the*sabhāparva*states while
describing**nakula**’s conquest in the*vāruṇeya*(western) direction
during the*digvijaya*:

“*tato bahudhanaṃ ramyaṃgavāśvadhanadhānyavat*

*kārtikeyasya dayitaṃ**rohītakam**upādravat*” ([sabhāparva
29.4](http://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/mbs/mbs02029.htm))

*“kārtikeyasya dayitaṃ”,*it is said. Cherished and loved by kārtikeya
is rohītaka.

Apart from this, a similar*nāstika*reference in the
bauddha[mahāmāyūrīvidyārājñī](http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/4_rellit/buddh/mmayuvru.htm),
and inscriptions to the same effect, which lay Hindu would associate
skanda today with Rohtak? He’s hardly remembered there though it is
exceedingly dear to him. Yet, thousands of kilometres away, in a small
island tucked away in Indonesia, this connection is remembered.

Speaking of these “invisible threads” holding together bhārata,
which,[as the āryottama notes, even the
wickedchachaappreciated](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/10/05/a-note-on-some-recent-work-on-india-genetics/),
one has the peerless tradition of the*rāmāyaṇa*, after**vālmiki**,
incarnating among the*dramila*-s as**kamban**’s poetry, among the
Gonds and in Bali, Thailand, and Cambodia. Or the case of mahārāṣṭradeśa
brāhmaṇa-s officiating at coastal rāmeśvara or the rawal who serves
badrinātha at his temple at Uttarakhand hailing from among the
nambūtiri-s.

But, the implications are more than just pan-Hindu unity transcending
boundaries of land and language though it constitutes a significant
part.

satyasoma: What else do these “invisible threads” imply, rudra, apart
from pan-Hindu unity of thought and expression? What else did you see in
these “threads”?

rudradatta: It is what I see beneath them, soma. The śruti stands
underneath this tapestry as an inexhaustible source of traditions and
stories, with every pada (word), vākya (sentence), a set of mantras and
ākhyāna (narrative) in a brāhmaṇa having the potential to give rise to a
tradition or a new story remembered by the masses. I could discuss
several examples of that but that topic is for another day. But, I will
content myself with one I can recount from personal experience.

satyasoma: The veda is the basis for everything in our dharma you say?
Isn’t that a statement to which one pays mere lip-service?

rudradatta: I do not know if I can say for everything, soma. Perhaps
more substantially than one would think, to put it safely. But it is not
a basis in the sense you are thinking, soma. It is anachronistic to
argue that the veda directly speaks of matters which arose way later
than its time. What I refer to is how the veda is the source of “raw
material” upon which new deities, practices and pious narratives are
built. I speak about the indescribable sense of euphoria when one
encounters an obscure part of the lofty śruti manifesting in the
unlikeliest of places.

Let me get to the example, Soma. In the course of doing*pañcāyatana
pūjā*for the Great Five
(**śiva**,**viṣṇu**,**ambā**,**ganapati**and**sūrya**), many would,
offer*dīpārādhana*with a*pañcamukha**dīpa*(a “five-mouthed” lamp).
During one such performance, I heard the following verses from
the*taittirīyabrāhmaṇa*being repeated thus:

“*nárya prajā́ṃ me**gopāya**/ amr̥tatvā́ya jīváse / jātā́ṃ janiṣyámāṇāṃ ca
/ amŕ̥te satyéprátiṣṭhitām /*

*átharva pitúṃ me**gopāya**/ rásam ánnam ihā́yuṣe / ádabdhāyó‘śītatano
/áviṣaṃ naḥ pitúṃ kr̥ṇu /*

*śám̐sya paśū́n me**gopāya**/ dvipā́do yécátuṣpadaḥ // aṣṭā́śaphāśca yá
ihā́gne /yécáikaśaphā āśugā́ḥ /*

*sápratha sabhā́ṃ me**gopāya**/ yéca sábhyāḥsabhāsádaḥ / tā́n
indriyā́vataḥ kuru / sárvamā́yur úpāsatām /*

*áhe budhniya mántraṃ me**gopāya**/ yám ŕ̥ṣayastraividā́ vidúḥ / ŕ̥caḥ
sā́māni yájūm̐ṣi / sā́ hí śrī́r amŕ̥tā satā́m //*” (Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa
1.2.1.25-26)

satyasoma: Strange. Why would a verse with**ahirbudhnya**occur here?
Is it because it is one of the names of**rudra**in later day texts and
presumably it was a*śiva-pañcāyatana*? (pañcāyatana worship, but with
Śiva placed specifically in the centre and the other four in the
intermediate quarters) But if it is so, why particularly at this point?
Do the other verses refer, somehow, to the other four devas?

rudradatta: No. The reason is less farfetched and simpler but more
amusing. See, the pañcamukha dīpa is a five-flamed lamp. In the śrauta
system, the three well-known fires are*gārhapatya*,*dakṣiṇāgni*(also
known as*anvāhāryapacana*) and*āhavanīya*. That we know, right?

satyasoma: Yes yes, I’m aware. The equivalences with the three lokas and
the*trimūrti*in later texts; that all we have heard of.

rudradatta: There are two other fires established at the very beginning
of the śrauta life, in the*agnyādheya*ceremony (the
establishing/setting-up of fires as a preliminary rite to qualify one to
perform śrauta rituals). Namely, the*sabhya*and*āvasathya*fires. The
above five verses are mentioned by**bhagavān****baudhāyana**in
his*śrautasūtra*as the*virājakrama*mantra-s and they are employed by
the*yajamāna*(the sacrificer) to pray to those five fires, in the
order I just mentioned.

satyasoma: Ah! I got it! Five sacrificial fires, five-mouthed lamp!
*That* is the connection?!

rudradatta (smiling): Yes. In the relatively popular pañcāyatana pūjā,
you find this obscure set of mantra-s from the taittirīya brāhmaṇa
making an appearance and yet many of those who recite it will continue
to do so without knowing the significance or the raison d’être behind
it.

satyasoma: I can top that example of yours, rudra! As obscure as the
reference may be, it is not so unimaginable to find mantras from the
veda, however unrelated it may be, in a pūjā performed mainly by smārta
brāhmaṇa-s.

Take this example! How many people would know that when they say the
word,*āratī*, to speak of their beloved daily ritual, they are really
uttering a slightly distorted version of*āratrikā*, which ultimately
derives from the words of a veda mantra?

rudradatta: Seems familiar. I remember hearing about this from someone.
Refresh my memory, Soma.

satyasoma: Apparently, the āratrikā rite is found in
the*atharvaveda**pariśiṣṭa*(supplement to the atharvaveda). There
occurs this*vidhi*of which I will quote some of the verses I remember
and are especially relevant:

“*athāto rātrisūktānāṃvidhim anukramiṣyāmaḥ 1*

*śuciḥ śuklavāsāḥ purohitaḥ 2*

*pārthivasya paścimāṃ saṃdhyām upāsya darbhaiḥ pavitrapāṇī rājānam
abhigamya 3*

*piṣṭamayīṃ rātriṃ kṛtvā 4*

*annapānadhūpadīpair arcayitvā mālyaiśca 5*

*prajvalitaiścaturbhir dīpakair arcayitvā 6*

***ā rātri pārthivam****iṣirā yoṣeti sūktadvayena rātrim upasthāya 7*

*trāyamāṇe viśvajite ahne ca tveti rājānaṃ pradakṣiṇaṃ triḥ kṛtvā 8*”

The rite was originally performed by a royal*purohita*, dressed in
white robes, for the king at the time of the evening*saṃdhyā*. He would
make an image of Goddess**rātri**out of flour and worships it with
food, drink, incense, lamps and garlands. He worships her with four
lamps burning and installs the idol by uttering two sūkta-s, “ā rātri
pārthivam” (atharvaveda, śaunakiya śākhā, 19.47) and “iṣirā́yóṣā” (same
text but 19.49). The purohita then waves the lights in a circular
fashion in front of the king thrice for his protection from evil. I
learnt about this, thanks to[Dr. Nirmala
Kulkarni](http://www.vedicbooks.net/vedic-studies-p-3405.html).

rudradatta: This is interesting. Hence an apotropaic rite initially
performed only for the kings, was later adopted by the common folk as
well. It is worthwhile noting that so many of the practices Hindus take
for granted as beginning-less features can be traced in some form to the
śruti. Speaking of which, one can argue that even the*harikatha*to
which the masses flock has roots deeply embedded within the śruti.

There has been an intimate link between the yajna and public recitation
of sacred knowledge, often unappreciated by the lay Hindu. It is no
coincidence that the mahābhārata is framed as janamejaya listening to
vaiśampāyana at the sarpa-killing sattra or that the uttarakāṇḍa states
how vālmīki has the sons of rāma go around the city singing the rāmāyaṇa
on the occasion of the aśvamedha held by rāma or that ugraśrava sauti
recites purāṇa-s to the sages at the sattra held by śaunaka.

Indeed, when one traces the origin of this, one realizes the roots of a
formalized public discourse lie in the hoary*pāriplava*rite of
the*aśvamedha*where various branches of knowledge are recited to
different groups, with the itihāsa-s and purāṇa-s being narrated to
fishermen and bird-catchers. But let me [put that discussion
aside](http://indiafacts.org/access-ritual-knowledge-hinduism-case-veda-agama/)
for now. In all this, I forgot to ask you as to why you are here. Is
everything okay, soma?

satyasoma: Yes, everything is fine, Rudra. It is a strange coincidence,
I think, that you should mention harikatha just now. I attended one a
few days ago, by this famous, “new-age” reciter at the behest of a
friend. The harikatha was full of the clichéd attacks on rituals and
vedas being incapable of leading a man to the highest good. This
brāhmaṇa was carefully combining*paurāṇika*narratives with
“commercially hot” words and phrases like, “be spiritual not religious”,
“rituals are for the ignorant”, etc. I wonder, if he knew how the śruti
equates viṣṇu with the yajna (sacrifice) itself. As I was sitting in my
seat, cursing myself for being there, something strange happened, rudra.
That’s what I came here to talk to you about.

rudradatta: What happened soma?!

satyasoma: Irritated with the*vedanindana*and*avamatya*he showed to
rituals, I turned my head upwards and had the strangest vision ever! I
saw “beings” standing in mid-air by the left side of the arch above the
stage. I will tell you how it all played out in front of me. It was as
if I, like**arjuna**, was given*divya**cakṣūṣi*(divine eyes), for I
do not think that what I saw, I could have seen them with the eyes of a
mortal! The three beings! The**first**one was an old man, with silver
hair and a thick beard indicating his antiquity. He had several heads,
trunks and feet, similar to the**puruṣa**of*puruṣasūkta*! Imagine
that, rudra!

rudradatta: “*sahasraśīrṣā puruṣaḥ sahasrākṣaḥ sahasrapāt*!” I can
imagine! Go on, Soma! Do not stop now!

satyasoma: He was slowly thinning but, dressed in majestic garbs, he had
a regal countenance and lordliness that remained largely unaffected by
his age. His many heads were adorned by a single crown that was
singularly unmatched. The**second**being was a handsome, young man
who, though not possessing the royal look of the**first**, was
nevertheless dressed magnificently, having several faces, each of them
extremely resplendent and rivalling the other in beauty. All of his
faces, his two shoulders and his trunk were covered with the auspicious
symbols of viṣṇu!

I saw him rend his way out of one of the many trunks of
the**first**one! The**second**one then feasted on part of the body
of the**first**and remorselessly fattened himself! The**first**one
became emaciated greatly! But in a short while, he too started thinning
out. Then out of both of them, a luminous**third**one materialized,
sporting a crown similar to that of the**first**being, but also having
the auspicious marks of the**second.**He then devoured parts of both
the**first**and the**second**and it seemed as if he had overpowered
them, but not for long. He too became weak. The three of them then
smirked condescendingly at the reciter of the harikatha and said, “*etat
sarvaṃ mariṣyati*(This all will die)”! Then it all disappeared, rudra!
What do you make of this? Tell me for it has been robbing me of my sleep
for the several nights!

*rudradatta listened with rapt attention and looked at satyasoma with
trepidation and began to speak.*

rudradatta: The trajectories of our minds seem to be crossing more often
than I would hope for, for the coincidences are becoming too inordinate
and frequent. Hear me out, soma, for this is what I think is the meaning
of whatever you saw.

For a few weeks, in the course of reading various śāstra-s and other
texts, a series of imaginations occurred to me. Since they were my own
imagination, I naturally did not make much of it then. But what I saw
with the internal eyes of my restless mind, something similar to what
you have seen with your external eyes, Soma!

During one such study, I was reading the
charming*āgamaḍambara*of**jayantabhaṭṭa**. There is a particular
scene in that play, which is rather touching; I read it again and again.
This episode where a*ṛtvik*(a priest who performs śrauta sacrifices)
and*upādhyāya*(a teacher) speak of the impending decline of śrautam
as*pāñcarātra*,*śaiva*and others overpowered it even as these systems
relied on the śruti as pramāṇa. There, the ṛtvik, with a tinge of
sadness I can only intuit, tells the upādhyāya:

“*vayasya, yathā manyase. kaḥ svārtham avadhīrya madhyastho
dharmaikatāna buddhir bhavati? kiṃ tu kathaṃ vedaikaviṣaya
yājanādhyāpanādi vṛttibhir asmābhiḥ kālo netavyaḥ?*”

(Friend, it is as you think. Who, disregarding his own goals,
impartially, have only dharma in his intellect? But how \[when\]
performing sacrifices, teaching, etc; exclusively concerns of the veda,
being our profession, should we pass our time?)

The upādhyāya replies:

“*vayasya, yathaivātikrānto nītas tathaivāgāmy api grāsavasanamātra
santoṣibhir neṣyate*”

(Friend, whatever way we have led in the past, the \[same\] way in the
future. With just a morsel to eat and clothing, we shall be content;
without desire.)

And then both of these men speak on how the pāñcarātrika-s imitate the
śrautin-s with impunity. As you very well know, I do have great regard
for the*vaiṣṇava*contributions to our dharma, be it pāñcarātra or the
great system of**rāmānuja**, who himself was a peerless defender of the
veda’s authority. Yet, I felt some resentment about the disregard for
the veda by many who represented these schools and thus, when I read it,
I had visualizations similar to what you saw. And I will now explain
what you saw!

satyasoma: Tell me without delay! My mind is restless with excitement!

rudradatta: The**first**being, old and of royal effulgence; he is the
veda, the śrautadharma of majestic form. Divided into countless śākhā-s,
each with a plurality of scriptures within, you saw him with several
heads, trunk and feet! The**second**being is pāñcarātra, oh soma!
Having his origins in the*vājasaneyaśākhā*of the veda, as the
pāñcarātra texts themselves state, you saw him tear himself out of one
of the trunks of the **first**. Yet, ignoring his origin in the veda,he
would put himself above it.

With his own unique*mantraśāstra*and*kriya*(rites) dedicated to the
great**nārāyaṇa**, he would indeed have appeared very handsome to you,
with all the auspicious marks of that deity. Feeding on the śruti as
necessary, he grew in stature and thought he had won, just as the
śrautin characters from the play thought he won! But time was not kind
to him, oh soma!

In a short time, in a few centuries, as it were a drop in
the*kālasamudra*(ocean of time), this complex ritual system dwindled
into obscurity, with many of its initiations being forgotten. Having his
origin in both the**first**and**second**beings, both the veda and
pāñcarātra, comes the**third**being, the great system of rāmānuja. He
adduced countless proofs from the veda with the venerable one
(**yāmunācārya**) before him and the lion (**vedānta deśika**) after him
both defending the pāñcarātra. Having taken up the mantle to explain
vedānta, the end of the veda which has no end, comes this system
of*viśiṣṭādvaitaśrīvaiṣṇavam*! In staking a claim to their knowledge
of the summum bonum of the vedic texts, they indeed sport a crown
similar to that of the **first**. In that it is a system devoted to
viṣṇu, he also has the same auspicious marks of the **second**!He is
that**third**person you saw! Gradually, obscuring his two progenitors,
he attained immense greatness!

Sadly, he too met his match, oh Soma! The pāñcarātra, the illuminating
and high philosophical thought of rāmānuja vedānta combined with the
devotional system of śrī vaiṣṇavam; both of them have been reduced to
weakness. The veda continues living on albeit in dire straits, as the
emaciated man you saw. The only thing really left is devotion,*bhakti*.
But like many things in this world, such as patriotism and compassion,
it has become the refuge of scoundrels. In this case, it is scoundrels
who despise rituals.

The “new age” harikatha exponent has lived off by doing nindana of the
rites of the veda as useless and he has prospered greatly! But his time
too shall pass! The dharma has śāstra for its basis. It has karman
(rites) for its basis. Without these, the insipid talk of that silly
man, like cotton candy, lasts in its effects for but a short while.
Having only this mediocrity as food for their buddhi, his audience will
soon seek out other avenues, going into*navya-pāṣaṇḍa*(neo- vedānta,
bābāisms) or worse, abrahma religions! Hence, they said, “*etat sarvaṃ
mariṣyati”*! The “tradition” of this degenerate harikatha exponent, if
one can even dignify it with such a term, will die soon. Do not think
that it will leave something better behind for it has come up only by
butchering the śāstra-s and sampradāya-s it fed upon. It will simply
leave a void, ready to be filled by the first things to exploit it.

satyasoma: A warning as to what will come to pass in the future, uh,
rudra?

rudradatta: Indeed. You already see Hindu youth turning towards the
above-mentioned avenues, lapping up the puerile teachings of babas or a
xyz-ānanda, when they fail to get answers from the “pandits” at their
local temples. In fact, our friend, vaṅgasiṃha, informed me of some
opining that we should be thankful that these Hindus have not converted
yet. Such is the pitiful state of affairs, oh soma!

satyasoma: This is like that story of**bhṛgu**and**varuṇa**where
varuṇa explains to bhṛgu his visions of horrible punishments in the
afterlife, except that this ends on a far grimmer note.

rudradatta (laughing): Except that I’m no varuṇa and you’re no bhṛgu…

satyasoma: And yet, somehow, our lives are just as dramatic.

Continued
[here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/29/a-cerapada-sahasa/)



