+++
title = "A cerapada sāhasa"
full_title = "A cerapada sāhasa"
date = "2017-01-29"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/29/a-cerapada-sahasa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/29/a-cerapada-sahasa/).


					A cerapada sāhasa				



[ January 29, 2017 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/29/a-cerapada-sahasa/ "Permalink to A cerapada sāhasa")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/29/a-cerapada-sahasa/#respond)

# A cerapada sāhasa

Continued from
[Here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/20/of-invisible-threads-the-veda-and-the-strangest-harikatha-experience/)

*The author thanks [@pinaki](https://twitter.com/pinakasena) for not
only helping edit the article but co-authoring parts of the story and,
in the process, educating me about Kerala, where I have not been yet…*

A week went by after that rather harrowing conversation with Satyasoma.
Life had attained a newfound normalcy, but the novelty was wearing off
and Rudradatta was feeling rather bored. Since his birth in pāṇḍyadeśa,
he had hardly spent sufficient amounts of quality time in any part of
bhārata but for some rare family trips.

His udyoga was extremely demanding though it provided fair compensation
and as a means to recharge after a punishingly packed schedule,
Rudradatta’s office allowed him to take a longer-than-usual vacation.
Thus, he undertook this trip to bhārata, his ancestral land. He went to
cerapada to visit Satyasoma, who was staying all alone in one of the
famous caturvedi maṅgala-s (the area of the village where brāhmaṇas
reside) of yore. The region was a refuge to the ancient dramila
brāhmaṇas who with their prowess in vaidīka and śāstra had transformed
it into a dakṣiṇa kāśi. Today it lay within the boundaries of the prānta
ruled by the pernicious rudhiradhvajas. Thinking it good to better
acquaint himself with the palpably worrisome situation there as well as
hoping to gain new contacts through whom he can gain further knowledge,
he made his way to Satyasoma’s home and stayed there for two days. On
the third morning, after he had finished his prātaḥ saṃdhyopāsana
(saṃdhyā worship in the morning), he was relaxing by himself as
Satyasoma had left to run some errands for a relative of his. And there
was a knock on the door. Satyasoma was back at home.

Rudradatta: Soma, I had spent a good amount of time conversing with
almost every one of my contacts in dramiladeśa. I believe I have milked
as many interesting conversations as I can out of them. There are enough
texts in my external disk to keep me busy. I will visit the devālayas
soon. But, for once, I want to do something new. Do you know any person
in cerapada to whom you can introduce me and whose company will be of
interest to me?

Satyasoma: itokke viḍu! (Leave all that). I have got something to break
you out of that intellectual and experiential rut, or rather the both of
us.

Rudradatta: Not in the mood for teasing or guessing games, soma. Just
tell me what it is.

Satyasoma: On the way, back home, I saw this young, well-built man,
dressed in traditional garb approach me. I could not take my eyes off
his venerable countenance. He spoke in malayāḷa. Such tejas! Such
brahmavarcas! He told me that his name was ānandan. He said, “O, young
paṭṭarē! You seem to be the kind of person before whom my āśān (master)
would want the araṇgēṟṟam of his rūpaka. We are staging this play based
on a kathā from the veda. We would not want more than two people in the
sadassu (assembly). So, bring along a caṇṇāti (friend) with you if you
will!”

Rudradatta: This is suspicious! So, he runs into you and invites you to
bring, at most, one friend with you! Did he give any further details?

Satyasoma: Well, you wanted to do something new. Here it is. I am
excited beyond words for this. So, don’t spoil my mood. And I insist
that you should come with me to this. I don’t think ānanda specifically
limited it to two and asked me to bring one friend, without any reason!
This is devacitta (will of the gods), rudra! [Man, your first Prime
Minister, he was
right](http://www.nas.gov.sg/archivesonline/data/pdfdoc/lky19770223.pdf)!
You are indeed a “champion grumbler”! Born in bhārata, you have
nevertheless imbibed the qualities intrinsic to that land!

Rudradatta: Alright! Hold your peace, soma! We will go for this! Out of
curiosity, at least, may I ask if this “ānanda” mentioned any details
about the to you?

Satyasoma: Not really. He only said that it is a little-known story from
the veda, filled with special effects and an abundance of adbhuta rasa,
with a sprinkling of bībhatsa towards the end. He told me that it is
very rare for a rūpaka to be staged, showcasing vedaviṣaya. Don’t think
too much about it rudra! Just come!

Rudradatta: Fine fine! I will come. Where and when is this play?

Satyasoma: It is tonight at 8 PM. We can make it well within time
considering that it will be enacted in a secluded clearing within the
Nelliyāmpativana. He was kind enough to give the directions. Let me tell
you about this pristine vana, rudra. Perched amidst the precarious
steeps of the malaya hills, this is a relatively untainted āraṇya which
still holds the trace of the loving caresses of bhārgava rāma who shaped
this land. It is filled with rare creatures which still retain the
echoes of the veda svarā-s in their chirping and cītkāra. It is nearly a
two-hour drive and it will be chilly considering the elevation; so dress
accordingly.

Rudradatta and Satyasoma complete their saṃdhyā prayers and leave for
the play about 5.30 PM. The drive was as serpentine as the coils of
confusion within Rudradatta’s mind. However, the splendid vistas offered
by this ancient land assuaged some of his ill feelings. In the distance,
he spotted rows of vṛkṣa bleeding thick white sap which gave this region
the name of Pālakkāḍu (forest of milk). The maññu (light mist) spread
along with the dark clouds of the Tuḷām Varṣa. The roiling retreating
monsoons firing the bane of vṛtra, the clouds themselves arrayed in a
tumult like a devāsura samara. Witnessing this play of forces beyond his
ken, prompted Rudra into reminiscing a previous conversation.

Rudradatta: Soma, do you remember what I told you about producing
traditional-style plays based on the veda? Remember the play I told you
that I would love to see being staged?

Satyasoma: Yes, rudra. That riveting story of yavakrī from the jaiminīya
brāhmaṇa, right? Forget it, rudra. It is too obscure a story. And do you
think, given the inappropriate parts of that story, they would stage it
tonight? They appeared to be rather traditional.

Rudradatta: Adbhuta and bībhatsa, they say. Let’s see what they have for
us.

*Rudradatta and Satyasoma reach the place. They see ānanda at a distance
who signals to them to follow him. They walk into a semi-forested area
for a while till they reach an open ground with a wooden platform set up
there and a few brāhmaṇa-s moving about, carrying props and getting
ready.*

**

Ānanda: Be seated here oh young men! The play will commence shortly.

**

*The Sūtradhāra, (the director of a play) a lustrous brāhmaṇa of
muscular build and wearing a turban, comes onto the stage to introduce
the subject of the play:*

Sūtradhāra: To the two men who braved their way to come to this forest
in the dark, our greetings! We present this rūpaka, yauvanakṛtapramādam
or as we might render, non-literally, in āṅglīkabhāṣā, “The madness done
by the youth”. This is the story of yavakrī saumastamba from the
jaiminīya brāhmaṇa and the mad sāhasa that was his life!

Since, this is cerapada, we thought of bringing a story from a śākhā
which thrives here! The relevant verses from the jaiminīya brāhmaṇa
would be interspersed with the dialogues of our actors!

That would be all from me! Enjoy this play, which has no likeness of it,
not staged according to the vidhi laid in the śāstra of bharata (i.e.
nāṭyaśāstra) and speaks of otherworldly concerns!

Satyasoma: Rudra! What are the odds?! I think I am starting to get
anxious!

Rudradatta: You are getting anxious now? It is too late. Let us sit
through this and see what transpires in this dark forest.

*A brāhmaṇa steps forward from behind the stage and proceeds to recite
with gambhīra:*

tena haitena mauṇḍibha udanyurīja udanyūnāṃ rājā \|

taddha yavakrīḥ saumastambir āstāvaṃ prati niṣasāda \|

“Now, in this way, mauṇḍibha udanyu sacrificed; the king of the udanyu.

yavakrī saumastambi sat down at the āstāva”

*\[The actor playing\] yavakrī enters the stage and the play continues.
Magical effects are produced on stage with expertise and skill, to the
surprise of rudradatta and satyasoma. As the play ends, they reminisce
the more memorable scenes of the play. You must pardon us here for not
offering a more generous sneak-peek into the dialogues of the play for
if we went into the details of the play, this story would never end!*

**

Satyasoma: What a show Rudra! The part where Yajñavacas Rājastambāyana
offers ājya (butter) into the fire and that woman suddenly appeared!
They misdirected us by generating a lot of smoke! And just when you
thought it was over, he offers one more time and a man with an iron club
emerges from the wall of smoke! Wonder what pyrotechnic substance was
the ājya?!

Rudradatta: Brilliant indeed! My favourite part, though, was when she
reveals the soles of her feet, which is entirely covered with hair! It’s
a whole different level of bībhatsa when you see it instead of merely
reading it in the text.

Satyasoma: Ah that part! The look on yavakrī’s face! Priceless! If our
doctor-to-be vaṅgasiṃha was here, he would have tried to explain it!

Rudradatta: When I read the text, I asked him about it. He told me it
could be some extreme form of hypertrichosis.

Satyasoma (Laughing): Indeed! Ah! What a day! We were told to pay at the
end of the play. So, let us play and then we can leave? It’s getting a
bit late.

*Rudradatta and Satyasoma are getting ready to leave. The sūtradhāra
comes where they are and calls on Rudradatta.*

Sūtradhāra: Do not be in such a great haste to leave, my friend. There
is a fee to pay for this spectacular performance you just saw! Or, do
you, young man, think that this is not worthy of a fee?

Rudradatta (bringing his hands together in greeting): Do not mistake us,
venerable sir. We were just about to approach one of your men to ask
regarding the fee. How much should we pay you for the extremely unusual
privilege of watching such a beautiful play sir? Indeed, after paying
you what is due, there are so many questions for me to ask you! Firstly,
may we have the fortune of knowing your name sir?

Sūtradhāra: I suffer from a dośa of having too many names. Some say
that, as a child, I demanded for more names. But let that be. Thisis
the dakṣiṇā for the glorious performance you just saw! Five nīlalohita
cows which give vāja, peya, jyoti and bheṣaja! Hurry now!

Rudradatta (a bit angrily): Hold it sir! I have spoken to you with
nothing but the utmost politeness. You are rude as to not give me your
name. Then you ask five nīlalohita cows which gives vāja…jyoti (and
slightly sarcastically); where does the venerable one want me to go to
procure cows for him? Is this a śrautakarma that I should make bovine
payments?

Sūtradhāra: Verily, this is as good as śrauta. This rūpaka itself is the
iṣti which just concluded. You are the yajamāna here! You desired to see
a rūpaka. And thus, you have the adhikāra to be the yajamāna for the
rūpakeṣti. I, the Sūtradhāra, the director, am the adhvaryu. (The ṛtvij
belonging to the yajurveda; he can be said to be the “director” of a
yajna)

This Ānanda here is the assistant director of this play, the
pratiprasthātr (the first of three assistants of the adhvaryu). Of
whatever worth the dakṣiṇā comes to, I, along with the hotṛ, udgātṛ and
brahman (the adhvaryu and these three are the four main ṛtvij-s), will
each get the largest portions and my pratiprasthātr gets half of what I
get. Second only to me in rank he is!

And since it is a bright beautiful full-moon today, let this be a
darśapūrṇamāseṣṭi for you! Just like the śrautayāga, you, the yajamāna,
have to do nothing. We do everything but you will reap the benefit of it
all.

Rudradatta: As Yajñavalkya indeed says so in the śatapatha brāhmaṇa

Sūtradhāra: Ah! Indeed! Why do you not expound on it for the listening
pleasure of us all?

Rudradatta: As you request sir. In the darśapūrṇamāseṣṭi, after girding
the wife of the yajamāna, there is a point in the ritual where the act
of looking upon the ājya (butter) takes place. Some opined that the
yajamāna himself should look at the auspicious ājya so as to secure the
benefits of the rite for himself. The opinion of the feisty Yajñavalkya
is recorded there. It is written:

athā́jyamávekṣate taddhaíke yájamānamávakhyāpayanti tádu hovāca
yā́jñavalkyaḥ kathaṃ nu ná svayámadhvaryávo bhávanti katháṃ svayaṃ
nā́nvāhuryátra bhū́yasya ivāśíṣaḥ kriyánte kathaṃ nveṣāmátraivá śraddhā́
bhavatī́ti **yāṃ vai kā́ṃ ca yajñá** **r̥tvíja āśíṣamāśā́sate
yájamānasyaiva** sā tásmādadhvaryúrevā́vekṣeta

śatapatha brāhmaṇa 1.3.1.25

“Now, he (the adhvaryu) looks down on the ājya. Here, some others, make
the yajamāna look \[instead\]. \[Regarding\] that, says yājñavalkya,
“How (kathaṃ here is in the sense of why) do not they (the sacrificers,
yajamāna-s) themselves be the adhvaryava \[at their own sacrifice\]? How
do not they themselves supplement (that is, they themselves can recite
the prayers) where blessings (āśiṣaḥ) are made? How can these
(yajamāna-s, the sacrificers who perform these sacrifices) have faith in
this?” **Whatever and whichever blessings the priests (r̥tvija) ask for
(āśāsate) is for the yajamāna alone.** Therefore, the adhvaryu indeed
should look down on it (the butter)”

Thus, even in our case, in this figurative sacrifice of the rūpakeṣti,
you, your assistants and actors have done everything but I alone reap
the pleasures of enjoying it as the spectator!

Sūtradhāra: Well spoken, young man! But you see, I would say that the
rūpakeṣti is better than your cherished śrautadharma (the vedic religion
of rituals). In the former, your senses are nourished and you feel
satiated with the performance and pay a fair price to men who earn an
honest living by means of their expertise in a craft. Look at the
r̥tvija-s in śrautadharma.

They exploit the naivete of pious men and create all kinds of
complicated rituals. How is that you are so passionate about this
śrautadharma? What about the śruti itself? Or the innumerable smṛtaya
and śrautasūtrāṇi (the śrautasūtra-s are the ritual manuals of
baudhāyana, etc who clarify on points of śrauta rituals) Does it really
care about how men wereexploited by greedy priests?

Rudradatta: From friendly talk, you have crossed over to rudeness and
attack against the veda. Sir, respectable as you look, you have no
propriety in your conduct. Good men do not speak ill of the vedas and
those who speak ill of it attain durgati. Your talk is like that of the
*navya-pāṣaṇḍavādin* (neo- vedānta, babaisms, etc) or that of the
mleccha scholars such as Max Muller the late german scholar.

Sūtradhāra: Well, what did they say that I am being accused of being
like them?

Rudradatta: Muller thought that the dharma declined under the “dead
hand” of the brāhmaṇa-s and their “priestcraft”. [He
wrote](https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.22870/2015.22870.The-Life-And-Letters-Of-The-Right-Honourable-Friedrich-Max-Muller-Vol1#page/n211/mode/2up/search/priestcraft):

“I should like to live for 10 years quite quietly and learn the
language, try to make friends, and then see whether I was fit to take
part in a work, by means of which the old mischief of Indian priestcraft
could be overthrown and the way opened for the entrance of simple
Christian teaching. Whatever finds root in India soon overshadows the
whole of Asia.”

Indeed, it was part of the grand scheme to portray as evil the
brāhmaṇa-s as well as the rituals which they perform. With these gone,
it would have been easy to subjugate the heathens and turn them into
deranged monotheists.

And this has to be accomplished in a perfect and complete manner. It
would not have been enough that the status quo rituals alone should be
targeted. Even the śrautadharma, whose rituals had largely gone out of
vogue, was excavated by these scavenger-scholars with the sole purpose
of undermining it. They knew that the veda was the source of the dharma
and hence they wrote evil against it and its rites.

Hermann Oldenberg notes that for the bauddha-s it was even worse than
priestcraft: “…and for Buddhism also, this priestly class was something
more than a vain and greedy priestcraft, that it was the necessary form
in which the innermost essence, the evil genius, if we may so call it,
of the Indian people has embodied itself”.

Sūtradhāra: Fine rhetoric. Answer my questions though! Does this
precious śruti of yours or the smr̥ti-s of the so-called great menreally
care about how men are being exploited by greedy priests? No matter how
wicked these r̥tvija-s may be, they will be elected to officiate anyway!
Their conduct, their character is of no importance to anyone; be it the
devas or men! As long as the devas get their share of the oblations or
men, the fruits of the ritual!

Rudradatta: Listen for I shall endeavour to answer you even as my
knowledge is limited.

I shall now quote from the śruti, the aitareya brāhmaṇa:

trīṇi ha vai yajñe kriyante jagdhaṃ gīrṇaṃ vāntaṃ

Three \[things\] occur in the yajna (sacrifice): the eaten (remnants),
swallowed, and vomited \[food\].

taddhaitadeva jagdhaṃ yad āśaṃ samnaṃmārtvijyaṃ kārayata uta vā me
dadyāduta vā mā vṛṇīteti taddha tatparāṅeva yathā jagdhaṃ na haiva
tadyajamānambhunakty

Now this verily is eaten is when he (the sacrificer) makes as r̥tvij who
desires ‘ May he give me, or may he choose me.’ That is cast-aside like
remnants; that indeed does not reward the sacrificer.

atha haitadeva gīrṇaṃ yadbibhyadārtvijyaṃ kārayata uta vā mā na
bādhetota vā me na yajñaveśaśāṃ kuryāditi taddha tatparāṅeva yathā
gīrṇaṃ na haiva tadyajamānambhunakty

Now this verily is swallowed is when he makes as r̥tvij whom he fears,
“Let him not either injure me, nor let him disturb the yajna for me/
That is cast-aside like something swallowed; that indeed does not reward
the sacrificer

atha haitadeva vāntaṃ yadabhiśasyamānamārtvijyaṃ kārayate yathā ha vā
idaṃ vāntānmanuṣyā bībhatsanta evamtasmāddevās taddha tatparāṅeva yathā
vāntaṃ na haiva tadyajamānambhunakti

Now this verily is vomited is when he makes as r̥tvij who is spoken ill
of. Just as here men are disgusted by what is vomited, similarly thus
the gods. That is cast-aside like something vomited; that indeed does
not reward the sacrificer.

sa eteṣāṃ trayāṇāmāśāmneyāt

He should not desire these three. // aitareya brāhmaṇa 3.46

Is this śruti sufficient for you, Sūtradhāra?

Sūtradhāra: Very well…

Rudradatta: Here are other verses from theśruti. Consider this from
thenoble mouth ofśāṇḍilya

dákṣiṇāsu tvèva ná saṃvaditávyaṃ saṃvādénaivá ‘rtvíjo ‘lokā íti

But in \[respect of\] fees (dákṣiṇāsu: plural locative form of dákṣiṇā),
it is not \[something\] to be agreed upon, (**In this context, it means
bargaining. The fees are not to be determined by discussion with input
coming from the r̥tvija-s**) by bargaining (**literally: by agreeing upon
it**) the r̥tvija-s \[become\] worldless (**deprived of heaven**) //
śatapatha brāhmaṇa 9.5.2.16

Satyasoma: What about theśāstra-s apart from theśruti?

Rudradatta: Or let me quote from the kalpasūtra texts you seem to be
fond of criticizing. This is from bhagavān baudhāyana in his
śrautasūtra:

kiṃgata u khalvativaraṇaṃ vāvaraṇaṃ vā bhavatīti

So, in what occurrence, then, supersession \[of one’s earlier choice of
a priest\] or non-choosing \[of a priest\] takes place?

steyamacārīd abhyamaṃsthād ayājyamayājayatsāditaṃ karma tadu hāsthita
ity eteṣām ekasminn ativaraṇaṃ vāvaraṇaṃ vā bhavatīti

He who lives by robbery, inflicts injuries, officiates for unfit
persons, commits a condemnable deed. In each one of these cases,
supersession of one’s choice (If the sacrificer had earlier chosen this
person as r̥tvij but comes to realize his despicable conduct later) or
non-choosing (if he has yet to choose) takes place.

Thus, your contention that the conduct of those who serve asr̥tvija-s
did not matter to the śruti (the veda) or the śiṣṭa-s (the wise men,
such asbaudhāyana who expound on the dharma to us) is unfounded bunkum!

Sūtradhāra: Well spoken! But what about the commentary on the mīmāṃsā
sutra 1.3.4: hetudarśanāc ca? He who had delved into the ocean of śrauta
knowledge, śabarasvāmin; he gives three examples of ulterior motives on
part of the r̥tvija! I will be merciful and take just one of them!

lobhād vāsa āditsamānā audumbarīṃ kṛtsnāṃ veṣṭitavantaḥ kecit. tat
smṛter bījam.

adhikaraṇāntaraṃ vā. vaisarjanahomīyaṃ vāso ‘dhvaryur gṛhṇātīti,
yūpahastino dānam ācarantīti.

“Out of greed, desiring \[excess\] cloth, they (r̥tvija) cover up the
whole of the audumbari (sacrificial post made of udumbara wood); this
was what gave rise to the smṛti rule \[that the whole post should be
covered up\]

Thus, these rules \[made by priests\] have no authority, such as: ‘At
the vaisarjana homa, the cloth should be taken by the adhvaryu’, ‘The
cloth covering the sacrificial post, they should give it away’ “

What is your reply to this, feisty young man?

Rudradatta: This has already been explained by kumārila bhaṭṭa in
tantravārtika. The greed of the priests would have been better satisfied
by covering the lower and upper parts of the yūpa (sacrificial post) by
two pieces, exactly as two are used by women for the lower and the upper
coverings. That way, the priest would get two large pieces of cloth
instead of merely one! The priest could have interpolated in the smṛti
that it should be an expensive silk cloth. Why would it be necessary to
cover the sacrificial post with kuśa grass before covering it with
cloth? The greedy priests might as well have had both coverings made of
cloth!

That śabarasvāmin pointed out this example demonstrates that brāhmaṇa-s
cared about worshippers getting exploited by a few greedy priests and
were willing to point out what they saw as morally censurable, even if
it be found in sacred ritual texts written by esteemed men! That
kumārila demolishes the examples proves that even these examples are
full of holes and that the case for śrautam being a system of greed and
exploitation is a very weak one! I know all the three examples you speak
of and could answer them too! Do you wish to hear?!

Sūtradhāra: No! I am pleased with what I have heard! Satiated like a
guest who has been fed well! Now pay me my fee and I shall leave! Five
nīlalohita cows which give vāja, peya, jyoti and bheṣaja!

Rudradatta: Sir, it is getting late. It is not the time for such jokes
sir!

Sūtradhāra: I thought you were sharper than this! Alright! Let me be
kind and explain! Vāja means food; peya, drink; jyoti, light for which
you need electricity and bheṣaja, medicine! What do you need for that?

Rudradatta: Money.

Sūtradhāra: Ah! Correct! Now, nīlalohita, that strange combination of
red and blue, is purple. Do you not have five purple cows in your
pocket?

Rudradatta: You mean my 2000 rupee notes!! You could have stated it
directly!

Sūtradhāra: parokṣa-priyā iva hi devāḥ, says the śruti! “The gods love
the indirect”. Are you not familiar with that? Since you like śrauta, oh
taittirīyaka, perhaps I will put it this way:

sūtradhārāya pañcanīlalohitān ā labheta rūpakakāmas  
sūtradhāro vai nīlalohita  
pañcaśirā sūtradhāro bhavati  
sūtradhāram eva svena bhāgadheyenopadhāvati

“To the Sūtradhāra, he should offer five reddish-blue \[cows\], desiring
a rūpaka (play). The Sūtradhāra is the reddish-blue deity. The
Sūtradhāra has five heads. With his own share, he shall please him!”

Rudradatta: Sir, first you said you are the adhvaryu asking for dakṣiṇā.
Now you speak as if you are the deva. You confuse me with your
contradictory speech! I’m exhausted and would like to leave for home
with my friend! Here is the money Sir!

Sūtradhāra: r̥tvij, deva,yajamāna; I’m all that! Ha ha! Farewell!

*Rudradatta and Satyasoma proceeds to leave. The sūtradhāra walks away
with his assistant, rambling about Rudradatta.*

Sūtradhāra: See the young āstika-s of today, ānanda! They grumble about
parting with such a small sum. Did I ever tell you how nābhānediṣṭha of
ancient times was ready to offer me the **dakṣiṇā he was entitled to and
already paid** by the āṇgīrasas? A thousand cows he was prepared to
yield to me, oh ānanda when I told him they belong to me! This boy sulks
over paying me the **dakṣiṇā he owes me**! These youths today…Did I not
give back the cows to nābhānediṣṭha? Perhaps, I will give these purple
cows back to him! Like nābhānediṣṭha’s truthful speech, this boy’s
feisty speech was pleasing to me!

*Rudradatta turns back in excitement and sees that there was no one
there! The sūtradhāra, his assistant ānanda, the other staff, the stage
and the props-all had vanished! Rudradatta panics and then prods
Satyasoma to turn back as well.*

Rudradatta: Soma! Did you hear what he said?! Do you not see it now?!

Satyasoma: He was rambling on and on and mentioned nābhānediṣṭha. And
now, he’s gone! All of them are gone! I do not understand what has
transpired!

Rudradatta: Soma….(breathing heavily) …The Sūtradhāra is……

Satyasoma: Who?!

Rudradatta: Rudra!

##### 

##### ————————————-

##### *Note:*

##### *Brief glossary and commentary on some words used:*

##### *paṭṭare: Derived from saṃskṛta word bhaṭṭa; as our friend [@pinakasena](https://twitter.com/pinakasena) informs me, it is the term used for Tamil iyers settled in Kerala.*

##### *araṇgēṟṟam: premiere performance of a dance or play*

