+++
title = "gotraḍambara Much Noise"
full_title = "gotraḍambara Much Noise About Gotra"
date = "2017-01-16"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/16/gotra%e1%b8%8dambara-much-noise-about-gotra/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/16/gotra%e1%b8%8dambara-much-noise-about-gotra/).


					gotraḍambara: Much Noise About Gotra				



[ January 16, 2017 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/16/gotra%e1%b8%8dambara-much-noise-about-gotra/ "Permalink to gotraḍambara: Much Noise AboutGotra")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/16/gotra%e1%b8%8dambara-much-noise-about-gotra/#respond)

# gotraḍambara: Much Noise AboutGotra

The author would like to thank[pinākī](https://twitter.com/pinakasena)
for helping edit as well as the critique and feedback which helped
improve this short story.

**rudradatta** **bhāradvāja**, with a cold glass of *nimbūrasa*, was,
with unwavering focus, reading every line on the page of the tome. He
knew which text to look up and was confident that he would have found
the name by the time **satyasoma** walked into his room.

satyasoma: What book is it now, Rudra?

rudradatta: I had just opened my copy of the *baudhāyana śrautasūtra*;
glossing through the list of *gotras* in the *pravarādhyāya*. This new
acquaintance of mine, **bhāskara sureśa**, had asked me if there was a
textual reference for his relatively rare gotra, by the name of
*naitundya*.

satyasoma: Indeed, there seem to be as many gotras as there are
*brāhmaṇas*. It makes you wonder how many of these names are
well-founded…

rudradatta: Ah! Found it! Listen satyasoma! bhagavān baudhāyana says
thus:

“*viṣṇuvṛddhāḥ śaṭhamarṣaṇā* *bhadraṇā* *madraṇāḥ śāmburāyaṇā bādarāyaṇā
vātsaprāyaṇāḥ sātyakiḥ sātyakāyanā **naitundyā** stutyā* *bhāruṇyā
vaihoḍhā daivasthānaya ityete viṣṇuvṛddhās*/

*teṣāṃ tryārṣeyaḥ pravaro bhavaty āṅgirasa paurukutsa trāsadasyeti hotā
trasadasyuvat purukutsavad aṅgirovad ityadhvaryuḥ*//”

Did you get it, Soma?

satyasoma: How could I miss your high intonation at naitundyā, Rudra? I
got it! I got it! (Laughing) Good work Rudra! Perhaps, you should set up
a website to offer brāhmaṇas such services! I have a question for you,
though. After “ityete viṣṇuvṛddhās”, you stated the *pravara* *ṛṣi*-s in
forward and reverse orders, did you not?

rudradatta: Yes, the *pravarādhyāya* is basically to inform the *hotṛ*
and *adhvaryu* the ways to address the *yajamāna*. The hotṛ addresses
the sacrificer by the patronyms derived from the names of the pravara
ṛṣi-s, going from the oldest to the youngest among them. As for the
adhvaryu, I suppose, he addresses the yajamāna as having, or being
possessed of, the ṛṣi, for it is indeed the blood of that ṛṣi that runs
in his veins. And he does so by going from the youngest to the oldest of
the pravara ṛṣi-s.

satyasoma: Ah, among the viṣṇuvṛddha-s themselves, so many gotra-s are
listed. That is just one of the several *gana*-s among the
*kevalāṅgirasa*-s. Apart from the kevalāṅgirasa-s, you still have the
bhāradvāja-s and gautama-s. And that is just within the āṅgirasa-s! You
still have the vaiśvāmitra-s, vāsiṣṭha-s, ityādi! How many gotras in
total are listed by baudhāyana, Rudra?

rudradatta: Not sure of the exact number, Soma! But from the estimates
of those who have counted, it seems to be about four-hundred! I was
curious about our own clan, the bhāradvāja-s. Sure, we are no rare
specimens for our ancestor was uniquely prolific in following the
command of the veda on having progeny! But the pravarādhyāya lists
eighty-eight gotras under the bhāradvāja-s alone!

satyasoma: Including our own gotra, the uninteresting and ubiquitous
bhāradvāja gotra…

rudradatta: Yes, but I didn’t stop at the counting. It got me thinking,
“So how many of these eighty-eight odd gotras listed by baudhāyana
actually survived till today?” So, I decided to check!

satyasoma: What rigorous methods have you employed to that effect,
Rudra?

rudradatta: Did not have time for any extensive research on this Soma! A
short while before you came, I was going through the eighty-eight names.
There was one name that immediately caught my attention as I had seen it
in a narrative in another text. That name was **somastambha**. He was
the founder of one of the eighty-eight great gotras among the
illustrious bhāradvāja.

satyasoma: Which other text mentions him?

rudradatta: jaiminīya brāhmaṇa.

satyasoma: Continue with his exploits!

rudradatta: So, by the grace of Google, I sought to see if anyone, from
the mahāsamudra of the world-wide web, identified themselves as hailing
from the gotra of somastambha. Little do we know about this man but more
is known about his son, **yavakrī**, who was the main character of a
scandalous yet incredibly riveting story in the brāhmaṇa of the
jaiminīya-s

satyasoma: So, did you confirm the existence of a descendant of
somastambha?

rudradatta: Nothing. Initially. So, I tried spelling the name of the
gotra in various ways. I realized that I had failed to account for two
powerful māyā-s concealing what I sought to find: *nāmachedana* and
schwa deletion. They split a personal name into two words and removed
the vowel at the end of each.

satyasoma: Ah, I get you. Twice as removed from the original, that must
have been a bit hard to find. But who are ‘they’?

rudradatta: Well, it was a young man doing some self-advertisement with
the intention to enter into vivāha. Caught in the rat race presumably, I
would bet that he has lost all memory of what it means to be a brāhmaṇa,
as is the case all across bhārata nowadays.

satyasoma: Indeed, the brāhmaṇa of today is a far, far cry from his rich
and deep roots, he hardly remembers anything except the name of his
gotra which he thinks fit to put up on an online sthala for
vivāha-nirṇaya for “formality’s sake”,without any attachment to his
progenitors.

rudradatta: And almost 2500 km south of where he lives and works, in
remote villages in dramiladeśa and somewhere in ceradeśa, reside a few
students of the endangered jaiminīya tradition, a śākha of the sāmaveda,
found only in those two deśa-s. And only the brightest and persevering
ones among those students, genuinely interested in gaining the full
knowledge of their śruti, that hardly anyone in their village, district,
state or country cares about; only they, one fine day, will start their
lessons for the jaiminīya brāhmaṇa and sit in front of their teacher and
repeat after him as he recites it.

And during one such lesson, they will come across the story of
somastambha’s scandalous son and recount the exciting tales of those
great ritualists of yore. Somewhere, 2500 km away from where one of
somastambha’s last few descendants stand and between him and them,
hardly anyone will know this name….



Continued
[here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2017/01/20/of-invisible-threads-the-veda-and-the-strangest-harikatha-experience/)



