+++
title = "Lost and Found"
full_title = "Lost and Found"
date = "2013-10-31"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/10/31/lost-and-found/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/10/31/lost-and-found/).

Lost and Found

Marcus Terentius Varro was called the most learned of the Romans. But
what did he know, and how did he know it? I ask because of this quote,
from *Rerum rusticarum libri III* (Agricultural Topics in Three Books):

“Especial care should be taken, in locating the steading, to place it at
the foot of a wooded hill, where there are broad pastures, and so as to
be exposed to the most healthful winds that blow in the region. A
steading facing the east has the best situation, as it has the shade in
summer and the sun in winter. If you are forced to build on the bank of
a river, be careful not to let the steading face the river, as it will
be extremely cold in winter, and unwholesome in summer. 2 Precautions
must also be taken in the neighbourhood of swamps, both for the reasons
given, and because there are bred certain minute creatures which cannot
be seen by the eyes, which float in the air and enter the body through
the mouth and nose and there cause serious diseases.” “What can I do,”
asked Fundanius, “to prevent disease if I should inherit a farm of that
kind?” “Even I can answer that question,” replied Agrius; “sell it for
the highest cash price; or if you can’t sell it, abandon it.”

I get the distinct impression that someone (probably someone other than
Varro) came up with an approximation of germ theory 1500 years
before[Girolamo
Fracastoro](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Girolamo_Fracastoro). But his
work was lost.

Everybody knows, or should know, that the vast majority of Classical
literature has not been preserved. Those lost works contained facts and
ideas that might have value today – certainly there are topics that we
understand much better because of insights from Classical literature.
For example, Reich and Patterson find that some of the Indian castes
have existed for something like three thousand years: this is easier to
believe when you consider that Megasthenes wrote about the caste system
as early as 300 BC.

We don’t put much effort into recovering lost Classical literature. But
there are ways in which we could push harder – by increased funding for
work on the Herculaneum scrolls, or the Oxyrhynchus papyri collection,
for example. Some old-fashioned motivated archaeology might get lucky
and find another set of Amarna cuneiform letters, or a new Antikythera
mechanism.

