+++
title = "Distance from Harvard"
full_title = "Distance from Harvard"
date = "2013-10-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/10/15/distance-from-harvard/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/10/15/distance-from-harvard/).

Distance from Harvard

Barry Marshall once said that if he had gone to Harvard, he would have
*known* that stomach ulcers were caused by stress, and wouldn’t even
have considered the possibility that they might be caused by a
bacterium. There are a number of other important innovators that sure
look as if they benefited from living as far as possible from the
sources of establishment opinion. Back when continental drift was
officially nonsense, quite a few geologists in South Africa and
Australia thought it must be correct – partly because there are local
geological facts that are hard to explain any other way (like ancient
glacial moraines in Australia whose rocks originated in South Africa)
but also because physical distance translates into mental distance.

Of course this does not always work – distance is useful, but not
sufficient.. Indonesia is pretty far from Harvard, but is a vast
wasteland, intellectually. Ideally, you want a country full of people
drawn from the populations that actually produce creative thinkers
(Europeans, mostly) instead of the populations that ought to but don’t.
And it should be really, really far away.

With the Internet and cell phones and all that, psychological isolation
is harder to find. Once even California had some thoughts of its own,
but that day is long past. If we want to keep progress from stalling
out, we need people that don’t get sucked into to the usual crap –
because they *can’t*.

The only real solution is interstellar colonization: the speed of light
is your friend. A generation ship might do the job – even if it never
arrived. It would be out there for hundreds of years, years in which the
inhabitants could go their own way. Some of the ships would be boring,
some of them would go crazy – but at least they’d be *different*.

