+++
title = "On new translations in"
full_title = "On new translations in Indian philosophy"
date = "2019-03-24"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/03/24/on-new-translations-in-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/03/24/on-new-translations-in-indian-philosophy/).

On new translations in Indian philosophy

One of the immediate frustrations one faces in teaching Indian
philosophy is that good translations are sorely lacking, certainly into
English and I suspect into any Western language, perhaps even any
non-Sanskrit language. *A Source Book of Indian Philosophy*, edited by
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Charles A. Moore, has been one of the most
frequently used works since its publication – *in 1957.* Radhakrishnan
and Moore have been dead for decades. And their work leaves much to be
desired, filled with so many ellipses that one feels like one is reading
Radhakrishnan’s and Moore’s ideas rather than those of the original
authors; the ellipses are disruptive enough that the reader can spend
more time wondering what was omitted than learning the original.

And yet with respect to some texts at least, Radhakrishnan and Moore
still have yet to be surpassed. I was excited for the publication of
Deepak Sarma’s 2011 [Classical Indian Philosophy: A
Reader](https://www.amazon.com/Classical-Indian-Philosophy-Deepak-Sarma/dp/0231133995)
as a potential replacement for Radhakrishnan and Moore. Indeed in my
class this year I am using Sarma’s excerpt from Rāmānuja’s
Vedārthasaṅgraha, alongside Radhakrishnan and Moore’s translation of
Rāmānuja’s Śrībhāṣya. Yet some of Sarma’s excerpts, as Andrew Nicholson
rightly noted in his [review in JAOS
133(3)](https://www.academia.edu/5710899/Review_of_Classical_Indian_Philosophy_A_Reader_by_Deepak_Sarma),
are embarrassingly awful, considerably worse than anything in
Radhakrishnan and Moore. What could Sarma, his original translator, or
the editor have possibly been thinking in allowing the fifth Vaiśeṣika
Sūtra to be rendered as “*Pṛthivī*, *āpa*, *teja*, *vāyu*, *kāla*,
*dik*, *ātmā*, and *mana* are the \_dravya_s”? As Nicholson rightly
notes, this is “hardly a translation at all”.Worse, it’s not as if
these are complex multivalent Sanskrit technical terms that pose great
difficulties for the translator such that they are best left in the
original – the first ones, for example, are just the classical four
elements of earth, water, fire and air. One gets the impression that
Sarma’s work had no editor or even proofreader, so that overall,
Radhakrishnan and Moore’s work remains superior despite its flaws –
though a teacher is fortunately able to pick and choose, drawing some
translations from one and some from the other, as I do.

All this is a way of saying how much we need new translations of classic
works in Indian philosophy. As such it functions as something of a
prelude to my main topic: Matthew Dasti and Stephen Phillips’s recent
[The Nyāya-Sūtra: Selections with Early
Commentaries](https://www.amazon.com/Nyaya-sutra-Selections-Early-Commentaries/dp/1624666167),
for which this post and the next post constitute a review of sorts. This
translation is not a reader but a rendering of a single text, the Nyāya
Sūtra– the terse aphorisms foundational to the Nyāya school of Indian
logic – and some of the later commentaries on it that constituted the
bulk of the Nyāya school’s work.

I am happy and lucky to count both Dasti and Phillips as collaborators
and friends –Phillips generously sponsored me to be a visiting
researcher at the University of Texas during my PhD, and Dasti is one of
my co-founders on the Indian Philosophy Blog. I’m also happy to say
their rendering of the Nyāya Sūtra and commentaries is the best out
there for its intended purpose of teaching undergrads; it fills a real
need. It is a bonus that, as is generally true for books from
[Hackett](https://www.hackettpublishing.com/), the book is mercifully
inexpensive.

Dasti and Phillips have chosen to translate not only the standard
commentary, Vātsyāyana’s Nyāya Bhāṣya, but the subcommentaries of
Uddyotakara and Vācaspati Miśra. The excerpts they’ve picked from the
subcommentaries are quite helpful to the reader, as is the introductory
material that they have composed themselves to guide the reader. In the
grand old tradition of Indian philosophical writing genres, this serves
as a commentary in its own right –sometimes even a commentary on
Vācaspati’s commentary on Uddyotakara’s commentary on Vātsyāyana’s
commentary on Gautama’s original sūtras. The result, in this respect, is
less confusing than it sounds: a reader trying to pick apart the
different layers of commentary to distinguish Vācaspati from Vātsyāyana
will probably get confused, but Nyāya readers themselves would likely
have treated the text, including the commentaries, as a whole. Overall,
the layers of commentary in the translation, from Vātsyāyana to Dasti
and Phillips themselves, serve the purpose that they are intended to
serve, of helping the reader tease out the meaning of the texts they
comment on. (Naturally, such commentaries typically have their own
agendas, as they are the characteristic genre of [innovation through
conservatism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/05/on-innovation-through-conservatism/);
one could quite reasonably argue that Dasti and Phillips are more
faithful readers than Vācaspati.)

The book contains only selections rather than the complete texts. This
is an entirely justifiable decision, given the decision to render
commentaries and subcommentaries. Providing a complete translation of
the original sūtra and bhāṣya would have been a manageable task; it is
what Mrinalkanti Gangopadhyaya did in his previous translation.
(Gangopadhyaya, for his part, leaves many words untranslated. Unlike in
Sarma’s collection, his decision is defensible, as these are at least
complex words like *pramāṇa* that have technical meanings difficult to
render. As such his translation is helpful to scholars who can scan
English more quickly than Sanskrit, but is less helpful to undergrads
than Dasti and Phillips.) Providing a complete translation of the
massive subcommentaries would have been a waste of effort, given the
intended undergraduate audience. And generally Dasti and Phillips
rightly provide complete excerpts, allowing one to read each passage as
it was rather than guessing what is hidden behind Radhakrishnan and
Moore’s proliferation of dot-dot-dots.

All of this is of great value to the student and the teacher. I used the
text successfully in my Indian philosophy class last year; multiple
students then described Nyāya as a highlight of the class, something
that would stick with them. They enjoyed seeing how Indian thought could
be so devoted to logical rigour, against the stereotypes of a
touchy-feely “Eastern mysticism”. (I imagine that somewhere in *svarga*,
[B.K. Matilal was
smiling](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/06/matilal-vs-radhakrishnan/)
when they said that.) So I’m using it again with my class this year, and
currently expect I will do so in future sessions as well.

The book also drives me crazy. Next time I’ll talk about why.

[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.](http://wp.me/pxfBj-19O)
