+++
title = "Nurses vs doctors"
full_title = "Nurses vs doctors"
date = "2014-10-01"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/01/nurses-vs-doctors/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/01/nurses-vs-doctors/).

Nurses vs doctors

Medicine, the things that doctors do, was an ineffective pseudoscience
until fairly recently. Until 1800 or so, they were wrong about almost
everything. Bleeding, cupping, purging, the four humors – useless.  In
the 1800s, some began to realize that they were wrong, and became
medical nihilists that improved outcomes by doing less. Some patients
themselves came to this realization, as when Civil War casualties hid
from the surgeons and had better outcomes. Sometime in the early 20th
century, MDs reached break-even, and became an increasingly positive
influence on human health. As Lewis Thomas said, medicine is the
youngest science.

Nursing, on the other hand, has always been useful. Just making sure
that a patient is warm and nourished when too sick to take care of
himself has helped many survive. In fact, some of the truly crushing
epidemics have been greatly exacerbated when there were too few healthy
people to take care of the sick.

Nursing must be old, but it can’t have existed forever. Whenever it
came into existence, it must have changed the selective forces acting on
the human immune system. Before nursing, being sufficiently
incapacitated would have been uniformly fatal – afterwards, immune
responses that involved a period of incapacitation (with eventual
recovery) could have been selectively favored.

