+++
title = "sukla yajurveda"
full_title = "sukla yajurveda sandhyAvandana prayoga"
date = "2015-06-14"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2015/06/14/suklayajurveda-sandhyavandana-prayoga/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2015/06/14/suklayajurveda-sandhyavandana-prayoga/).

sukla yajurveda sandhyAvandana prayoga

White yajurveda or  
‘*suklayajurveda* ‘ is densely followed veda *shAkhA* in North India
.With time rituals and ritual manuals ( prayogaM and paddhatI ) of
vAjasaneyas changed , fancy manuals ( inauthentic elaborate rituals
composed by priest class for more earning ) replaced pAraskara sutra ,
kAtIya parishisTha and yAgnavalkya smrutI based manuals .Such authentic
and authority prayogaM and paddhatI books are either out of print or in
possession of some old vAjasaneyas . Those who want to teach authentic
prayogaM and Ahnika as *nitya adhyayana* ( study of veda without desire
as duty of brAhman ) at their home lacks students and pAthasAlAs with
fancy prayogaMs are full ( as they teach how to graspe dakshinA on
behalf of ritual  
). For example ,in our city before 75 years ‘ *Anhika sutravalI* ‘ (
which is an authentic and authority granTha ) was followed, then priests
and commoners started using ‘ *bramhakarma sammuchaya* ‘( a fancy and
inauthentic granTha which even lacks aupAsana homa , agnihotra ,
sthAlipAka prayoga and aparkarma prayogas ) now all are using
‘*nityakarma puja prakAsha* ‘ ( inauthentic in sense of pramAna from
sutra ) .All this fancy manuals contains elaborate rites and rituals
even each have unique sandhyA prayogaMs based on none .The actual
sandhyA according to kAtIya sutra don’t take more than 20 minutes (
Assuming 108 gAyatrI japaM ) and sandhyA in this manuals are so bulky
that they consumes single hour .Due to such reasons many have given up
their vedic practices .To restored Authentic vedic practic of
shuklayajurveda my next posts will be on some authentic prayogaMs ( of
course with pramAna ) word by word following pAraskara sutra.

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-img_20150615_005142.jpg?w=700 "IMG_20150615_005142.JPG")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-img_20150615_005142.jpg)

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-img_20150615_005000.jpg?w=700 "IMG_20150615_005000.JPG")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-img_20150615_005000.jpg)

Animesh’s Blog

