+++
title = "kAThaka purUsha suktaM"
full_title = "kAThaka purUsha suktaM"
date = "2015-06-26"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2015/06/26/kathaka-purusha-suktam/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2015/06/26/kathaka-purusha-suktam/).

kAThaka purUsha suktaM

purUsha suktaM is one of most celebrated vedic hymn employed densely in
any vedic ritual . It is recited in almost all Vedic rituals and
ceremonies. The purUsha suktaM is an important part of the rig-veda
(10.7.90.1-16). It also appears in the taittirIya Aranyaka (3.12,13),
the vAjasaneyI samhitA (31.1-6), the sAmaveda samhitA (6.4), and the
aTharvaveda samhitA (19.6). An explanation of parts of it can also be
found in the shatapaTha, taittirIya , and shvetAshwatara brAhmana. Like
any other veda shAkhA , kAThaka shAkhA too have purUsha suktaM. This
sukta is housed in purUshamedhaM of kAThaka shAkhA.The sukta is in
anushtuba and trishtup meters , vishvAtma purUsha ( virAta purUsha ,
vishvarUpa ) is deity and nArAyana is rishI.( kAThaks first recite meter
then deity and then the seer of any mantra , this is standard format of
viniyoga for them ).Like any other veda shAkhA it is one of important
suktas of kAThaka shAkhA. In srauta context it is used in purUshamedhaM
.In grihya context it is used as UpasThana sukta in sandhyA , also
employed in devtArchana and abhishekaM of any male deity. First
published edition of kAThaka purUsha suktaM was in ‘kAThaka samkalan’ of
suryakAnta.

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-fnjbnbw95ym1k2d6h71bktvc1.jpg?w=700 "FNJBNbW95YM1K2d6H71bKTVC.jpg")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-fnjbnbw95ym1k2d6h71bktvc1.jpg)

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-7uhtedt1b6p3alrrfefqqv69.jpg?w=700 "7UHtEdt1b6P3aLRRfEFQQV69.jpg")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/wpid-7uhtedt1b6p3alrrfefqqv69.jpg)

Footnotes

1\) ्ं /gum/ is missing in the text , neither marked nor recited in
modern recitations.

2\) purUshmedhaM is not found in samhitA portion ( probably in kAThaka
brAhman which is lost. )

3\) svars were lost at early stag so it is recited in ekashrutI mode.

Source

Handwritten sandhyA manual of swAmI lakshman joo.( His handwriting )

Animesh’s Blog

