+++
title = "The Role of Imagination"
full_title = "The Role of Imagination in Perception"
date = "2014-05-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/05/17/imagination-in-perception/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/05/17/imagination-in-perception/).

The Role of Imagination in Perception

Imagination is a topic of ubiquitous, varied and profoundly
existentially significant philosophical reflection in the
millennia-spanning heritages of South Asian thought. In the Brāhmiṇical
traditions that grew out of the śramaṇa movements in ancient India, it
was often conceived as the “magic” (māyā) through which first the
luminous deities and then, in different degrees and ways, consciousness
created or manifested the world with all its beautiful but ultimately
inessential material bodies and things. In one branch of South Asian
Buddhism, Vijńānavāda, Vasubandhu attributes to the imagination the
power to help us see colors, taste flavors, feel textures and love
ourselves, in spite of the fact that, in reality, there are no such
things as colors, flavors, textures or selves. It is these marvelous
and surely profound conceptions of imagination that most Westerners
newly introduced to Asian religious and philosophical histories are
presented with. But are their resources in the Asian traditions that
make of imagination something more than the repository of fabrications,
illusions and misunderstandings of ourselves? Might imagination also
help us to experience and thrive in the sensuous and physical world that
is the home of our embodied lives?

As B.K. Matilal illustrated more than thirty years ago in his landmark
English-language study on theories of perception in Indian thought,
“imagination” (kalpanā) was given a technical sense and was seen to be a
basic mechanism of cognition by classical South Asian thinkers for
millennia. One of the most fraught debates that took place over the
role of imagination in cognition between Brāhmiṇical and Buddhist
philosophers involved whether or not imagination played a role in direct
sensation or perception (pratyakṣa) or whether it was an activity
confined to inferential states of reflection (anumāna) or to mental
states that were merely fantasies, concoctions of things that were not
real. This issue was placed front and center through the purported
definitions given for sensation or perception by the most seminal
seventh-century purveyors of Yogācāra-Sautrānta Buddhism, Dińńāga and
Dharmakirti. They insisted, in subtly variant ways, that imagination
could not be operative in purely sensory or perceptual cognition. This
precipitated centuries of attempts by Brāhmiṇical opponents to
demonstrate that, while “imagined” objects were not themselves directly
sensed, the objects of sensation could often not be recognized as the
things they are without the aid of imagination. We do not, they came to
insist, only use our eyes to see, but we must often use imagination to
see, and by that very token, imagination helps give us access to what is
real.

Now, while this debate has often been cast, in both classical South
Asian and modern Western hermeneutical terms as turning on the problem
of whether or not commonly pervasive properties or “universals”
(samānya) should be considered objectively real or natural phenomena or
merely conceptual “constructs,” I would like here to focus on how these
opposed positions characterize sensation or perception itself. When we
sense, what exactly do we sense, and how do we understand the mechanisms
though which sensations and perceptions as specific kinds of cognitions
come about? I will demonstrate in what follows that both
Yogācāra-Sautrāntika Buddhists and Naiyāyikas held that imagination
enables us to think and act within the world rightly and effectively.
Imagination, that is, helps us to experience what is real. However,
their respective accounts of this are not equally sound and true to our
experience. I believe that what will become apparent as a result of
this focus is the degree to which the Yogācāra-Sautrāntika conception of
kalpanā impoverishes their depiction of what sensations and perceptions
are. I will in the course of this examination try to explain why I
characterize their view in this way in the light of certain Nyāya
attempts to defend the role of imagination in perceptual states. We
will then discover the insightful and powerful fashion in which certain
Nyāya philosophers argued that imagination intermingles with our
sensation and helps us to truly perceive.

In his definition, Dińńāga posited that “sensory cognitions are free of
imagination” (pratyakṣaṃ kalpanā podhraṃ). Obviously, it is crucial for
us to understand how Buddhist logicians conceived of imagination in
order to grasp what immediate sensations or perceptions are free of in
lacking it. The most important sense of kalpanā or vikalpa in
Dharmakirti’s commentaries concerns the power of imagination to provide
the “establishing basis” or “mark” (sādhana) that serves as the sign for
thinking about, remembering or speaking about an object of experience.
That is to say that imagination here does not have the role it has in
other systems of thought, in which its objects are distinguished or
separated from one another. Rather, imagination forges connections
between one objective form and another by creating commonalities between
them, but all of these commonalities are concocted within the
imaginative process and are not gleaned from things that are merely
sensed. And it is precisely, for the Yogācāra-Sautrāntikas, their
reference to the objects of other cognitions prompted by “marks” that
distinguishes “imaginations” from sensory cognitions, for the latter are
restricted (niyata) only to that object that appears directly to the
sense organs (nirbhāsa). Unlike other mystical traditions of Indian
thought such as those in the lineage of Vedānta, then, Dińńāga and
Dharmakīrti did not associate kalpanā as imagination with the concocting
of dream or illusory cognitions that could be produced wholesale by the
mind. This was a weighty consideration for Dharmakirti in defending and
clarifying Dińńāga’s definition of perception, which had claimed that
perceptions were distinct from imaginings because the latter affixed
names and a classification to objects. When the Brāhmiṇical loyalists
pointed out that false cognitions and dream states could also attach
names and classes to their objects, and so such a distinction did not
threaten the possibility that real commonalities could be detected in
perceptual experience, Dharmakirti responded. The kind of imagination
he had in mind was free from error (abhrānta) and thus decidedly not
associated with dream or illusion. For the Yogācāra-Sautrāntika
position, he insisted, imaginative cognitions could still serve as
instruments of knowing, for they could, in the technical epistemological
sense, often lead to successful activities such as apprehending or
inferring a fire as a fire and using it for warmth. Instead,
imaginations, insofar as they enable people to attribute any commonality
(samānyalakṣaṇa) to an experienced thing through memory, association,
inference and so on are not drawing any of such commonality from a
directly perceptual experience, but from other cognitions. We do not,
that is, see commonality, we imagine it.

This presents at least two serious problems, one for the Buddhist
tradition itself and the other of a broader philosophical sort. The
difficulty of Dińńāga’s and Dharmakīrti’s isolation of perception that
is internal to Buddhist discourses has been lucidly pointed out by
Richard Hayes. The Sautrāntikas have on the one hand with this model
elevated directly perceptual knowledge to the level of paramount truth
(paraṃārthasatya) because, unlike inferences that can involve mistaken
predication, it is always free from error. On the other, all the
signature teachings associated with Buddhism, the suffering and
impermanence of life, the lack of a self or fixed nature in persons and
things, the soundness of the eightfold path and so on are all knowable
only by inference, by making generalizations about direct experience
that are not strictly speaking derived from it, and that don’t
ultimately correspond with it. So much, then, for the claim for
Buddhism’s grounding in direct experience if what the Sautrāntikas say
about the gap between perceptual and conceptual experience is true.
But, in another implication that is more broadly pertinent, one way to
characterize Dińńāga’s and Dharmakīrti’s conception of perceiving is
that we really don’t perceive anything to speak of. We can call the
supposed object of nirvikalpapratyākṣa a “self-characterized” momentary
experience if we want, but since the content is not perceptually
recognized, apprehended, bears no perceptual commonality with other
things and cannot be articulated in language, what is the theoretical or
practical difference between the so-called svalakṣaṇa object of
perception and a mere stimulant of a sense organ that has no cognitive
or practical value for the person who is aware of it?

Even, to press the point in the paragraph above, if we insist as the
Sautrāntikas do that the self-characterized object of a perceptual
cognition is still somehow a definite thing, how experientially tenable
is it to claim that our perceptual encounter with things exhibits no
structural relationships at all? Do we not, for example, genuinely
taste both the coolness and flavor of a liquid as belonging to the
liquid when we drink it? Do we not hear both the pitch and duration of
a bird’s call as coming from the bird when it is sung? Do we not see
ridges in a tree as inlaid into the tree when we look at it? This
question does not require that we have conceptual ideas of what
“coolness,” “pitch” or “ridges” when we have these respective
sensations, but rather asks whether we can perceptually identify
features as belong to, residing in or qualities of other things. Do we
only sensorally detect one experience at a time with no direct relation
to the next, or do we have some genuinely sensory access to the textured
layeredness of things? Do we, to put the above questions in the
contrapositive, detect temperature and flavor as coming from outside the
glass that holds the liquid I am drinking, or see ridges just happening
to appear in proximity to some other sensations of wood? Speaking of
ideas that are counter-intuitive, it seems to strain credulity to
suppose that we “infer” things like flavor, pitch and spatial relations
after seeing things that are just distinct from one another in some
ultimately inexplicable way. It is maybe for this very reason that the
vocabulary of “concept” as a translation for words like kalpanā or
vikalpa is particularly unhelpful, because the Buddhists believe that
these are in a more literal sense “imaginations” that arise from the
sedimented dispositions we have built up as the kinds of beings we are.
And the fact that they are conceived as “imaginings” greatly buttresses
the Buddhist theory, for as imaginings, they are presumably subjective
to each of us and not features of the physical world. After all, as
Yogācārins like Vasabandu would point out, textures and flavors and
spatial relations will appear quite differently to creatures of
different kinds, and this would show our qualitative experience of
things depends largely on how we are used to taking them. But, though
this reminder is surely a helpful one, it does not quite capture the
Naiyāyika concern with the notion of perceptions as being exclusively
nirvikalpa. Nyāya thinkers too acknowledge that our habits and accreted
ideational associations (saṃskāra) will cause one person to find a sound
beautiful and another person to cringe with annoyance at it. While we
may react to different features of things quite uniquely given our
individuated karmic heritages, we still find features, according to
Nyāya thinkers, to belong to things in our properly perceptual
experiences. And so, in conceding that imagination does play an active
role in our perceptions of structure, Nyāya philosophers wanted to
demonstrate how this imaginative process enhances our sensory engagement
with things and helps to reveal them, rather than merely distorting
perceptual experience and framing it around our subjective desires and
plans.

Of course, the contention that we do not directly perceive commonality
in the things we encounter strikes at the very heart of the classical
Brāhmiṇical conception of realism. According to Nyāya, our most direct
form of knowledge, precisely perception, does present us not just with
unique sensations, but also with features that are common to many
things. Naiyāyikas therefore vigorously attempted to refute this
contention that commonality was merely a creation of mental activity and
not observable in the properties of things. Now, they often proffered
the rebuttal that is built into the classical Nyāya ontology, which
asserted that common properties or features are actually in the things
we see, and so when we perceive something, we perceive both the
individuated thing and its common properties all at once. But this of
course is just a claim; how can we know that it is true? The
demonstration proved to be enormously tricky for Naiyāyikas, in large
part because they generally agreed with Dińńāga and Dharmakirti that, in
the first moment of sensory cognition, there is no recognition of things
as qualified by their common properties (viṣeśyaviśeṣanabhāva). Indeed,
this acknowledgement that an initial sensory cognition does not
apprehend commonality in the features sensed seems, as D.N. Shastri
pointed out long ago and John Taber has reiterated since, to have been
generally accepted among both Mimāmsa and Nyāya thinkers within a
century or so of the idea’s introduction by Dińńaga, among Kumārila,
Vācaspatimiśra, Śridhāra, Udayana and persisted on into Gańgeśa’s
writings. If, then, imaginings (vikalpaka) that supplied the
commonality of certain features of our experience and the relational
ties that joined such features with certain objects were not drawn from
the first moment of sensation, then in what sense could they be
perceptual? If they are perceptual and not merely produced and
projected onto our sensations by mental activity alone, there must be a
causal story for how the objects of imagination could be perceptual, or
how they could help make perceptions perceptions.

In the next several centuries, Nyāya thinkers made a number of
successive attempts to show how imagination enhanced perceptions, and
did not merely follow them and distort them in some fundamental fashion
as the Buddhists held. Some, like Vācaspatimiśra, slightly broadened
the classical definition of perception itself, saying that it occurred
not merely when something comes in direct contact with the sense organs
but when something enters into the range of sensory cognition (yad eva
indriyajasaya jńānasya gocaras tat pratyakṣaṃ na tv indriya saṃbaddham).
Previous cognitions, memories, have made us familiar with the
relational ties between things and their properties. And so, we
remember that certain features are always found in certain kinds of
things, and these memories can be relied on for the imaginative content
that takes features (dharma) as “marks” of the things in which they are
found (dharmin). Thus, as Vācaspati tells it, while the initial sensory
contact with a thing makes us aware of a form (rūpatayā), the memory
bringing the imagined relation between presently sensed features and
recalled things mingles with the sensation such that the object we
finally fully perceive possesses a form (rūpitayā). This manner of
perceiving things comes to be known in the tradition as jńānalakṣaṇa, or
a perceptual cognition featuring the possession of marks or
determination. Imagination, on this view, must surely assist, through
memory, in the delivery of “marks” or common features through which
things are recognized, lest a sensation be only an unnoticed physical
interaction between a thing and a sense organ. But, so long as the
features or qualities of things in question are in fact seen in the
sensory cognition, then imagination helps us to perceptually recognize
what a thing is with the aid of things remembered that resemble the
present. Is this, and other Nyāya representations much like it,
sufficient to demonstrate how imagination can aid perception?

In this ongoing contemporary debate about perception and imagination in
Nyāya, Chadha has suggested that imagination gives the person a
“recognitional capacity” to discriminate between things. While this
conception of a “recognittional capacity” (presumably a translation of
the expression samvid samārthya) invoking memory and habits, is helpful
in explaining the role that kalpanā plays in our conscious lives, it
perhaps requires that we retrain are focus on precisely what kalpanā in
this context are. We have said above that, in this particular
philosophical context, imaginings are non-illusory cognitions in which
some feature of the world is presented as a common one, that serves as a
“mark” or indicator of a relationship with things of certain kinds, and
that therefore invokes other cognitions. Now this would seem, as
Chakrabarti has also pointed out, to contravene another basic Nyāya
belief about perceptions, namely that they cannot be caused by another
cognition but are instead caused by sensory contact with things. So, if
what is being suggested here is that imaginations actually can help
precipitate or facilitate perceptions, then Naiyāyikas should not accept
that. Several contemporary scholars have offered technical arguments in
defense of Nyāya on this point. Phillips and Chadha have both argued
that an imagining of a structured thing, itself acquired from past
experience, though it is a necessary condition for making a mere,
unstructured sensation a structured perception, is not the latter’s
instrumental or chief cause, which is the sensation itself, and so no
incoherence is done to the Naiyāyika position on this matter. However,
it is perhaps the classical authors, the most groundbreaking of which
was Vācaspatimiśra, who provide us with a more detailed picture of how
this mingling of sensation and imagination can enable us to experience
the layerdness and commonality of real things that seems to permeate our
awareness.

First of all, he asks whether the Yogācāra conviction that sensations
and imaginings really follow two utterly separate causal streams. If
this were the case, Vācaspati argues, then two other postulates that the
Buddhists are committed to, namely that some causal relation (the
ālambana or “basing causal relation”) does exist between sensations and
imaginings and that imaginings can impel us to actually successful
activity, could not hold good. Furthermore, he points out that sensory
cognition (indriyavijńāna) can be evoked by a particular image
(vikalpa), when, for example, upon seeing a color that reminds us of a
similarly-colored candy that tasted sweet, our present sensation of the
color is accompanied by a sensory anticipation of sweetness. In this
way, the memory, in the form of a previously sensed image (kalpanā) can
enhance our sensory experience, and by so doing, make a merely sensed
feature (orange) into a robust perception (this is an orange, sweet
M&M). And when we reach for it and eat it, our sensation, aided by our
imagination, has helped us correctly identify a thing sensed. Not every
imagined experience recalled through memory will enable us to correctly
identify our sensations through such sensory enhancement, but it is not
at all difficult, in turns out, to enumerate many that do. While the
commonality of an immediately sensed feature may not be given through
the sensory experience in its first instant, then, previously
experienced sensory images preserved in memory which provide “marks”
through which commonality is detected can be triggered that add to the
sensory experience and help us rightly identify their objects.

One will notice that this narrative also suggests how imaginations can
assist us in identifying the structure or layerdness of a given
sensation. To continue with the snacky example of the previous
paragraph, the initial sense-organ contact presents us with a color, or
perhaps a color that has a roughly round shape. The sensation triggers
a memory in which we enjoyed a piece of candy with the same, or strongly
resembling, color or shape, and in addition to the added sensation of
sweetness that the memory adds to it, we are able to identify the object
of our sensation as an M&M, and we have the robust perception of the
complex and predicative sort that we are so familiar with in many of our
other experiences. Again, there is no guarantee that every such
structured perception will be correct, will be in accord with the thing
before us; we might reach for the treat and discover that it’s an awful
Resees Piece instead, , or maybe even something totally unexpected, a
large necklace bead. But there are also many times when the
sensation-imagination complex will make us rightly aware of the candy in
front of us, will help us identify the thing to which a feature belongs.

This formulation of the intermingling of sensation and imagination that
helps give rise to robust perceptions was criticized by D.N. Shastri
long ago, and echoes of his critique still reverberate in some quarters
of modern scholarship. His biggest complaint seems to have been that,
with this explanation, Vācaspati has abandoned the already established
Nyāya position (siddhānta) that perception arises from sense-organ
contact with the object alone and is not brought about by another
cognition. Surely while abandoning a previously held scholastic
position could be cause for censure and defeat in a classical Indian
debate, there are several issues that mitigate this criticism. While
early Naiyāyikas did seem to believe, as noted above, that veridical
sensory cognitions were determinate from the beginning since their
objects were in fact structured substances, we have also seen that their
original definitions did continence the possibility that indefinite,
vague sensations could occur that required aid from additional sensory
cognitions to properly identify. This allowance may have left enough
room for not only Vācaspati but for others to refine the theory of how
perceptions are brought about without smacking of necessary systematic
incoherence. However, even if Vācaspati’s thematization of the mutually
supportive activities of perception and imagination may not in the end
be perfectly reconcilable with Gautama’s and Vātsyāyana’s, insisting
that original definitions be either immovably committed to lest one
surrender one’s entire worldview would obviously make classical Indian
thought in its practice nothing more than a face-off of fixed doctrines
rather than a heritage of substantive philosophical growth that was and
is bolstered by refinements and improvements rather than undermined by
them. We should no more hold Buddhist philosophers, whose tradition
itself exhibits extraordinary and powerful intellectual hybridity, to
such an inflexible precedent than we should Naiyāyikas or any other
seekers of truth. What ought to matter is whether or not the arguments,
and the representation of the world and our own nature they support, are
cogent or not. And on this score, it seems to me, Vācaspati’s
explanation of perception, and how sensations can be aided by imaginings
in correctly identifying things, is superior to that of his successor
Gaṇgeśa, who, on this matter, obfuscates the issue of how we can cognize
unlocalized features of the world more than he clarifies it. In
Vācaspati, we find an exemplary instance of an Indian philosophical
theory that empowers imagination not just to project its desirous
obsessions through Vasubandhu’s mere intentions or construct the world
out of Śańkarācārya’s cognitive magic, but to enrich and enable our
experience of living in the actual world.

