+++
title = "House of Egibi: Entrepreneurs in the Neo-Babylonian Empire"
date = "2021-03-23"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/03/23/house-of-egibi-entrepreneurs-in-the-neo-babylonian-empire/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/03/23/house-of-egibi-entrepreneurs-in-the-neo-babylonian-empire/).

It’s 560 BCE, the Neo-Babylonian throne just a few months back, had been
usurped by Neriglissar. The situation is north-west of the city of
Babylon and a purchase is going to be made of a land outside the city by
a man named Nabû-ahhē-iddin. Around 24 Kur of land (about 32.4 hectare),
situated on either side of the New Canal is being bought. The land in
question is being sold by four brothers to Nabû-ahhē-iddin for about 22
1⁄3 minas (about 11,166 kg) of silver but they are not going to get this
amount. Instead the amount is going to the temple of Marduk in Esagila
which had a claim against the brother.¹ Purchase is being witnessed by
high ranking officials like seven royal judges and none other than the
governor of Babylon. Four scribes are also there and together, these
people stand witness to the business exchange and the document is
finally signed by the witnesses when they roll their seals along the
edges of the cuneiform tablet.²

Such complex business activity with so much meticulous detailing is not
something that comes to our mind when we think of ancient empires
anywhere in the world. The picture is usually overshadowed by the
politics of the time, the stories of the kings and the armies marching,
the battles ensuing, the temples and its gods being worshiped. Somehow,
the trading activities, the business aspect of the civilization is not
what one usually thinks of. But this is quite natural when we consider
the fact that majority of the historical data of that time is either
religious or is concerned with the palace.

Any other kind of information is the exception, not the rule. It’s not
that other details like the information regarding business activities
weren’t maintained. They most definitely were but the data stored was
either on perishable materials or it wasn’t kept for period long enough
for us to retrieve it and information considered unnecessary was
probably destroyed. But sometimes, the historians get lucky. And this
post is about that sheer stroke of luck when one gets huge details
regarding the business activity in an ancient empire. This post is about
the activities of one business family, the house of Egibi whose
transactions are now known to us, thanks to the numerous cuneiform
tablets that were found in the late nineteenth century CE at the site of
ancient Babylon.

![***A glazed relief of a lion from Ancient Babylonia (Neo-Babylonian
Period)
***^(***a***)](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/relief-of-glazed-lion.jpg?w=1024)

**Background**

When Europeans started conquering the regions that were once flourishing
centres of older civilizations, mostly from eighteenth century onwards,
their fascination with the *“Orient”* resulted in unlocking of the doors
of the past. This unlocking came as a surprise in various degrees
particularly for the regions like Egypt, Mesopotamia and Persia where
the memories of the past had been completely erased by the cults of
monotheism. By the 19th century, the locals of these areas realized that
the Europeans were collecting *“*the old scraps*”* by any means possible
and it dawned on them that they can earn a few quick bucks if they could
sell some of these artifacts which for them were worthless anyway. The
idea was certainly lucrative. And so it happened that few locals when
searching for some of these artifacts and hoping to sell them, found in
the late 19th century (1870s-1880s) many tablets in the ruins of the
private houses of ancient Babylon.

***“They were found in sealed earthen jars, a sure sign that they had
been consciously set aside by their owners.”***^(***3***)

This archive of what was originally around four thousand tablets was
unfortunaltely reduced to around two thousand due to various problems
like careless excavations and shipments. Most of the collection ended up
in the British Museum due to the inter-mediation of a man named George
Smith. The rest of the tablets from this archive went to the other
museums in Europe and America. Many scholars over the time have studied
them and have enlightened us regarding the details of these tablets
(most notably, the scholarly research of Cornelia Wunch and also
Kathleen Abraham whose work has been a major source for this post).

The archive belonged to one family called the Egibi family, spanning
five generations, covering the periods of king Nebuchadnezzar II to the
beginning of the rule of Persian monarch Xerxes (approximately from 606
BCE to 486 BCE). As this covers mostly the period of Neo-Babylonian
Empire and only some fifty years of the Achaemenid Empire in Babylonia,
the archives are for the sake of simplicity called Neo-Babylonian. This
archive includes some archives of the Nūr-Sîn family as well, for when
the daughter-Nuptāya of a descendant of Nūr-Sîn, Iddin-Marduk married
into the Egibi family, the activities of both the families for some time
got overlapped.

![***Egibi Family Tree
^(b)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/egibi-family-tree-3.jpg?w=675)

**Origin of the Family**

In the earlier stages of the research of this archive, it was suggested
that the Egibi family was actually a banking house and that the family
was Jewish in origin (connecting the name Jacob as the source or
derivation of the name Egibi). The New York Times, in 1879, even wrote
an article over it titled *“Egibi & Co*. *The Oldest Bankers*“*⁴* But
this argument has been refuted for long. It is now confirmed that the
name Egibi is a short form of the Sumerian e.gi-ba-ti.la which means
*Sîn*–*taqīṣa*–*libluṭ* in Babylonian. This translates into “*‘O Sin
(the moon god), you have given (the child), may he now live in
thrive.’…this follows a well attested Babylonian name pattern.”⁵*
Scholarly research has also disapproved the tag “bankers” credited to
the family because what we usually consider basics of banking *i*.*e*.
depositing money and in turn lending it out at a higher rate to others
is not the case here.⁶ The archive that comprises our sources can more
appropriately be called entrepreneurial rather than deposit banking.
They did accept deposits from others and also lent money to others but
the profit for the family did not come from this difference and the
money for their various investments came from other business
transactions rather than banking.

**The Start**

The family was not what we can consider the traditional riches, there
was neither any inherited property nor any prebendary offices for the
earliest generation are mentioned in the archives. The prebendary system
was a transactional system in which the temple promised a share in the
temple revenue in return for various services provided, both priestly
and skilled work. It was considered a prestigious job and most of the
prebendary holders were free and not slaves and many ‘old money’
families had prebends.⁷ But the start of the Egibi family isn’t like
this. Sulaja/Sulaya, man of the the earliest generation for whom the
documents were made, earned his money mostly by business in wholesale
commodities, particularly barley and dates around the rural region of
Babylon. He had many business partners during the course of his life,
that helped him to make several connections. The wealth earned and the
connections made helped his son Nabû-ahhē-iddin (mentioned in the
beginning of the post) who later made perfect use of this to enlarge the
business and riches of the family.⁸

**The *Harrānu***

Sulaja and Nabû-ahhē-iddin took the help of the *harrānu* companies (
*harrānu* means a street or a caravan) that organized business
partnerships on “debt/equity basis”. This can be best described as:

> ***“These partnerships commonly were formed between a senior financial
> backer (the sleeping partner) and an on-the-spot junior partner who
> did the actual work.Drafted as an interest-free debt contract, they
> implied thatthe backer would recoup his original capital upon the
> dissolution of the business, so that only the profits were shared and
> either reinvested or distributed in regular intervals. Such
> partner-ships were neither new nor unique, assimilar forms of
> enterprise already are known from the beginning of the second
> millennium BC under the name oftappûtum, especially in the long
> distance trade.”***
>
> **Cornelia Wunsch, Neo-Babylonian Entrepreneurs (2010)**

So a sort of start-up capital was provided by the venture capitalists
and the work was carried on by the other junior partners who after
“paying off their backer”, started on their own ventures. The difference
with any other loan and this kind of contract was that the acting
partner was to work full time and was not to take any other partner. The
risk was great but so was the profit and therefore, this style of
contract suited those ambitious businessman who wanted to earn big. This
is the method that was adopted by Sulaja/Sulaya and his son as well. But
there was a downside to this also because when one lost in this venture,
one lost big. Wunsch points out that there is also evidence of many
families loosing big in such ventures and were ultimately forced to sell
their properties. Evidently, many got rich but many lost as well. The
Egibi family in turn when got rich enough, acted as venture capitalist
in the *harrānu* contracts to the other junior partners in future.

**Main Business of the Egibi Family**

The main business of the Egibi family was of collection, commodity
transport and storage. They played the role of a mediator between the
producer and the consumer. Various goods like barley, dates, onions and
wool were transported. The Egibis earned their wealth by financing these
activities.⁹

***“They accepted deposits, provided loans, paid off client’s debts, and
enabled the acquisition of goods for future payment by providing credit.
The family was very successful in its trade of agriculture products,
which enabled it to acquire large tracts of land, and some of its
members became leading officials in Babylon.”***^(***10***)

The rural side produced the goods and the main buyers of these products
were in the cities like the temples and the royal palace that had huge
personnel to support as well. The farmers also had to pay the rent and
tax to the king (including very important irrigation fees). The problem
was to transport these crops to various sources in the city. Individual
farmers were unable to do that. And here came the mediators like the
Egibi family.

**Transport and Tax Farming**

In the process of tax farming, the responsibility of collecting taxes
from a given area is given to certain individuals – the “tax farmers”
who pay in exchange of this right, a certain fixed amount. The rights
are usually auctioned of to the highest bidder and the amount of tax
calculated is based on the expected revenue from the region. Any amount
over this expected revenue is the profit for the tax farmer. The Egibi
family combined their tax farming with the transport and storage of
various commodities and this formed the main business of the family.

***“The traditional Mesopotamian practice was to draw up debt contracts
to deliver a given volume of crops at harvest time, in payment for
money, advanced for seed and draft animals, fees for irrigation water,
kindred taxes, or similar items.” ***^(***11***)

A very important part was played by the canal system in ancient
Mesopotamian farming. In southern Mesopotamia, the centre of Baylonian
civilization, the soil is fertile but the rains are insufficient and
therefore, irrigation becomes very necessary. You might have heard about
the yearly inundations of the Nile in Egypt where the floods in the
river are just in time to provide proper moisture to the soil, helping
in the farming process. But quite the opposite are Euphrates and Tigris,
who have the tendency to flood every year but on the time when it is not
needed i.e. the harvest time. So, irrigation played much more important
role in Babylonia than probably in Egypt. Dams, sluices, canals were
made to provide the fields with water and protect them from the floods
when needed. As the rivers deposited a lot of silt, this required
regular maintenance.¹²

All the landowners like the farmers and even the temple, using the
canals had to pay a fee for its use and maintenance. The Egibis
contacted the official responsible for maintenance of the canal along
with collecting the fees for its use and paid him a fixed amount to pay
the royal palace and in return, earned themselves the right to collect
the canal dues in kind. They would establish debt contracts with the
cultivators and provided them with the lending money, purchasing their
crops and arranging for its transport. And for the transport, the Egibis
hired many boats and boatmen. The cultivators were asked to bring their
crop as a tax payment to the loading site on a pre-decided date. Instead
of “*having to pay individual retail rate for individual deliveries*“,
they would pay just a lump sum to the canal official and with
combination of their tax farming business, the family was able to earn
huge profits from this cycle by financing these ventures. As has been
perfectly explained by Wunsch:

***“While the Egibis increased access tocommodities for trade, their
effective control over such toll-collecting points enabled them to
obtain a major part of their profit margin at the disadvantage of
competitors, much in the way that John D. Rockefeller built up his
Standard Oil monopoly by negotiating favorable freight rates with the
rail roads. Tax farming probably was nottheir main business purpose,
butdovetailed efficiently with other aspects of their commodity
trade.”***

**The Crediting**

The usual credit providing facilities of the family can be understood by
one example: the tablet documented by an important member of the Egibis-
Marduk-nāṣir-apli, the fourth generation of the family (*see The Family
Tree posted above)*. The Israel Museum of Jerusalem holds one tablet
from the Egibi archive and scholar Kathleen Abraham provides us with its
contents that helps us to understand how a common creditor-debtor
transaction was conducted.

In the tablet, the receipt of ten shekels of silver by Marduk-nāṣir-apli
has been recorded. The amount has been returned by one female named
Nuptaya, wife of one Bēl-iddin on January 18, 515 BCE in Babylon. The
silver received was actually *“part of an outstanding debt* *of silver,
the original amount of which has not been specified, which Bēl-iddin*
*owed to the Egibi family. Apparently, *Bēl-iddin* had died and his wife
was left with paying his debts, incurred by him in his lifetime.”¹³* As
per Abraham, it appears from the contents of the tablet that the debt
was now all cleared and there was no outstanding amount left to be payed
back and the document was signed by witnesses.

![***The Egibi Tablet Obverse (left) and Reverse (right) from Israel
Museum in Jerusalem. ^(c)***
](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/egibi-tablet-final.jpg?w=794)

The usual practise was that one copy of the receipt was given to the
ex-debtor as a proof and other was kept by the ex-creditor, probably for
book keeping. And as a standard procedure in the first-millenium BCE
Babylonia, when the debt was all cleared the documents or tablets
pertaining to the transaction were either scraped or given back to the
ex-debtor.¹⁴ This tablet was probably copy of the original and many such
copies were kept for the purpose of training the junior scribes. ¹⁵

**Egibi’s Business in Land**

There is some proof that the earliest member of the generation, Sulaja
had a palace land on lease possibly near Babylon, which he had to
cultivate with date palms and he probably received half of the yield in
return. Wunsch suggests that most probably this was the land that helped
to get his commodity business “off the ground”.

***Holding Administrative Offices*:** As has been mentioned in the start
of the post, the first major purchase of land was done by
Nabû-ahhē-iddin. Even before this purchase which was made during the
reign of Neriglissar, he had secured for himself the post of a court
scribe¹⁶ during the reign of king Nebuchadnezzar II on account of being
trained in scribal skills and even legal work. He also served in the
royal administrative centre of Opis and conducted business there on the
side as well. He “*issued documents to the royal officials on their
private matters*.” He also worked in the capacity of sort of a lawyer
for the then important official Neriglissar who later himself became
king by usurping the throne. Evidently, the connection that
Nabû-ahhē-iddin made with Neriglissar when the latter was an important
official of the empire proved quite fruitful later. During the reign of
Nabonidus, he worked as a royal judge of Babylon as well. And it is
during this period of working as a royal judge that many business
transactions of the family were handled by his son and his trusted
slaves.¹⁷ It is clear that these administrative offices and the
connections made during that period helped him a great deal in expanding
the family business.

***Real Estate and Crop Sharing:*** It was in the period of king
Nabonidus that Nabû-ahhē-iddin started to purchase various properties –
town houses, many parcels of land etc. The investment of the profits
from the tax farming and commodity transport was put into the land as
property. When the farm lands were purchased, they were rent out on
share cropping basis. The investment was far sighted, for the profits
were not going to be immediate but when it did start making profit, the
margin was big.

***“…their leasing arrangements gave tenants an economic motive to
invest in cultivating more capital-intensive crops, shifting from grain
to dates. In return for planting date palms, the Egibis allowed their
tenants to pay little rentin the early years, foregoing short-term
grain rent in order to obtain higher long-term returns from date trees,
which take several years to mature and yield a crop. They alsorequire
good irrigation and maintenance, and thus can be grown onlyin areas
close to awater supply.”****^(**18**)*

The biggest example of this was that on one particular plot near the New
Canal, the area under date cultivation increased from only 1/30th to
almost 1/4th!

***The Slaves:*** The Egibis were large slave holding private
enterprise.¹⁹ But what needs to be kept in mind is that the scale of the
system was nowhere close to what it was in the ancient Roman
civilization. The slaves were not that much in number that they can
“compete with free labor”. Though many owned slaves but most of the
time, it was mostly for domestic work and only very rich families used
to have their slaves trained. For example *“half of the the surviving
apprenticeships were contracted on behalf of the powerful Egibi
family”²⁰* One of the reason of less number of slave labour that Wunsch
explains was that slaves were much more expensive, and sold for an
amount almost equal to many year’s income of a hired worker. War
captives in those times were a constant source of slaves along with
slave markets. She goes on to explain that many slave girls were given
as dowry and some skilled slaves with business acumen could also be
given responsibility of some administrative duties. For this, we have
the example of Itti-Marduk-balāṭu (third generation of the Egibi family)
who “*entrusted at least three of his slaves with running his on the
spot affairs during prolonged periods of his absence.”²¹*

What is interesting is that many slaves who worked in farms and did the
hard work were mostly tenants rather than forced labour. And in this
way, even they had some interest in increasing the efficiency and
production quality of the farms. But the slaves in Baylonia remained
slaves for the rest of their lives and there was no concept of them
buying their liberty, unless at the the fag end of their lives and the
manumission even then was rather the initiative of their owner. ²²

**The Marriages**

As is the practice today, the connections made through marriages was an
effective measure to increase the business of the family. It is
suggested that in the earlier stages, the take off of the Egibis was
also helped by them marrying one of their daughters to a man of “some
means” to increase the connections and prestige of the family. Dowry
played an important role. The dowry given to the daughters was
considered to belong to the future husband or the father-in-law. But the
husband can and many a times actually did make wills in favour of the
wives or daughters. The Egibi family archives give us information
regarding dowries of women of three generations of the family (starting
from the third) and they follow a pattern – women who were married into
the the Egibi family brought far better and heavy dowries as compared to
the dowry of the daughters of the Egibis which was given to them on
their marriage.

***“Obviously, it must have been lucrative as well as prestigious to
marry into this part of the family, at least since the third
generation”***^(***23***)

But there were other technicalities that were important. The dowry was
considered the property of the parents of the wife until there was birth
of the children. That is why there are many examples where the actual
dowry was deliberately delayed until the birth of her children. Also,
the dowry silver could be invested by the husband but not without
providing compensation of equal amount for the wife’s security.²⁴

**The Egibis after the Persian Conquest**

Even after the conquest of Babylon by Cyrus in 539 BCE, we have
confirmation from the Egibi family archives that they continued their
role of tax farmers during the Achaemenid hold over Babylon. But this
required attentiveness and heavy lobbying in the Persian court. In fact,
Itti-Marduk-balāṭu even went to the Persian court and lobbied his case
to the high ranking Babylonians, *“evidently to befriend the officials
responsible for administering taxes under Persia’s empire.”²⁵* And his
efforts bore fruit. The Persians gave many established families like the
Egibis the right to collect taxes as these families were already
acquainted with the process and pre established local systems of
Babylonia.

**Conclusion**

It is evident that the Egibis were not the only entrepreneurial family
of such stature in Babylonia. Many such established business families
existed. Even cursory reading of their archives give us such valuable
insight into the business activities of that time. As mentioned earlier,
there is a tendency to limit the development of the ancient
civilizations to only religion, kings, architectural marvels etc. Not
disregarding the extreme importance and value of these aspects of any
civilization, there obviously was much more to them. The business
activities many a times, as can be gleamed from the Egibi archives
reached extreme levels of complexity. If and when such sources come to
our attention, they shatter the one-dimensional image of the ancients.

**References**

1.  [Cornelia Wunch, *The Egibi Family – In: G. Leick (ed.): The
    Babylonian World. London: Routledge 2007, pp.
    232–242.*](https://www.academia.edu/1221586/_2007_The_Egibi_Family)
2.  *ibid*.
3.  *ibid*.
4.  [*Egibi & Co. The Oldest Bankers*, article published in The New York
    Times.](https://www.nytimes.com/1879/11/30/archives/egibi-co-the-oldest-bankers.html)
5.  C. Wunsch, *The Egibi Family*..
6.  [Cornelia
    Wunsch](https://www.academia.edu/734418/_2010_Neo_Babylonian_Entrepreneurs)*[,
    Neo-Babylonian Entrepreneurs (2010), The Invention of Enterprise
    :Entrepreneurship from Ancient Mesopotamia to Modern
    Times.](https://www.academia.edu/734418/_2010_Neo_Babylonian_Entrepreneurs)*
7.  *ibid*.
8.  C. Wunsch, *The Egibi Family*..
9.  [Marc Van De Mieroop, *A History of the Ancient Near
    East.*](https://archive.org/details/AHistoryOfTheAncientNearEast/page/n165/mode/1up)
10. *ibid*.
11. C. Wunsch, *Neo-Babylonian Entrepreneurs.(2010)*
12. *ibid*.
13. Abraham, K. (2011). An Egibi Tablet in Jerusalem.*Israel
    Exploration Journal,**61*(1), 68-73. Retrieved March 23, 2021, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/23214222>
14. *ibid*.
15. *ibid*.
16. C. Wunsch, *The Egibi Family*..
17. *ibid*.
18. Wunsch, *Neo*–*Babylonian Entrepreneurs*.
19. Edited by Jack M. Sasson, *Civilizations of the Ancient Near East*.
    (*1995*)
20. *ibid*.
21. Wunsch, *Neo*–*Babylonian Entrepreneurs*
22. *ibid*.
23. C. Wunsch, *The Egibi Family*..
24. *ibid.*
25. C. Wunsch, *Neo-Babylonian Entrepreneurs.(2010)*

**Photo Credits**

a\. [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
York.](https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/322585)

b\. [Cornelia Wunsch, *Neo*–*Babylonian Entrepreneurs* (*2010)*, *The
Invention of Enterprise :Entrepreneurship from Ancient Mesopotamia to
Modern
Times.*](https://www.academia.edu/734418/_2010_Neo_Babylonian_Entrepreneurs)

c\. Abraham, K. (2011). An Egibi Tablet in Jerusalem.*Israel
Exploration Journal,**61*(1), 68-73. Retrieved March 23, 2021, from
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/23214222>

