+++
title = "Skin Deep"
full_title = "Skin Deep"
date = "2016-10-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/10/30/skin-deep/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/10/30/skin-deep/).

Skin Deep

There are a couple of new
[papers](http://phys.org/news/2016-10-europeans-africans-immune-neanderthals-partly.html)
out in Cell about demonstrated immunological differences between
Africans and Europeans. We already knew that the course of various
infectious diseases can be quite different in people from those two
different races, while autoimmune risks are also different (lupus for
example is considerably more common in blacks). Researchers found that
inflammatory responses were considerably stronger in Africans than
Europeans. African macrophages zapped bacteria three times faster than
European macrophages.

I wonder if this increased inflammatory tendency is behind the increased
risk for sarcoidosis in blacks ([12-fold higher death
rate](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25188873)). If so, maybe you
could help the clinical course by damping down inflammation.

The African pattern almost certainly worked better in Africa (chock-full
o’ of pathogens, including many adapted to man or close relatives),
while the European pattern worked better outside of Africa – on the
whole cooler and less of a microbial playpen.

Henry and I, along with others, put out a
[paper](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567134809002123)
on this subject a few years ago.

Some of the milder-inflammation alleles in Europeans originated in
Neanderthals. Logical, since they too had adapted to the lower pathogen
load in ice-age Europe and Central Asia. This probably meant that
Neanderthals couldn’t have returned to Africa.

This is all impossible if race does not exist, or if Lewontin had had
anything to valid to say on the subject. Of course race does exist,
while Lewontin is a fountain of nonsense.

