+++
title = "Polynesia’s bloody roots"
full_title = "Polynesia’s bloody roots"
date = "2016-10-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/10/12/polynesias-bloody-roots/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/10/12/polynesias-bloody-roots/).

Polynesia’s bloody roots

Polynesians are mostly descended from a population on Taiwan,
represented today by Taiwanese aboriginals, and from a Melanesian
population similar to New Guinea or the Solomon Islands. They’re about
25% Melanesian autosomally, 6% Melanesian in mtDNA, 65% Melanesian in
Y-chromosomes.

Until recently, the dominant model was the slow-boat hypothesis, in
which the Taiwanese-derived Lapita culture mixed with Melanesians in New
Guinea and the Solomons before sailing out into the deep Pacific. The
funny numbers for mtDNA and Y-chromosome were explain by some
hand-waving matrifocal cultural bullshit.

Now they’ve looked at ancient DNA from Tonga and Vanuatu. The old
samples don’t have any noticeable amount of Melanesian ancestry. So it
was like this: the Lapita derived from Taiwan (thru the Philippines),
settled Vanuatua and Tonga – then were conquered by some set of
Melanesian men, who killed most of the local men and scooped up the
women. Probably their sons extended the process, which resulted in a
lower percentage of Melanesian ancestry while keeping the Y-chromosomes
mostly Melanesian.

After this conquest, the Polynesians expanded further east, and those
later settlement (Tahiti, Marquesas, Hawaii, etc) all had that \~25%
Melanesian component.

If you want to approach this kind of problem with reasonable priors,
read Robert E Howard, not Brian Ferguson.

