+++
title = "What happened at the"
full_title = "What happened at the beginnings of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta?—Part 1"
date = "2015-08-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/23/what-happened-at-the-beginnings-of-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/23/what-happened-at-the-beginnings-of-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-part-1/).

What happened at the beginnings of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta?—Part 1

The starting point of the present investigation is the fact that between
Rāmānuja and Veṅkaṭanātha a significant change appears to have occurred
in the scenario of what was later known as Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta (the
term is only found after Sudarśana Sūri). The Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta as
we know it was more or less there by the time of Veṅkaṭanātha, whereas
in order to detect it in the oeuvre of Rāmānuja one needs to
retrospectively interpret it in the light of its successive
developments. This holds true even more, although in a different way,
for Rāmānuja’s predecessors, such as Yāmuna, Nāthamuni and the
semi-mythical Dramiḍācārya etc.

How did this change occur? Is it due to external stimuli (e.g., to the
need to answer objections), so that everything was already there with
Rāmānuja and only needed to be spelt out? Was it due to an inner and
”natural” development? Was it due to a precise strategy? The scarcity of
data about Viśiṣṭādvaita between Rāmānuja and Veṅkaṭanātha allows for
multiple interpretations.

More specifically, several distinct component are constitutive of what
we now know to be Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta and are not present at the time
of Rāmānuja:

1.  1\. The inclusion of the Āḻvār’s theology in Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
2.  2\. The Pāñcarātra orientation of both subschools of Viśiṣṭādvaita
    Vedānta
3.  3\. The two sub-schools
4.  4\. The Vedāntisation of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
5.  5\. The impact of other schools

**  
The inclusion of the Āḻvārs’ theology**  
The first point to take into account is the fact that also the Āḻvārs do
not represent a uniform theological perspective and that they differ
also as far as the presence of Sanskrit terminology (e.g., in Nammāḻvār)
is concerned.  
Having granted this, some authors of the so-called Śrīraṅgam school such
as Tirukkurukai Pirāṉ Piḷḷan (1060–1161) and Nañjīyar (1113–1208) wrote
commentaries on Nammāḻvār in a style influenced by Rāmānuja’s choices.
Does it mean that Rāmānuja (who was according to the tradition Pirāṉ
Piḷḷai’s teacher) favoured this development? Or rather that the
Śrīraṅgam community was —independently of its Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
faith— close to the Āḻvārs’ heritage?

**The Pāñcarātra orientation of both subschools of Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta**  
Why did the two trends, later to be identified as two subschools of
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta both agree on adopting the Pāñcarātra Sacred
Texts? One might suggest that there is no (unitary) Pāñcarātra theology
and that consequently the adoption of Pāñcarātra Sacred Texts only
amounts to the adoption of their rituals. But, nonetheless: Why adopting
them? The question is even more urgent if one reflects on the early
history of the two subschools, which appears to be quite divergent, and
on the probably Kaśmīrī origin of the rituals prescribed in the
Pāñcarātra texts. Mumme suggests that the adoption of Pāñcarātra was due
to the “more liberal Pāñcarātra method of worship” (Mumme 1988, p. 8)
but does not elaborate on it. Could we imagine that the Śrīraṅgam school
first adopted an Ekāyana-Veda orientation, thus somehow forcing other
Vaiṣṇavas (the ones of the so-called Kañcī school) to try to steer
Vaiṣṇavas towards a more pro-Vedic attitude by adopting themselves
Pāñcarātra texts, but of a different orientation?

This post is a revised summary of the introduction I held at my panel at
the World Sanskrit Conference. For a pdf of my presentation, see
[here](https://www.academia.edu/13634202/Introduction_to_the_panel_One_God_One_%C5%9A%C4%81stra._Philosophical_developments_towards_and_within_Vi%C5%9Bi%E1%B9%A3%E1%B9%AD%C4%81dvaita_Ved%C4%81nta_between_N%C4%81thamuni_and_Ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADan%C4%81tha_16th_World_Sanskrit_Conference_Bangkok_June--July_2015).
For a summary of the panel in general, see
[here](http://wp.me/p3YaBu-tc).
