+++
title = "Book Review of Hinduism"
full_title = "Book Review of Hinduism and Environmental Ethics by Christopher G Framarin (Reviewed by Stephen Harris)"
date = "2015-08-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/08/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-stephen-harris/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/08/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-stephen-harris/).

Book Review of Hinduism and Environmental Ethics by Christopher G. Framarin (Reviewed by Stephen Harris)

**Christopher G. Framarin. *Hinduism and Environmental Ethics: Law,
literature, and philosophy*. 192 pp. London and New York: Routledge.
2014. 140 USD.**

This book is a welcome addition to the literature on Indian philosophy
and environmental ethics. Framarin’s main thesis is that certain
important Hindu texts are implicitly committed to the claim that plants
and animals have direct moral standing, that is to say that their
well-being ought to be considered when we decide how to act. He focuses
his account on three classics of the Hindu intellectual tradition: the
*Manusmṛti*, representing law, the *Mahābhārata*, representing
literature, and the *Yogasūtra*, representing philosophy (1-2). Part
one of the book surveys and critiques existing work on Hinduism and
environmental ethics. In part two Framarin advances an original set of
arguments defending his claim that these texts are implicitly committed
to ascribing direct moral standing to plants and animals.

The first chapter lays the groundwork for the book by arguing that any
plausible environmental ethic will need to ascribe direct moral standing
to plants and animals. This chapter also makes useful distinctions that
help clarify the issues at stake. For instance, Framarin distinguishes
direct moral standing, the position that an entity’s well-being should
be considered in deciding what to do, from intrinsic value, the claim
that something is valuable for its own sake (6-7). On the basis of this
distinction, he later dismisses as unconvincing an argument that Hindu
texts ascribe direct moral standing to plants and animals as a result of
their identity with *brahman*. Since *brahman* has intrinsic value, this
identification does entail that plants and animals have it as well;
nevertheless, it does not entail direct moral standing, since *brahman*
cannot be affected by human actions and therefore requires no
consideration at all (6-7 and chap. 4). Framarin’s employment of an
analytic methodology in marking distinctions like this is a strong
feature of the book that will doubtless have a positive influence on
future work in the field.

The remainder of part one surveys and critiques the existing literature
on Hindu environmental ethics. Chapter two summarizes instrumentalist
interpretations that claim plants and animals have value only as a
result of their relevance to human well-being. Chapters three and four
address positions that ascribe direct moral standing to nature, but
whose arguments are flawed. Chapter three focuses on arguments that
appeal to the karmically connected nature of everything that exists as
the basis for this ascription, while chapter four surveys views claiming
that the identification between Brahman and nature grounds ascriptions
of direct moral standing. Each chapter skillfully distinguishes between
various versions of the argument in question. Care is taken to represent
the authors’ positions fairly, after which Framarin offers objections to
each version of each argument. An interesting feature of these chapters
is the way they draw attention to similarities in the underlying
structure of the arguments of the authors they critique.

Part two of the book advances Framarin’s original arguments that certain
Hindu texts are implicitly committed to ascribing direct moral standing
to plants and animals. Each chapter focuses on a respective text from
law, literature or philosophy, with chapter five focused on the
*Manusmṛti*, chapter seven on the *Mahābhārata* and chapter eight on the
*Yogasūtra*. Chapter six responds to a potential objection to chapter
seven’s argument by showing why an episode of burning a forest in the
*Mahābhārata* should not be taken literally as a lack of concern for
plant and animal lives. Framarin develops several distinct arguments for
his position that these texts ascribe direct moral standing to plants
and animals. Variations of each argument apply to multiple texts, so
here I will just mention the basic form of each, rather than giving a
chapter by chapter summary.

The first of Framarin’s arguments is called “the argument from
sentience.” This takes as a premise that Hindu texts claim certain
actions are meritorious or demeritorious, and therefore give rise to
good or bad results in the future. Moreover, pleasure and pain are
respectively an important result of meritorious or demeritorious action.
Therefore, pleasure and pain must have intrinsic value; if they did not,
it would make no sense for them to result from morally good and bad
action. Framarin concludes that all creatures experiencing pleasure and
pain must therefore have direct moral standing. Moreover, Hindu texts
claim that plants as well as animals experience pleasure and pain.
Therefore, plants and animals have direct moral standing (77, 86 etc.)
Framarin claims that versions of this argument are applicable to all
three texts that form the basis of part two of his book, and offers
carefully reconstructed versions of each argument in the relevant
chapters.

Framarin offers two additional arguments that the relevant texts ascribe
direct moral standing to plants and animals. Both of these are
variations on the sentience argument, and both take the fact that
certain actions are meritorious or demeritorious and therefore must have
intrinsically good or bad results as an important premise. One argument,
which he calls “the life argument” claims that since Hindu texts view
lengthening or shortening of lifespan as a potential result of good or
bad action respectively, they are committed to viewing all living things
(which of course will all have lifespans) as having direct moral
standing. A third argument, called “the birth argument” uses the same
basic form, but substitutes particular abilities such as motion and
moral agency as the good result that implies direct moral standing.
Framarin claims that the life argument applies to the *Mahābhārata* and
the *Yogasūtra*, while the birth argument applies to the *Manusmṛti* and
the *Yogasūtra*. Versions of each argument are developed in detail in
the relevant chapters.

There are I believe at least two primary audiences for the book. First
and primarily, the book speaks to specialists in the field as it makes
substantive contributions in the field of cross-cultural philosophy
focused on the intersection between environmental ethics and Hinduism,
both by the original arguments developed in part two, and in the
critique of existing work in part one. Another important feature of the
book, however, is the great care Framarin has given to organizing and
where necessary reconstructing the argumentative structure of past work
in Hindu environmental ethics. As a result, the book will serve well as
a kind of primer for the second primary audience: those new to the field
of Indian environmental philosophy.

Another feature of the book that I appreciated was Framarin’s
methodology, which combined textual analysis with philosophical
reconstruction and argumentation. On the one hand, Framarin takes
seriously the underlying presuppositions of the Indian tradition.
Likewise, he skillfully appeals to textual evidence in reconstructing
premises in his argument. On the other, he uses philosophical argument
to go beyond what the texts explicitly say and reconstructs what they
are intellectually committed to in a way that lets him put the tradition
into dialogue with contemporary work in environmental ethics. A good
example of this technique is his sentience argument referred to above.
The argument leans heavily on the fact that Hindu texts claim morally
right and wrong actions bring about good and bad results. Framarin moves
beyond this explicitly stated position, however, by inferring that this
commits the tradition to accepting that the effects of these actions
must have intrinsic value, and that therefore beings experiencing these
effects will have direct moral standing. He then returns to what the
texts explicitly state and references passages ascribing sentience to
plants as well as animals, thereby allowing him to conclude that plants
should also be viewed as having direct moral standing.

Although a strength of the book, Framarin’s appeal to basic Hindu tenets
also relates to what I thought was a potential weakness. This is that in
relying on presuppositions of the Hindu tradition, it becomes less clear
what the relevance of Framarin’s original arguments are to those outside
of the Hindu intellectual worldview. Few contemporary authors, for
instance, will accept the metaphysical connection between morally
charged action and its results that forms the basis of each of
Framarin’s original arguments. Laying out the implicit philosophical
commitments of these Hindu texts is of value in itself, but I also found
myself wondering if Framarin believed these texts contributed something
to contemporary debates that will not be able to employ premises about
the meritorious results of action.

This criticism does nothing to disvalue the many admirable features of
this work. It will be an invaluable addition to the library of any
scholar interested in the intersection between classical Hindu texts and
environmental philosophy. I warmly recommend it for close study.

*Reviewed by Stephen Harris,Leiden University ([website
here](http://www.hum.leiden.edu/philosophy/academic-staff/harrisse.html))*
