+++
title = "Subservience: Of The Red, For The Red & By The Red"
date = "2021-08-29"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/08/29/subservience-of-the-red-for-the-red-by-the-red/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/08/29/subservience-of-the-red-for-the-red-by-the-red/).

The year of 1919 proved momentous for more than one reason. While this
year is surely to remind one of the oxymoronic peace conference at Paris
which halted one great war and sowed the seeds of another, the other
lesser famous event was founding of the Communist International – the
Comintern in Moscow by the leader of Bolshevik Revolution, Vladimir
Lenin. This organisation was an announcement to the world that Soviet
Russia was not to be the only communist entity. It was only a start and
Soviets openly advocated communism as the future reality of the world.
India was to be one of its laboratories. In this post, I try to analyse
the well known and the lesser known communist activities *vis-à-vis*
India and the subservience of Indian communism to entities outside India
after 1919 till 1933 *i.e.* the end of the famous Meerut Conspiracy Case
of 1929. It is a humble attempt to assemble all the important facts of
the said period on this topic and reiterate what other scholars and
writers have written. Let’s begin!

***Table of Contents*** ***& Links***

-   [Background](#Background)
-   [*c.* 1919-1922](#1919-1922)
-   [*c.* 1923-1926](#1923-1926)
-   [*c.* 1927-1929](#1927-1929)
-   [*c.* 1930-1933](#1930-1933)
-   [Conclusion](#Conclusion)
-   [References](#References)

**Background**

Communism as an ideology encompasses every aspect of a society but its
basis is usually the worsening economic conditions of the workforce and
India was also dealing with such issues in the early decade of 20th
century when the labour situation resembled the conditions of the
workforce during the early periods of Industrial Revolution in England.¹
With the benign start of the modern Indian industry in the middle of the
19th century, the ideas of the Left also started to surface. The
conditions of the labour in such environments of the modern industry was
more or less the same as that of its European counterparts and therefore
with the rise of the economic woes of labour, rose a set of people – the
activists and the philanthropists, with primarily humanitarian goals who
wanted to better those conditions.² By the last decade of the 19th
century, the early work in this direction was mostly like the early work
of Indian National Congress and followed the similar style of petitions
and moderate pressure on the colonial British Government of India for
the redressal of their grievances.

At this point, the Left literature in India had started to emerge.
However, it would be wrong to call it communism as the subtle
differences between labour rights, socialism and communism were not
clear to the Indian readers. The activists at that time, only wanted to
help in improving the conditions of the workers. Some organizations were
set up for the purpose mostly in Bombay which was the hub of early
Indian industry but also to a lesser extent in Calcutta and Madras. The
lesser penetration of violent Left ideas in this period can be
attributed to more or less moderate policies of Indian organizations of
all kinds at that time – be it political, social or economical.

***“This in a way prevented the emergence of leftism at an earlier
period, as it was strongly believed that by ending political subjection,
economic and political problems would be solved more easily.”
***^(***3***)

The great war had resulted in an increased manufacturing in the country
but the sub-par working conditions with no real change in the wages of
the workforce coupled with the labour shortage in the later part of the
war due to the Spanish influenza had created a curious mix of situations
that made the industrial cities of India, particularly Bombay because of
its significant industry of cotton textiles, quite ripe for the
emergence of strikes as a useful tool for the labour rights activists.
The result was that some influential trade unions had been established
and that culminated in the foundation of All-India Trade Union Congress
in 1920. The severity with which the partition of Bengal in 1905 had
been opposed by the nation had surprised many and the struggle against
the British from 1905 had given a fillip to the political activities of
India. Germany had seemed like a viable supporter against the British
and a new generation was now attracted towards the possibility of
violent overthrow of the current invaders. This resulted in many
individual as well as organised attempts in this direction. After the
end of World War I, Germany was defeated and many groups that had
emerged in foreign lands were now in dire need of support from some
other source. The disdain of the youth towards British found a
sympathizer in Soviet Russia. And when these circumstances coincided
with the founding of the Comintern in 1919, the emergence of an
organised communist organisation in and for India was not very far.

***c.*** **1919-1922**

In a way, Soviet Russia had inherited the temptation of being active in
India from its predecessors. From the time of Peter the Great to the
unsuccessful attempts of Czar Paul and Alexander, the Russians had
coveted India. Therefore, it was but natural that the Bolsheviks, now
armed with even bigger and ambitious ideology of Communism would want
India under their influence. Besides, the Russo-British relations were
sour at this time and what better way to undermine Britain than snatch
India, the crown-jewel of the British Empire from them. Conquer India
through communism and the rest of the British colonies would follow.

***“…even a threat to British power in India would undermine the British
power the world over.”⁴***

But how this was to be achieved? Lenin had strongly believed in the
creation of a party which would be the *“acknowledged vanguard of the
proletariat”* but he equally emphasised on securing influence over other
kind of political organizations. In his words, he believed in the
*“opportunity of gaining mass ally, even though this ally be
temporary…”* The same tactics were to be followed in India. One
commentator Kerzhentsev, writing in 1919 believed that the revolutionary
movement in India will grow increasingly stronger in the coming months.⁵
The Russian influence within India was not very strong during this time
and Moscow decided to use the small but now stranded groups outside
India for their advantage. The group that became important in this
regard was the Berlin group under Virendranath Chattopadhyaya, brother
of Sarojini Naidu and a scion of the famous Chattopadhyaya family. But
before coming to the activities in Berlin, let’s look at the actions of
M. N. Roy who was to be the foremost leader of the Indian Communism.

***§ M. N. Roy and Communist Activities Outside India***

Roy had been active as a revolutionary freedom fighter against the
British rule in the early years of the 20th century and through a very
interesting journey from China, Japan to the United States, he ended up
in Mexico in 1917. It is hard to say how much was he influenced by
Communism at this point, in fact as per some of his rivals in Mexico, he
was quite a traditionalist.⁶ Mostly he seems to have only wanted a free
India at the time and the ideology of Communism was yet to found
resonance with him. In Mexico, Roy with the German support lived a very
comfortable lifestyle along with his wife, Evelyn whom he had met in
America. He frequently wrote in favour of Mexico against its conflicts
with the United States and thus had good influence with President
Carranza. But by 1919, Roy was dissatisfied for he was out of touch with
anything that was happening in India.

Here Roy met F. Gruzenberg (later Michael Borodin), an agent of the
Comintern who also introduced Roy to Hegelian dialectics as key to
Marxism. Roy by now had already gained good knowledge about socialism
and with this new acquaintance, he was getting influenced by Communism.
Roy due to his influence with President Carranza also helped Gruzenberg
to gain diplomatic facilities for communication with Moscow. As a
result, Roy was now informed that Lenin wanted him to come to Moscow.

***He was also told by Borodin that if he founded a Communist Party in
Mexico and nominate himself as a delegate of the Third International
(Comintern), Borodin would help Roy in promoting Hindu independence
(Overstreet & Windmiller, 1960, pp. 25-26). ***

Roy by this time was a member of a Mexican Socialist Party. Now,
following on the lead of Borodin, he seceded from the Socialist Party
along with some six-seven people of his group and formed a Communist
Party. This party nominated Roy for representing them in the Comintern
and Roy with his wife left Mexico for his ultimate destination – Moscow.

Roy made a stopover at Berlin and met some members of the Berlin
Committee, a group of Indian émigrés who had been working for Indian
independence with help from the Germans. The group had Virendranath
Chattopadhyaya, Bhupendaranath Dutta and Champakaraman Pillai as its
members and here, Roy met the latter two. However, it is interesting to
note that in Berlin, Roy treated them with considerable indifference⁷
and chose rather to spend his time there cosying up to the members of
the German Communist Party. When he reached Moscow in 1920 for the
Second Congress representing Mexico, he wasn’t the only Indian in the
conference. The Indian delegation there included Abani Mukherjee (who
also had been a freedom fighter and had known Roy) and M. P. T. Acharya.
But, only Roy had an actual vote in the conference, the rest only having
consultative votes. Roy and his wife served in the Colonial Commission
of the Comintern in which again, Roy represented Mexico and Evelyn
represented British India. While in Moscow, Roy states in his writings
that he had many private discussions with Lenin.

![***Vladimir Lenin (front centre) and M. N. Roy (Red Dot). Source –
[The Daily
Star](https://www.thedailystar.net/star-weekend/news/the-roy-lenin-debate-colonial-policy-1737643).***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/roy-sepia.jpg?w=1024)

Lenin had already formed his thesis on the colonial problems as briefly
mentioned above. As per Roy, he was asked by Lenin himself to write his
own views on the colonial question. At the behest of Lenin or may be on
his own, Roy did write a thesis on this but his views differed largely
from Moscow’s line. Lenin believed that the Communist Parties which are
in their initial stages in the colonial and semi colonial countries,
should support the bourgeois democratic liberation movement. This
wouldn’t be contradictory to the principles of Communism for the
anti-imperialist and pro-democracy tint of such nationalist movements
are nothing but only the first stage of the many revolutionary stages of
Communism and the Communist parties can make a temporary alliance with
such mass movements. Roy however was against such alliances and strongly
believed that the Comintern should exclusively support the Communist
parties which represent in his view organisation of broad popular masses
and their struggle. Roy had contempt for the methods of the Indian
National Congress and hated the idea that he would have to support the
INC if the strategies of the Comintern were to be followed.

> ***“Lenin believed that bourgeois nationalist movements were
> characteristically revolutionary and that Communists should support
> them. Roy believed that they were not revolutionary, and therefore,
> unworthy of support.”***
>
> **Overstreet and Windmiller, Communism in India.**

A more interesting reason however, could be his lack of connections in
the INC and the possibility that the Berlin Group under Virendranath
Chattopadhyaya due to his relations and connections within the Congress
was more likely to be chosen as the Indian representative to the
Comintern if the current thesis was to be accepted. Roy after all was a
highly ambitious man and *“did not wanted to play second fiddle to
Chattopadhyaya.”* He had an inkling that Chattopadhyaya would approach
Moscow with a proposal for their support to Indian Revolutionaries and
for the aforementioned reason, had a decent chance of getting accepted.
A truce was reached and Lenin accepted some of his ideas but these very
different point of views of Lenin and Roy were to be responsible in
future for major confusions and divisions in the Comintern policy
towards the colonies.

***§ The Tashkent Files***

In 1921, the Executive Committee of the Communist International (ECCI)
tasked Roy to attend a Congress in Baku and establishing the Central
Asiatic Bureau of the Comintern in Tashkent. Roy considered the Baku
congress as futile and therefore, Abani Mukherjee was sent instead while
Roy established the Bureau with himself, Safarova and Sokolnikov
(Chairman) and went to Tashkent. In the meantime, Roy’s hunch proved
right and Chattopadhyaya did present a proposal in Moscow to organize
Indian revolutionaries in Europe but was asked to prove his leadership
of the group by the Russians.

During the Khilafat Movement, many Indian Muslims had left India either
in the hope of joining Mustafa Kemal Pasha’s forces or to reside in any
Muslim country. Either way, they left so that they won’t have to live
India ruled by Britain, a country that had ended the Caliphate. The
Bureau’s plan was to unite in Tashkent these *muhajirs* from the
neighbouring countries to get aboard the Red Ship. Roy arrived in
Tashkent with *“two trainloads of arms, gold bullion and Indian currency
and formed a first international brigade of the Red Army”* with Pathans
that had deserted the Indian Army, some Persians and other Middle
Easterners present. Some fifty *muhajirs* were then brought to Tashkent
and promised military training, among them was one Shaukat Usmani.⁹ Some
of these *muhajirs* joined Roy and some joined other communist group
present in Tashkent and some became neutral. When these *muhajirs* were
being indoctrinated into Communism, the more enthusiastic of these
wanted to form a Communist Party of India to which Roy eventually,
though reluctantly agreed. Usmani also took active part in this, but
with so many factions and disagreements in Tashkent, it is certainly not
surprising that nothing much of importance was actually accomplished.
The number of people trained also couldn’t have been more than forty.

***§ Marxism Finds a Footing*** ***in India and the Role of S. A.
Dange***

Events in India were taking a very different turn. As mentioned above,
with a very curious mix of circumstances, trade unionism was
increasingly becoming a feasible option for the labourers to get their
demands heard. In 1920, this resulted in the formation of All-India
Trade Union Congress with Lala Lajpat Rai as its President. AITUC
immediately became a member of the International Labour Organisation. A
man named Chaman Lal was its secretary who also was a member of the
Workers’ Welfare League of India in London.¹⁰ The events related to the
rise of Gandhi and his Non-cooperation Movement need not be separately
mentioned. But it is important to note that dissatisfaction and
confusion that arose from its abrupt end after the Chauri Chaura
incident created an atmosphere conducive to new theories. The Marxist
literature was being read as an alternative to the Gandhian policies.
One of the biggest name in the new stream was Shripat Amrit Dange. In
1921, Dange wrote a pamphlet called *Gandhi and Lenin¹¹ *with obvious
criticism of the former. Due to this pamphlet Dange captured the
attention of a wealthy flour mill owner of Bombay with liberal
tendencies – Ranchhoddas Bhavan Lotvala who was so impressed with
Dange’s views that he funded his study of Marxism and even an entire
Library with the purpose of disseminating Marxist interpretations of
India. Marxism had found a solid intellectual footing in a major city of
India.

***§ Roy in Moscow*** ***and Competition*** ***with the Berlin Group***

In early 1921, Moscow called Roy back for a Conference of Indian
Revolutionaries and he took Usmani, Abdul Majid and Abdul Kabir Sehrai
with him. In the conference was also invited Chattopadhyaya and his
group. As they were a bit late, Roy tried to convince Moscow to not
support them and claimed that they were nationalists and not communists.
The Chattopadhyaya group arrived and included Nalini Gupta,
Bhupendranath Dutta, G. A. K. Luhani, one Khanoji and also one Agnes
Smedley who Roy believed to have been principal formulator of the
group’s report. This group when arrived, did found some support and was
asked to submit their report but ultimately lost to Roy who was now
apparently recognized as Comintern’s sole agent for India.¹² Nalini
Gupta had now joined the camp of Roy. Roy, who was now more confident
due to his latest victory, decided to have some students from Tashkent
to be educated extensively in the Communist doctrines and accordingly,
he got them admitted in the Communist University of the Toilers of the
East in Moscow in April 1921. He had planned to send these students to
India after their education for organizing communism there.¹³ But by
September 1921, Usmani on his own accord, left Moscow for India,
creating suspicions in the mind of Roy who now sent his own man, Nalini
Gupta with £ 200 and orders to form a Communist Party in India. Gupta
after arriving in India, met Muzaffar Ahmed in Calcutta. Ahmed had known
Roy from back when they were fighting British in pre-1915 days. In late
1921, Nalini Gupta apparently, also met Dange in Bombay but the evidence
in this regard is inconclusive. Roy after this time, remained in contact
with Ahmed and Dange and corresponded with them.

***§ In Berlin***

When Roy reached Berlin in 1922, a great deal of competition with
Chattopadhyaya’s group ensued who had established an Indian News and
Information Bureau which had many declared communists as well as
non-communists. Chattopadhyaya had evidently not lost hope for Moscow’s
support. Gupta who by now had reached Berlin, started questioning Roy on
the finances, and after their disagreements he joined Chattopadhyaya’s
group. Nevertheless, while in Berlin, Roy in 1922 started a bimonthly
called *The Vanguard of Indian Independence*. He had also written a book
with clear Marxist and Communist leanings called *India in Transition*
and this along with *The Vanguard* and the Comintern’s *International
Press Correspondence (Inprecor)* had started reaching India, visibly
influencing the discourse.

***§*** ***The First Emissary***

Surrounded by people whom he did not trust, Roy in August 1922, wrote
to the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) and asked if they could
send two Europeans to India (one to Bombay and one to Calcutta). Roy
promised to provide for some of their expenses. Not much progress has
been done as to the organization of Communist activities in India, Roy
was evidently getting impatient. The CPGB decided to send one Charles
Ashleigh, a quite well known Communist. The plan was for him to meet
with Ahmed and Dange and organize an Indian delegation for the Fourth
Congress of Comintern but the plan didn’t materialize for the British
authorities got the hint and put Ashleigh in custody in September 1922
when he reached Bombay. But he was still able to contact Dange and other
leftist and deliver the messages (Overstreet & Windmiller, 1960).
Another setback to the Communist cause was that most of the Tashkent
trainees were arrested by the British on the frontier when they reached
India and expectedly, most of them denied any attachment to the
Communist cause and said that it was only a choice for survival. Only
Usmani after getting back to India had tried to organize some communists
in the United Provinces.

***§ The Five Main Groups***

Thus, with the steady influence of the Marxist literature some influence
of the communist ideology could certainly be seen by the end of 1922
but neither these people were organized in their activities nor all of
them were in complete agreement with all the concepts of Communism.
Nonetheless, the main groups were five in India – one obviously in
Bombay where Dange had been able to form oneof the most committed and
dare one say, most extremist groups of communists due to the support of
Lotvala (mentioned above). He not only had under him a library and a
hostel for people devoted to the communist ideals but also a publishing
house that published a Marathi daily called *Induprakash* and a weekly
English language journal – *Socialist*. The second group in importance
was the Madras group under Singaravelu Chettiar. Though Chettiar was a
Congressman, he was influenced by Communism. Third group was in Calcutta
under Muzaffar Ahmed that published *Langal*, fourth wasin Lahore under
one Ghulam Hussian (a former professor from Peshawar). Hussain had been
to Kabul and had received Rs. 6000 from either Roy’s agents or the
Soviet embassy and he another Rs. 16,000 after his return to India. He
with the help of this money, published an Urdu paper titled *Inquilab*.
The last group was under Usmani in United Provinces.

***§ Persuading the Congress***

The Comintern was still strong on its policy of supporting the
bourgeois nationalist movements and capturing them from inside rather
than exclusively supporting the Communist Parties in their infancy. The
Comintern’s logic was that the “bourgeois nationalist” parties already
had mass support. So, it was better to capture them than waste their
resources on the new Communist parties. Besides, there was no worthwhile
Communist Party in India anyway. Therefore, Roy was asked to toe the
Soviet line. He despite his reluctance and by his efforts had now
started to capture the attention of the INC and wrote consistently
asking the Congress to support workers and peasants. He wrote in the
*Advance Guard* (changed name of *The Vanguard*) and tried to influence
the opinion of the Congressmen with liberal views which were more likely
to be amenable to Communism.¹⁴ It was hoped that a group of the actual
committed Communist and Socialists would try to form a opposition bloc
in the Congress and try to capture the leadership and another group of
the sympathizers in the Congress party would be formed. Along with this,
it was planned separately to form an illegal Communist Party as well.

The Congressmen that the Communists try to influence most were Chitta
Ranjan Das and Singaravelu Chettiar. Roy tasked Usmani to influence
another Congressman – Sampurnanand. Efforts in this direction had
started in late 1922. Roy addressed Das directly not only in his paper
but also through his letters to him. Interstingly, in some speeches made
by Das, the influence of Communism can be clearly seen.¹⁵ Roy’s plan
seemed to be heading somehere. But, Das despite his liberal views
gradually weaned away from Roy’s views and later openly disagreed with
him. Usmani on his part had been successful in making Sampurnanand
amenable to their cause and Sampurnanand helped in distribution of
Communist literature among the people he knew. Roy was also successful
in making Chettiar distribute Communist propaganda among the Congress
members. He had tried to influence the Congress agenda at the Gaya
session of 1922 and hundreds of copies of the *Advance Guard* were
distributed to delegates there, though most of it were confiscated by
the British. But, his efforts didn’t materialize and his ideas could not
find much traction in the Gaya session. While, many copies were
confiscated, the semiofficial news agency – *Reuters* cabled Roy’s
entire program to the press in India and described it as Bolshevik. It
evidently was a plan on part of the British to declare not just Roy but
also any Congressman sympathizing with his views as Bolshevik. Roy’s
insistence on adopting violent means for revolution played an important
role as the aura surrounding Gandhi and his ideals was such that
acceptance of violence was anathema to the Congress. This was the main
reason why not only Das but even Singaravelu Chettiar differed from Roy
on certain points and who openly advocated non-violence. However, at the
Fourth Comintern Congress, Roy was still able to represent India and
gave his analysis of India’s situation and it seemed like Comintern was
satisfied with his report.

***c.* 1923-1926**

Though Roy had been trying to influence INC, he also knew that it was
never going to be a committed party to what he believed were the
interests of the masses. It seems from his correspondence with Dange
that Roy had no doubt about the “real nature of the Congess” *i.e.* a
bourgeois nationalist movement and his actual strategy was to
deliberately get rejected by the Congress so as to show it to the
Russians that Congress was never going to accept Communist ideas¹⁶ and
that’s why, it was a wastage of time and money to support them. Instead,
the nationalist and armed revolt sympathizing organisations like the
*Jugantar* and the *Anushilan Samiti* should be their target. And of
course, the Communist parties and organizations should be formed at the
same time. Thus, his stance on the communist movement and its
relationship *viz-à-viz* Congress would be vindicated. But, under
guidance from the Comintern, he still tried to organise a communist bloc
within the Congress along with establishing a proper Communist party.
His February issue of The *Vanguard* had “Central Organ of Communist
Party of India” on its masthead.

***§ Singaravelu Manifesto***

Inspired by Roy, in February 1923, Singaravelu Chettiar issued a
manifesto to organize an All-India Communists Conference and hoped to
make his Labour and Kisan Party in Madras to be the center of the
country wide organization. After a kerfuffle that involved a communist
of the Berlin group – Mani Lal Shah and his attempt to plagiarize the
Singaravelu manifesto, at the last Singaravelu was identified as the
best man to do Roy’s bidding in India in general and Congress in
particular. Though, it is interesting that some six months after these
events, when Roy actually read the manifesto, he severely criticised it
because it had denounced the Bolsheviks and the foreign agents. Roy
became concerned as this kind of language would make it extremely hard
to get funds from the Russians (Overstreet & Windmiller, 1960). Roy
while in Moscow was able to convince the Russians for the feasibility of
a separate mass party in India. Accordingly, in June 1923, he issued a
memorandum basically asking to form a mass party called the Workers’ and
Peasants’ Party (WPP) which would then send a delegate to the Comintern
and also to form an illegal Communist Party while still trying to find a
solid footing in Congress. The plan was ambitious but the aforementioned
conference didn’t happen due to internal squabbles of the Indian
communists. The Mani Lal faction which was supported by Abani Mukherjee
of Chattopadhyaya’s Berlin group was at loggerheads with the Roy group
with the result that there still didn’t existed a proper Communist Party
in India.

***§ Increasing Hurdles***

As mentioned above, the *muhajirs* – the Tashkent trainees had already
been arrested at the frontier for their suspicious activities. They were
being tried in the Peshawar Conspiracy Case since 1922 by the British
Government in India but in May-June 1923, Usmani, Muzaffar Ahmed and
Ghulam Hussain were also arrested. The year of 1923 was therefore, an
overall dud for the Communists. Surveillance was being tightened and
many copies of *The Vanguard* were being continuously confiscated. Even
Dange found it extremely hard to organize his communists activities.
Communist work thus faced serious hurdles. It was at this time that
Roy’s one and only source of communication in India – one R. C. L.
Sharma was arrested and interned in Pondicherry. Roy’s *“transmission
line to India was..completely broken.”*

***§ Cawnpore Conspiracy Case 1924***

After preparing for months, the British Government in India, came out in
February 27, 1924 to initiate a conspiracy case against Roy, Gupta,
Ahmed, Usmani, Dange, Hussain, Sharma and Singaravelu. Others like
Sampurnanad, Mani Lal had also been considered but eventually only the
aforementioned eight were charged. Interestingly, Abani Mukherjee was
not arrested and was allowed to go out of India even though his
connections with Moscow were well known. Evidently, the Government had
decided to allow him and his Berlin group be a continuing nuisance to
Roy. Of the eight mentioned, Singaravelu was too sick to attend the
proceedings and was therefore excused, Roy and Sharma were not in India
and, Hussain turned an informant for the British. Case proceeded against
the four for *“depriving the King of the Sovereignty of the British
India.”* They were then sentenced four years imprisonment. But the most
interesting reaction to this was certainly from Roy who said –

***“We must have better Communists than this lot; and the defending
Councils \[sic\]. By God, what fools!…With a better lot in the dock and
less stupid heads at the better, the Cawnpore case could have been an
epoch making event in our political history.”¹⁷***

***§ Trade Unions in India***

In August 1924, the Wokers’ Welfare League of India was appointed as the
as AITUC’s representative in England for the International Labour
Organisation. Many a times, it sent trained trade unionists in India to
organize the movement. British Intelligence considered it as the first
agency that introduced *“Bolshevik principles into the trade union
movement in India.”* Increasingly, trade union activities in India were
being directed from London!¹⁹ Gradually, after the Cawnpore Case, the
trade union movement started to gain bigger role. It is at this time
that D. R. Thengdi of Nagpur became President of AITUC. He was one of
the first Communists in India to raise the topic of class struggle from
a union’s platform (Ghosh, 1978).

***§ Communist Party of Great Britain and the Instructions from the
Comintern***

Abani Mukherjee during this time was trying to undermine Roy’s position
in Paris and Moscow but seemed not to have not gained much for Roy was
still able to get elected a full member of ECCI and a candidate member
of the Presidium. Then a debate ensued just like it had during the
Second Congress. The ECCI at this point again pushed forward in its
report the strategy of supporting the bourgeois national liberation
movement *i.e.* INC through a *“direct contact”* and trying to gain
leadership from the inside. The ECCI’s report and discussions at the
Fifth Congress also ordered *“the Communists Parties in the imperialist
countries to establish ‘very close contact’ with the political movements
in the respective colonies.”¹⁸ *This order in a nut shell, directed CPGB
to take active interests in the Indian affairs. Roy again protested
against this strategy and explained the futility of it as he had done
many a times before. However, there is as strong possibility that more
than the debate about ideology, this was again about ambitions. Roy kept
on insisting on his line as he was well aware that he still had no sound
connections within INC and the involvement of CPGB could not be a
welcome decision for his position as the sole agent of India to
Comintern. The matters came to a head and Chairman of the Colonial
Commission – Manuilsky even accused Roy of deviation!

> ***“In the three years that followed, Roy’s retention of his eminent
> position in the Comintern was apparently not based on his
> contributions to the revolution in India.”***
>
> **Overstreet and Windmiller, Communism in India (1960).**

On the instructions from the Comintern, CPGB in early 1925, started
working on the ordered line and formed a Colonial Committee and sent its
emissary – one Percy E. Glading to India, a decision which Roy opposed.
He visited few Indian cities for a few months and reported that *“no
Indian Communists groups exist at all.”* Roy in the meantime was in
Berlin due to his expulsion from France. His wife, Evelyn was in Paris
with a small group of Indians. CPGB was now active in Indian affairs. A
small group of Indian leftists in London, mostly students called the
Indian Bureau was also active. Another influential voice was of one
Shapurji Saklatvala, a scion of the Tata family who had been elected to
the British Parliament on a Communist ticket. By this time, there were
just too many voices causing too much of confusion for the Indian
Communists.

***§ CPGB And Roy***

CPGB decided to organize an Oriental Conference in Europe for all the
colonies and also convened a meet in July 1925 of some European
Communists to discuss the Conference. Those present were Roy and his
wife, one Sneevliet, Gertrude Hessler, Khan representing the Indian
Bureau, Glading and one N. J. Upadhyaya who had been active in London
for CPGB and had been organizing the Indian seamen. Clemens Dutt
(brother of R. Palme Dutt) and Robson represented CPGB. Roy had asked
CPGB’s help in these matters on previous occasions and had even
complained regarding their lack of interest in India. But this time, he
knew that they were coming too close and accused them of imperialistic
tendencies. After all, even the current meeting had been set up without
informing Roy. But, after the meet, Roy went to Moscow and by September
1925, he had a letter from the Comintern that defined Roy’s role in the
Indian affairs to the CPGB and with this for the time being the matters
between him and the British Party were partially resolved.

Roy knew that he was in a peculiar condition where he was directing
matters for the Indian Communists with very few tools in his hands. He
needed the help of the CPGB, it was with the help of the seamen acting
as his couriers that he was transmitting money to Indian Comrades. He
could not act alone and could not help but criticize the excessive
interference of the British Party in the Indian affairs. On the other
hand, it had been made clear by the Comintern to CPGB that *“they can’t
work independent of Roy.”* It was a delicate situation. The role of
Clemens Dutt now becomes important who apparently had developed a decent
relationship with Roy and was now some what a friend to him. On the
direction of the Comintern, a Foreign Bureau of CPI had also been
established in Europe for better intra-communication. Clemens had became
a member of the Foreign Bureau.

***§ Communist Party of India, 1925***

Meanwhile, one man named Satya Bhakt who had been under the British
radar even before the Cawnpore Conspiracy Case, decided to officialy
form a Communist Party in India. He had come to a conclusion that as
long as the Party did not involve itself in treasonable actions, it was
not illegal to form a Communist Party. But activity only picked up after
the release of Muzaffar Ahmed and Nalini Gupta from jail. Roy was
obviously interested but his actions, particularly his financial
assistance or rather lack of it was becoming a topic of criticism in the
Indian Communists’ circles. Nevertheless, it was decided to convene a
Conference in Cawnpore (Kanpur) in December 1925 and Bhakta decided to
have Maulana Hasrat Mohani whose connection to the Congress, the Muslim
League and the Khilafat Movement was well known. The Conference
organised by Bhakta was convened but gained criticism from certain
communists including Roy because of some remarks made during its course
that could hinder Moscow’s support. Sringaravelu and Mohani’s speech in
the Conference specifically emphasised that the Communist movement in
India was purely Indian – *“We are one with the world communists but not
with the Bolsheviks.”*^(*20*) Curiously, at this point Bhakta breaks
away from the communists. One doesn’t have to think much as to what
could be the reason.

***§ Accusations on Roy***

By late 1925, a Labour Swaraj Party was formed by Nazrul Islam in
Calcutta and possibly had members like Muzaffar Ahmed. Saumyendranath
Tagore, a scion of the famous Tagore family was also a member. The
organisation did get noticed but nothing much worthwhile happened beyond
that. But, in early 1926, an All-Bengal Tenants Conference was held and
it was decided to form a Workers’ and Peasants’ Party of Bengal. Now
the question of finances again raised its head. Since late 1925,
criticism against Roy had already started but now a serious and stinging
letter was sent to Roy: *“..The boss \[Roy\] and family are living as
Princes…and the boys here…are starving….except a few, all..are losing
confidence in you.”²¹ *The veracity of these accusations cannot be fully
determined and therefore, the culpability of Roy is debatable but these
accusations certainly raise a few questions.

***§ Allison and Spratt – The New Emissaries***

Around this time, by the end of April 1926, a man named George Allison
(*alias* Donald Campbell), a Scottish coal miner and a member of the
CPGB was dispatched by the Red International of the Labour Unions
(RILU) for putting some life in to the Trade Unions in India. While
Allison did his work in the trade unions of India, CPGB’s Clemes Dutt
decided to dispatch another one of their emissaries – 24 year old Philip
Spratt, to India. His job was quite different from Allison’s. Though
later Spratt became an expert on Communism, he was at that time only
sent because he was *“unknown to the police..”* He says in his memoirs –
*“my job was to be of a messenger and reporter.”²²*

It seemed like Roy and CPGB were still not in agreement on the question
of supporting the ‘bourgeois nationalist movement’ like the Congress or
the Swaraj Party as can be seen from very visible and different
viewpoints taken in this regard by Roy and R. Palme Dutt in their
respective books – *The Future of Indian Politics* and *Modern India*,
both of which came out in 1926. But by the end of the same year, CPGB
seems to have moved closer to Roy’s strategy of establishing a new
national movement and a new mass party of workers and peasants,
completely separate from the INC.

Keeping in mind the new truce that Roy and CPGB arrived at, it is
significant to note that Spratt was asked not to engage himself in any
kind of public work and was asked to return within six months. Before
his awaited journey, he met the Comintern’s Russian representative – one
Petrovsky in London who asked him to write *a pamphlet on China, urging
India to follow the example of Kuomintang.* He was also taken by Dutt to
Paris where he met Roy’s agent Mohammed Sippasi and after that he was
dispatched to Bombay. So it can be assumed that Spratt’s arrival was
agreed upon by the Comintern, CPGB and even Roy. But it should be noted
that Roy was still suspicious of CPGB’s activities and its attempts to
capture the Indian Communist Party and deprive him of its leadership.
Apparently, he wasn’t wrong as proved by the future events which will be
explained shortly. Spratt had been ordered to deliver the message that
the Communist Party of India should launch a Workers’ and Peasants’
Party as a legal cover and its members should obtain the leadership of
the trade unions.²³

***c.* 1927-1929**

***§ Fazl-i-Ilahi alias Qurban***

When Spratt arrived at Bombay, he met George Allison who has been
mentioned above. Their conversation tells us that Allison was not a big
fan of the British Party’s and the trade union’s leaders as oppose to
their *“truly working class members.”* Spratt also met some of the
*muhajirs*, who had been trained in Tashkeknt and after their
imprisonment, were now out of jail. In an interesting little quip, it
was a chatter among them that one of them had been given almost Rs.
60,000 *for party work but had used it all to build himself a house.*
One of these *muhajirs* was Fazl-i-Ilahi Qurban whom Spratt also met in
Bombay. Qurban was actually Roy’s agent in India and had been sent by
him in December 1926 to be his eyes and ears and to keep Roy’s position
and leadership secure from the activities of CPGB. Qurban during his
time in India had been under surveillance of the British. An interesting
incident that Spratt narrates in his book *Blowing Up India* gives
insight into how the so-called international brotherhood of Communism
did or did not affect their mindset. Spratt in one of his meetings with
Qurban in Bombay was taken by him to a tea shop owned by a Hindu and it
seems while reading the relevant text that the owner was a staunch
religious vegetarian Hindu and did not want to serve non-vegetarians. A
normal reaction should have been to find another tea-shop but Spratt
says – *“he \[Qurban\] induced a bigoted Hindu tea-shop proprietor to
serve us by swearing that he himself was a Hindu and I was a strict
vegetarian.”* The incident might be small but speaks a lot for their
‘ideology.’ By April however, Qurban was arrested and after his
prosecution in Peshawar, was sentenced for five years imprisonment.

Spratt continues to tell that even though the party had been established
in 1925, there was not much work done for the organization. There were
few people who were as well versed in the communist literature as Spratt
himself but *“the rest did not know what a communist party is and did
not try to organize and carry on its work.”* When Spratt reported this
to London, his report was taken as a criticism of Allison’s work though
this does not seem to have been his intent. By the end of January 1927,
Allison’s forged passports were discovered in a police raid. He was
instantly arrested and deported.

***§ Saklatvala and his Visit to India***

On January 14, 1927, Shapurji Saklatvala (mentioned above) came to
India. It should be noted that there seems to have been a rivalry
between Saklatvala and the Dutt brothers for the leadership of the
forthcoming Indian party. Spratt had been taken by Clemes Dutt to meet
Saklatvala while in London and Dutt had expressed his dislike for him.
Nevertheless, when Saklatvala came to India, Spratt met with him and
together they went to tour some places like Delhi, Aligarh and a couple
others.

When Muzaffar Ahmed had come to Bombay it had been decided to held a
conference in Lahore in March and Saklatavala was invited to preside it
but he denied the request in a letter in very scathing terms. Not only
this but he also released the letter to the press. Much enmity was
therefore between them and the conference had been called off but by
March they seem to have patched up and a meeting was held in Bombay in
which a constitution for the party was adopted and executive committee
was also elected. Saklatvala toured many places in India and visited
many cities; he was even given an official welcome at Calcutta. His
speeches generated quite a buzz and he even interviewed Gandhi. But this
became a problem for him due to his strong criticism of all of Gandhi’s
policies which as usual did not go down well with the public mood at
the time and by the end of his tour in April, he seemed to have lost
some goodwill as can be gleamed from the fact that when asked, the
Bombay Municipal Corporation denied to give him a farewell.

***§ CPGB gains prominence in India***

The work of emissaries of CPGB had been a boon to the communists’
interests in India and a great deal of them had been able to infiltrate
the trade union movement. The 1^(st) of May was celebrated in Lahore for
the first time in 1927 as the slogan– *Long Live the Red Flag* replaced
*Bande Mataram* in labour rallies.²⁴ By the end of May, S. V. Ghate had
been elected as the general secretary of the Indian Communists Party and
Muzaffar Ahmed, K. S. Iyengar had been elected to its presidium. There
is no doubt that the communist activities visibly picked due to the
astute skills of Spratt who along with Ahmed, Mirajkar and Ghate
organized and smoothed a lot of frictions of the party. He was joined in
India in September 1927 by Benjamin Bradley, a fellow member of CPGB.

***§ Roy’s Visit to China and Back***

While CPGB was virtually gaining the overlordship of the Indian Party,
Roy had been to Moscow and had been dispatched by the Comintern as its
agent to China where Chinese Communists were facing various issues of
their own. Though the events of China do not come in purview of this
analysis, it will suffice us to say that he seems to have been sent to
China deliberately by the Comintern to keep him out of Europe and thus
out of touch with the events in India and CPGB’s activities there.²⁵

However, it will be important to note here that the non-Indian
communists were not the only one who had problems with Roy. He was not
particularly popular among the Indian communists as well as has been
mentioned above. Saumyendranath Tagore was a member of the Bengal
Workers’ and Peasants’ Party and in that capacity, had gone to establish
direct contact with Moscow. He had told the General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Comintern – Piatnitsky that the Communists in
Indian were suffering from the lack of funds. This raised some questions
because huge amounts of funds had been allocated to the Indian movement
through Roy.²⁶ It is a possibility however, that the funds had been
spent on his activities in Europe and the regular publishing of *The
Vanguard.* Whatever had been the case, it is true that Indian Communists
received only a fraction of it. Probably this also contributed to the
ease with which CPGB could gain importance in India. When Roy came back
from China, an internal struggle for power in Moscow was going on in
which Roy supported Stalin and not Trotsky, despite the fact that
Trotsky and his ideology of not supporting the bourgeois nationalist
movements in colonial and semi colonial areas was more similar to Roy
than Stalin’s beliefs who instead was in favour of supporting such
movements. It would have made sense for Roy to side with Trotsky but
evidently, he did not and by doing that he did a complete turn for what
he had believed until now.

***§ League Against Imperialism***

The Oriental Conference that had been planned by CPGB back in 1925, was
organized in Brussels in February 1927 and was attended by 175 delegates
from 37 countries. Roy had been against this conference but as told
above, with great maneuvering by CPGB and Comintern, he had been sent
away to China. Here an organization called the League Against
Imperialism had been formed which everyone knew was nothing but a
communist front. Virendranath Chattopadhyaya had also been active in
organizing this conference. Chattopadhyaya became one of its the three
joint secretaries and interestingly Jawaharlal Nehru also attended the
conference. He also served on the executive committee of the League.
Nehru had been in Europe since March 1926 and after his request, had
been made the representative of the INC in the conference.

Inspired by his time in Brussels, Nehru in December 1927, was able to
get some left leaaning resolutions passed in the Madras Session of INC.
Spratt, Nimbkar, Joglekar also attended the session and tried to get
some resolutions passed that openly supported Russia but were
unsuccessful. At the end of 1927, Spratt and Bradley had a visitor from
the Russian Communist Partyand once in 1928 even from the American
Communist Party. Evidently, the Indian scene was a topic of curiosity in
the International Communists circles.

***§ The Assembly Letter***

Roy had issued a letter on 30^(th) December, 1927 to the Indian
Communists reiterating his strategy. A copy of it was intercepted and
the letter was read in the Indian Legislative Assembly and henceforth it
was called the Assembly Letter. The letter was nothing but an attempt to
regain his leadership of the Indian Communists. The letter described
Roy’s long held views of a Workers’ and Peasants’ Party – WPP which
should be the legal face of the communists movement and the Communists
Party that will remain in the background. When Roy went to Moscow in
February 1928 to attend Ninth Plenum of ECCI, it was to be his last
visit to Moscow. He fell ill after spending some time there and when his
friends in Berlin got worried of his health and the possibility of
deliberate neglect by Moscow, they went there and with help of some
Russian friends arranged for his return to Berlin where he promptly
recovered.

***§ Tactics***

Spratt argues that during these years before his arrest in the Meerut
Conspiracy Case, he and other communists had tried to infiltrate
Congress, trade unions, youth leagues etc and had used deceit in doing
go but they never denied being communists and that the WPP was a front
only to get cover from the police but it’s communist leanings were never
in doubt. It was only incidentally that they deceived the public, he
says. He goes on to explain how the year 1928 saw a considerable rise in
the number of strikes in the country. The dissatisfaction in the public
against the British, particularly against the Simon Commission had
created an atmosphere that was not only conducive to armed nationalists’
actions but also for the trade union movement. The Communists were
highly active in the trade unions and tried to gain leadership of some
of them. Spratt personally went and traveled along East Indian Railway
with many union men and they appealed to the groups of one industry’s
workers to strike in support of their fellow men in other industries.
Spratt says in his book –

***“It occurred to me sometimes, that it was a little incongruous for us
members of the educated class to urge these ignorant people to face such
risks for a purpose which they could not understand. However, Lenin had
told us that precisely, that was the job of the educated professional
revolutionary.” ***

Even though a talented organizer, Spratt had always been a somewhat
reluctant Communist and his doubts can be seen forthcoming in the above
mentioned statement. It is therefore, not surprising that he later left
the cause of revolution.

***§ Lester Hutchinson***

Much more committed and steadfast in his revolutionary ideas was Hugh
Lester Hutchinson, a British journalist, and a staunch communist. He was
not a member of the CPGB but probably had connections with the British
Labour Party. He came to Bombay in September 1928 and quickly got
involved in the labour struggles and the trade unions. While his stay in
Bombay, he got support and help from the members of the famous
Chattopadhyaya family, particularly Suhasini Nambiar and Mrinalini
Chattopadhyaya.²⁷ Strikes in the industry had already reached a high
point. As Hutchinson describes, he had come to India when a six-month
long strike of cotton textile workers in Bombay had just ended. After
this strike had started, there was in fight among its leaders which
resulted in a split and the formation of a new union – Girni Kamgar
Union. Dange became the leader of the new faction and in a little time,
with militancy of its members and its swelled up cadres, itquickly
became the leading union of the strike. Bradley also became a prominent
member of the new union. During his stay in Bombay, Hutchinson traveled
and attended many meetings with Bradley in what he called the
working-class areas.²⁸ He in the meantime had also started a paper
called *The New Spark.*

***§ The Sixth Congress and a Hard Turn to the Left***

By the end of 1928, Sixth Congress of the Comintern had been convened
and six Indians were present there – Sikander Sur (Shaukat Usmani),
Narayan (Saumyendranath Tagore), Mahmoud, Raza, Masoud and Rouhani.
Clemes Dutt was also there apparently representing India. Interestingly
all six of them were not representing the Communists Party of India!
Tagore was a member of WPP, Rouhani was only Roy’s associate, Clemens
was actually from CPGB and only represented the Foreign Bureau of CPI,
Usmani with his three companions had been disqualified by Communists in
India. Around the same time, S. Shrinivasa Iyengar, the Congress (INC)
man was also in Moscow and had meetings with Usmani. Probably by
exaggerating his connections within the INC, Usmani was able to impress
the Russians and got himself elected to the Presidium of the Sixth
Congress.

At the sixth Congress, the Comintern, now strongly in Stalin’s hands,
seems to have changed its policy and took a hard turn to the left,
perhaps after the utter failure of their previous policy in China. It
was now suddenly realized by the Russians that WPP was becoming a hub of
the petty bourgeois and could any moment take a counter-revolutionary
turn. The entire logic of the WPP was denied and it was suggested to
concentrate its support on the real Communists Party. This strategy was
protested by the members of the CPGB who had worked all this time to
form and organize WPP in India and had made serious gains in the Indian
trade union movement. Usmani surprisingly, sided with the Russians and
vehemently criticized the CPGB’s tactics. Tagore took a somewhat mixed
stance. Even though he supported the WPP, he was against excessive
interference by the CPGB in the Indian affairs.

***§ The New Colonial Thesis***

The new colonial thesis that emerged from the sixth Congress, quite
expectedly one might say took the Russian line – ‘the bourgeois
nationalists,’ even the left bloc of such organizations like the INC was
to be criticized and were to be opposed tooth and nail. WPP would no
longer be supported by the Comintern and was to be liquidated. The only
entity to be supported would be an illegal Communist Party of India.
Interestingly, Roy and CPGB were of the same opinion that it would be
better for the communists movement in India at the time to have a legal
WPP under the domination of an illegal Communist Party. But only
Moscow’s view prevailed and no one could question it. Despite the fact
that the new line from Moscow was going to create problems for the
Communists in India and despite the open secret that by now Comintern
was nothing but a place for intra-fights and intrigues of the Russians,
Indians and the CPGB emissaries had to follow the line.²⁹ In early 1929,
owing to major differences with the Comintern, Roy was out of their good
graces and his relations to Moscow ended.

In India, WPP of the Calcutta branch had been the only one that had
recruited members (many of the Jugantar, Anushilan Samiti members were
WPP members as well) and accordingly was an organization with some
discipline. But these members were getting restless as to being part of
only a ‘front’ of the Communist Party and not the actual party itself.
When a conference was held in Calcutta in December 1928, these members
broke the meeting. Dissatisfaction was growing.

***§ The Race Card***

A very telling anecdote as to why these foreigners were more capable to
organize the party comes from Spratt. He explains in his book that many
a times, he had been dragged into much trade union work, often against
his will because a *Gora* on the platform improved morale of the public.
And this race aspect played its role equally among the educated for it
is not only with the illiterate that a pink skin carries prestige, he
says in his memoirs. As for the situation of communists before his
arrival, he says:

***“When I arrived in India, the members of the party were inactive, but
this was largely because they did not know what to do, or if they knew
what to do, they were ashamed to do it.”***

***§ The British Government in India Decides to Act***

The Trade Union Act of 1926 passed by the British Government in India,
went into effect in June 1927 and helped in furtherance of the trade
union activities by providing them immunity from criminal and civil law
suits if the work done was only for the beneficence of the labourers.
And along with the active communists participation, the number of trade
unions went on increasing. The combined result of all of these factors
was that the number of registered unions in India went from 11 in 1927
to 30 in 1928. These were only registered unions. The numbers of actual
unions went from 72 in ’27 to 94 in ’28. Such intense activity with
communists involvement got the industrialists and the government
worried. The Millowners’ Association of Bombay and Calcutta asked the
British Government in India to resolve the situation and the government
which had already been closely monitoring the communists activities,
particularly of the English emissariers like Spratt, Bradley and
Hutchinson decided to finally act on it.

The government on its part had been considering taking some big actions
against the communists since 1927. Sir David Petrie of the Intelligence
Bureau had already submitted his report on Communism in India in
September 1927, urging the government to fight Communism in India with
*“the most unrelenting opposition”* and take strong measures against it.
By September 1928, the conversation between Lord Irwin, Viceroy of the
British India and the Secretary of State for India had already started
on the possibility of launching a conspiracy case. Activities of Spratt
and Bradley had been the main topic of the discussion for it was obvious
that communist activities had picked up after their arrival.

***§ The Public Safety Bill***

In fact, the government was about to bring the Public Safety Bill in the
assembly mostly to easily deport such unwanted foreigners from the
country. The law that existed at the time did not allow for an
Englishman to be deported without his written consent.³⁰ As the law
could then easily be maneuvered against the nationalists, it was sure to
face sever opposition from the Indian members of the assembly. While the
viceroy was in favour of launching the conspiracy case first and present
the bill in the assembly separately, the Secretary of State wanted the
bill to be passed and the Englishmen deported without the hassle of a
court case. The government was for one not sure if the bill could be
passed and even if it did, would only allow them to deport Spratt and
Bradley without a proper punishment and therefore they considered it
better to pursue the conspiracy case. London was also worried about the
prospects of negative publicity that a case against British citizens
would generate with forth coming general elections in Britain. Viceroy
assured the Secretary of State that no action will be taken against
Communists in England though their mention was inevitable.³¹ At last, by
the end of February 1929, the government had convinced a reluctant
London to support them in this matter and a case was about to be
started.

The timing of the Public Safety Bill also played a role. When introduced
in the assembly, it was defeated by a united nationalist effort and the
government had every plan to reintroduce it in the next session. But the
atmosphere against it was forming in the country through nationalists’
activities. Hutchinson remarks that *“protests meetings against the Bill
were held in every political centre throughout the country.”* The
Government therefore, considered it prudent to bring a case against
*“the gravity and the reality of the Bolshevik menace.”³²*

***§ British Politics***

Another plausibility for launching the case when the government did as
soon as they got the green signal from the secretary of the state was
probably due to the politics of Britain itself. The Conservative
government of Baldwin was not sure about its prospects in the coming
general elections of May 1929 and it was also very likely that a future
Labour government would not go forward with a case against labour
leaders of India. And as per the British law, once a case was started,
the next government could not stop it from running its full course. The
Baldwin government may also have hoped for the case to generate enough
conversation against Communism so as to create an atmosphere conducive
for a new anti-Soviet intervention.³³

***§ Why Meerut?***

As the Home Office had given it a go only half-heartedly, it was decided
to conduct the trial without a jury. A jury even with an iron tight case
was still capable of letting the accused go and the government did not
want to take that risk. The venue of Meerut was also chosen with much
thought. As by that time’s law, unlike the civil cases, the choice of
the place in criminal cases in India was of the prosecution and in a
conspiracy trial, the city where the court will be held had to have been
a scene of the overt activities of the conspirators and Meerut had been
visited by some of the accused. Bombay and Calcutta were too volatile
for such case to be held. Its central position and proximity to Delhi
was also very viable.³⁴

***§ The Arrests***

In March 1929, the government conducted raids simultaneously in almost
six places and all the members of the Communist Party of India, many
trade unionists, congressmen and others– about 30 men were arrested and
taken to Meerut. The big names of the communist movement that were
arrested included Spratt, Bradley, Ahmed, Dange, Usmani to name a few.
Extensive search operations were conducted, a stage was set and the
trial was to be conducted. When the arrests had been made, protest
meetings were held, strikes were announced particularly in Bombay. There
were also demonstrations against the government in Allahabad, especially
due to the arrest of P.C. Joshi who was then a student activist and a
member of the WPP branch of the United Provinces. As violence was
expected, the police and the army was mobilized in Bombay and Calcutta.

Hutchinson’s house in Bombay had been searched but he had not yet been
arrested and he used this time to go to Madras where he also visited
Adyar, the headquarters of the theosophical society. In a little
anecdote, Hutchinson describes the story of St. Thomas the Apostle’s
visit to the south and his eventual death. It is not at all surprising
that Hutchinson believed in the story for it was considered a historical
truth at that time and only recently its historicity has come into
serious questioning. But it is interesting to note his further remarks –
*“It is consoling to know that martyr had been fittingly revenged; for
today thousands of Hindus are converted to Christianity in his name
where as the name of his executioner has been forgotten. Truly the ways
of the Lord are inscrutable.”³⁵ *One cannot help but notice the hint of
glee in these remarks. That is some godless brotherhood of the
Communism!

Hutchinson was however arrested in June. It was thought that there was
enough evidence against him – *“if he is included as an accused in the
Meerut case, it will be of material benefit to the prosecution of the
other accused. To proceed against him under public safety ordinance may
it is thought to be reasonably criticized as pre-judging the Meerut
trial.”³⁶ *Overall thirteen were arrested from Bombay, ten from Bengal,
five from the United Provinces and three from Punjab.³⁷

> ***“..a good deal of inner working plans, secret quotes, letters
> written in cryptic terms, or in invisible ink and secret documents
> were disclosed, which were later on supported by a vast mass of direct
> and documentary evidence, including testimony of the accused
> themselves.”***
>
> **M. R. Masani, The Communist Party of India.**

It’s however quite amusing to note that the invisible ink wasn’t exactly
invisible! Spratt adds in his memoirs that the Russian party would not
have committed such simple mistakes. CPGB clearly was new at the game.

The British government had kept monitoring the activities of most of the
prominent communists in India, both Indian and foreign for a very long
time and when the British struck, they had been planning the arrests for
long. It was a matter of not if but when it finally decided to act
against them.

***§ The Evidence***

Prosecution was handled by one Langford James, a very astute lawyer from
Calcutta who started the his case with a very detailed speech that used
evidence to make several political remarks against Communism. For the
first time, the role of and directions from the Comintern were brought
to day light. The instructions for the organization included the usual
trade union work like infiltrating the unions, denouncing the
capitalists, praising the Red International Labour Unions but some
interesting instructions included introducing political subjects and
issues, creating discontent and intensifying it where it exists, drawing
illustrations from Russia and also a much telling instruction was *to
deprecate tactfully the influence of religion.* Clearly, the goal from
the very start was not to be limited to only trade union work.³⁷ The
instructions were also to create an agrarian revolution and to fight
against foreign imperialism for national independence. The goal was to
establish a dictatorship of the proletariat through a socialist
revolution.³⁸ Accordingly, the accused were charged under Section 121 A:
conspiring to deprive the King Emperor of his sovereignty of British
India.

![***Twenty five of the Meerut Prisoners outside the jail:*** *Back row
(left to right): K. N. Sehgal, S. S. Josh, H. L. Hutchinson, Shaukat
Usmani, B. F. Bradley, A. Prasad, P. Spratt, G. Adhikari. Middle Row:
Radharaman Mitra, Gopen Chakravarti, Kishori Lal Ghosh, L. R. Kadam, D.
R. Thengdi, Goura Shanker, S. Bannerjee, K.N. Joglekar, P. C. Joshi,
Muzaffar Ahmed. Front Row: M. G. Desai, D. Goswami, R.S. Nimbkar, S.S.
Mirajkar, S.A. Dange, S.V. Ghate, Gopal
Basak.*](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/meerut-sepia.jpg?w=680)

As these arrests had gained the attention of many nationalists as well,
James made sure to include the scathing criticism of the bourgeois
nationalist movement that Communism ascribes to. But it did not affect
the attitude of the nationalist, as they were blinded by the fact that
the Communists at that time were acting against the British, completely
neglecting the fact that they were equally against the nationalists as
well. In a very thought provoking anecdote in his book, Spratt says that
James made interesting arguments against Marxism. Spratt says –

***“He cited a Comintern debate in which someone had mentioned facts
which told against the official line. The official reply was that if
these facts were admitted the necessity for revolution would vanish,
which was impossible: therefore, it was implied, they were not facts. We
laughed, but we had no answer.”³⁹***

***c.* 1930-1933**

***§ Support of the Congress***

Congress also came out in support of the arrested. Even Gandhi visited
the arrested in the jail and promised them help. Many like Motilal and
Jawaharlal Nehru came to the defence of the accused in the court but
only in the start. When prosecution very smartly, read out the
statements of some of the accused that they had made in the past,
severely criticizing many congress leaders, they backed off after some
time from defending the communists though some indirect support seem to
have continued – *“At the beginning of 1930,the nationalist Meerut
Defence Committee of which Pandit Motilal Nehru and his son Jawaharlal
were members was dissolved, and the prisoners were left to their own
devices.”⁴⁰*

***§ Treatment of the Accused***

At this time, it is important to note the treatment meted out to these
accused after their arrests. Surprisingly, after some weeks of initial
discomfort, they were allowed allowances for food and clothing. They
were even transferred two times to the hills when the weather got very
hot. They were allowed to have books, papers – without any censorship
and were even allowed to play chess, cards, table tennis, cricket and
volley ball. The court was held in a house of the town where they could
also meet visitors without much supervision. Interestingly, these terms
could hardly be for someone considered dangerous by the authorities,
especially if we compare them with the inhumane treatment meted out to
prisoners in the Cellular Jail or even to the nationalists freedom
fighters. If this difference was not enough, the European accused were
also given a feast one Christmas by the local authorities of Meerut –
the commissioner of the division and the district magistrate. They were
escorted to the Garden House in Meerut that had been the venue of their
trial, and had been converted into a dining hall for the occasion. When
questions were asked regarding their communist claim of being
anti-religion, they replied by saying that the invitation for the feast
was accepted purely on material and sensuous grounds but naturally the
critics were not convinced.⁴¹ Also telling is such blatant favouritism
towards one kind of people.

***§ Communists’ Attitude Towards the Nationalists***

It is significant to note that in the eyes of these communists,
particularly Hutchinson, one of the most devout of the group, the Indian
freedom fighters, the ‘terrorists’ had came upon to the cause of
nationalism only because they belonged to the lower middle class and
their economic impoverishment had induced them to such *‘extreme
nationalist views.’⁴²* The emphasis on their poverty and unemployment
rather than their actual love of the motherland signifies exactly what
they thought about the freedom fighters. Their supposed support to the
nationalists in the initial phase was what one would call a union of the
circumstances. The communists at this time only supported the armed
nationalists groups because these groups were acting against imperialism
and Moscow had instructed to go against imperialist forces. The armed
nationalists, in the eyes of the communists were also seen as a
potential sources for their cadres in future. We all know how ‘devoted’
their cause against imperialism was, if we consider the events after the
Soviet Union’s entry into the second world war in favour of the allies.
The Indian communists, some reluctantly and many enthusiastically after
1941, actively colluded with the British to thwart Indian nationalism.

Another interesting anecdote that gives us the idea of the ‘devotion’ of
the communists for Indian nationalism is when Bhagat Singh, Batukeshwar
Dutt and Jatindranath Das, while in Lahore jail, went on a hunger strike
for improving the conditions of the political prisoners. The hunger
strike had captivated the entire nation and Jatindra’s unfortunate death
and sacrifice for the nation had made him a hero and a martyr for the
Indian public. But the attention of the public had in these months
shifted to the Lahore hunger strike and away from the Meerut trial.
Hutchinson says – *“..we were losing public sympathy by not taking any
action…our only strength and protection lay in the support of the
public.”* So they decided that they would also go on a hunger strike and
*“to do one better”⁴³* to quote his words by demanding the complete
reform of the Indian prison system. *“We might as well have asked for
the abdication of the Government of India,” he adds.⁴⁴* Their fast came
to an end barely on its fifth day after a resolution was passed by the
All-India Congress Committee to take on the demand for prison reform on
its shoulders and a request to suspend the hunger strikes. The long
drawn strike in Lahore and the just started Meerut strike came to an
end.⁴⁵

> ***“Towards the end of the Meerut Trial, an Indian from Moscow, whom I
> did not see, came to Meerut and had an interview with Usmani. Shortly
> afterwards, Usmani…underwent…a nervous breakdown. He asked to be
> separated from the rest of us, and left the party…The stranger had
> informed him that his three companions had been shot as spies in
> Moscow.”***
>
> **Philip Spratt, Blowing up India.**

***§ Trial as a Stage For Propagating Communism***

The trial went on for way too long than what it should have – four years
at the expense of more than twenty lakhs! Even the accused were
astonished for the length of the trial. They themselves knew that the
evidence was overwhelming and it could have been finished very quickly.
But as the government was taking its sweet time to present the evidence
in detail, the communists also decided to use the platform for
propagating their ideas. The then Chief Justice remarked – *“The accused
took an inordinately long time in reading out well prepared
statements..in most cases they had nothing more than an exposition, on
an elaborate scale, of the doctrines of communism, its tenets and its
program.”* These were the tactics that communists had used for long
where they “regard the ‘courts’ as bourgeois fads to be turned into
platform for communists propaganda.”⁴⁶ Spratt had accepted that *“On the
whole the revelation of our secret methods caused people to admire us;
we had done what most men wanted to do…”* About the speeches that they
made in the court he says, *”Several of them were long enough to make a
short book and altogether no doubt most of what can be said in favour of
communism was said.”⁴⁷* The trial ultimately placed Communism on sure
footing in India.⁴⁸

***§ The Arrests and The Amnesty***

All of the accused, except four, were sentenced to imprisonment on
16^(th) January 1933. Ahmed, Dange, Ghate, Joglekar, Nimbkar and Spratt
were sentenced for 12 years; Bradley, Mirajkar, Usmani for 10 years’
transportation and the lightest sentence was of three years
imprisonment. But it is intriguing to note that all of their sentences
were reduced after their appeal to the Allahabad High Court on the count
of them already have been in jail for four years. As a result, all were
out of jail between 1933-1935. David Petrie of the Intelligence Bureau,
expressed his displeasure forsuch a reversal in the sentences – *“The
tragedy of the case has been whittling down of the sentences. The Judges
seem to say all the right things and do all the wrong ones.”⁴⁹*

***§ In the Dark***

One important thing to note was that many of the accused were
nationalists and trade unionists and had no idea of the real nature of
the conspiracy and its underhand methods. They were thus taken aback
when they got to know about the communists tactics during the trial.⁵⁰
And this is the reason why the group of accused got divided between the
communists and the non-communists and a lot of petty but bitter
infighting ensued.⁵¹

***§ While in Jail***

There is no doubt that the Communists were able to do propaganda in
favour of Communism but the work certainly suffered with most of the
leadership in jail for four or more years. Only one strike happened in
the course of 1929 and the lack of enthusiasm could be seen. The
intra-party politics was also playing in the background. Though the
accused with help from their fellow communists had been able to
establish a party office in Meerut, they also seem to have been trying
to pump up their image in front of the Comintern at the cost of those in
jail. Spratt says – *“We were convinced as we informed the Comintern
(through a bulky document smuggled out of jail) that for the sake of
prestige the new party leaders were claiming bigger successes than they
had actually achieved.”* Spratt’s words are telling when he says,
*“Despite real devotion, the communist leader is just as ambitious a
careerist as any other politician.”⁵²* Due to the new Comintern line,
the central trade union was split two times in two years in the meantime
and despite the help provided by the Congress during the trial, every
policy of it was heavily criticized by the Communists.

**Conclusion**

What then was the purpose of all of the colonial British government’s
actions and at what cost? If it was to deprive the communists of their
leadership, they were only partly successful for the communist
propaganda was able to entrench itself deep in the political environment
of the time and the party activities also picked up pretty soon after
the release of the accused.

As debatable the motives of the British were, one thing was clear as a
day that the new Comintern policy was harmful for the interests of the
Communists Party in India, yet Moscow could not be questioned. After
all, a subservient only exists to follow his master’s orders and not to
question him. And as has been explained in the article, the communists
were never in support of what they called the bourgeois nationalist
movement and were only somewhat sympathetic to the armed nationalists’
actions as long as Moscow ordered them to be. They had no real
connection or aim of a nation’s independence as has been proved by their
lack lusture and mechanical attitude towards the activities of the
Indian freedom fighters. They did not want a nation’s freedom, only a
dictatorship of the proletariat sans its religious roots. After all, for
a communist all is nothing but a class struggle. The aims, the noble
emotions and ideologies like nationalism are to be used only as means
for a pan world domination by their ideology of Communism. And when
proved to a stumbling block, nationalists are to be vehemently opposed
and criticised.

It is therefore, not surprising when the pendulum of Communism again
shifted inan opposite direction and later infiltrated the nationalist
movement after 1933, hollowing it from within by attacking their
beliefs, but that is a topic of another post for some other time. Their
entire ideology particularly in India, though claiming to be
anti-imperialist, had ironically been itself under the overlordship of
the British Party and Moscow. The revolution of the Red *i.e.* Communism
in India had for its entire existence only worked for Communism, not for
the nation. It indeed has been nothing but *an act of subservience* –
*of the red, for the red and by the red.*

***References***

1.  *[History and Culture of Indian People, Struggle For
    Freedom.](https://archive.org/details/struggleforfreed00bhar/page/422/mode/2up)*
    Vol XI. p. 859.
2.  Pramita Ghosh, *[Meerut Conspiracy Case & The Left-wing in
    India](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.64999/page/n25/mode/2up)*
    [(1978)](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.64999/page/n25/mode/2up)*[.](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.64999/page/n25/mode/2up)* p.
    7.
3.  *ibid.* p. 8.
4.  Gene D. Overstreet & Marshall Windmiller, [*Communism in
    India*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.135300/page/n5/mode/1up)
    (1960). p. 7.
5.  *ibid.* p. 8.
6.  *ibid*. p. 25.
7.  *ibid*. p. 26.
8.  *ibid*. p. 31.
9.  *ibid*. p. 35.
10. Ghosh, *[Meerut Conspiracy Case & The Left-wing in
    India](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.64999/page/n25/mode/2up)*
    [(1978)](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.64999/page/n25/mode/2up)*[.](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.64999/page/n25/mode/2up)* p.
    11
11. Overstreet & Windmiller, *Communism in India*. p. 38.
12. *ibid*. p. 37.
13. *ibid*. p. 39.
14. *ibid*. p. 47.
15. *ibid*.
16. *ibid.* pp. 49-50.
17. ibid. p. 68.
18. *ibid*. pp. 71-72.
19. Ghosh, *Meerut Conspiracy…* p. 11.
20. Overstreet & Windmiller, *Communism in India*. p. 78.
21. *ibid*. p. 80
22. Philip Spratt, [*Blowing Up
    India*.](https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.507541/page/n1/mode/2up) p.
    29.
23. *ibid*.
24. Ghosh, *Meerut Conspiracy…* p. 11.
25. Overstreet & Windmiller, *Communism in India*. pp. 90-94.
26. *ibid*. pp. 96-98.
27. Lester Hutchinson, [*Conspiracy at
    Meerut*.](https://archive.org/details/dli.ministry.01472/page/75/mode/2up) p.
    33.
28. *ibid*. p. 37
29. Philip Spratt, *Blowing Up India*. p. 44.
30. Hutchinson, *Conspiracy at Meerut*. p. 37.
31. Ghosh, *Meerut Conspiracy…* pp. 75-76.
32. *ibid*. pp. 87-88.
33. *ibid*. p. 89.
34. *ibid*. pp. 77-79.
35. Hutchinson, *Conspiracy at Meerut*. p. 48.
36. Ghosh, *Meerut Conspiracy…* p. 84.
37. M. R. Masani, *[The Communist Party of
    India.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.148187/page/n43/mode/2up)* p.
    37.
38. *ibid.*
39. Philip Spratt, *Blowing Up India*. p. 51.
40. Hutchinson, *Conspiracy at Meerut*. p. 91.
41. *ibid*. p. 97.
42. *ibid*. p. 75.
43. *ibid*. p. 100.
44. *ibid*. p. 101.
45. *ibid*. p. 104.
46. Masani, *The Communist Party of India.* pp. 38-40.
47. Spratt, *Blowing Up India*. p. 53.
48. *History and Culture of Indian People, Struggle For Freedom.*
    Vol XI. p. 423.
49. Ghosh, *Meerut Conspiracy…* p. 166.
50. *History and Culture… Struggle For Freedom.* Vol XI. p. 422.
51. Spratt, *Blowing Up India*. p. 52.
52. *ibid*. p. 53.

