+++
title = "Aging"
full_title = "Aging"
date = "2013-12-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/aging/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/12/09/aging/).

Aging

I’m going to use words, rather than equations, so this is going to be a
bit sloppy.

For our purposes, aging is the gradual decline of biological function
that leads to increasing mortality with time. Threescore and ten, and
all that.

There are two senses in which aging is inevitable, but there is another
sense in which it is not inevitable at all.

First, humans age. You can’t find anybody who doesn’t. Individuals
from every population age, although not in exactly the same way -there
are some racial differences.

Theoretical biology makes it quite clear that individuals *ought* to
age. Every organism faces tradeoffs between reproduction and repair.
In a world with hazards, such that every individual has a decreasing
chance of survival over time, the force of natural selection decreases
with increasing age. This means that perfect repair has a finite value,
and organisms that skimp on repair and instead apply those resources to
increased reproduction will have a greater reproductive rate – and so
will win out.

Creatures in which there is no distinction between soma and germ line,
such as prokaryotes, cannot make such tradeoffs between repair and
reproduction – and apparently do not age. Which should be a hint.

Again, thinking about hazards and the declining power of selection with
age: there’s not much point in paying extra for a car that never wears
out if you’re about to enter it in a demo derby.

In practice, this means that animals that face low exogenous hazards
tend to age more slowly. Turtles live a long time. Porcupines live a
good deal longer than other rodents. Mainland opossums live only two
years, but those on Sapelo Island, off the cost of Georgia, which has
been predator-free for thousands of years, live three years. Organisms
whose reproductive output increases strongly with time, like sturgeons
or trees, tend to live longer.

The third way of looking at things is thermodynamics. Is aging
inevitable? Certainly not. As long as you have an external source of
free energy, you can reduce entropy with enthalpy. In other words,
despite what your kids may claim, they really can clean up their rooms,
as long as you feed them. Disorder decreases locally. It increases in
the universe as a whole, mainly in the form of high-entropy radiation
going into outer space, but who really cares about that? In principle
there is no reason why people couldn’t live to be a billion years old,
although that might entail some major modifications (and an extremely
cautious lifestyle).

The third way of looking at things trumps the other two. People age,
and evolutionary theory indicates that natural selection won’t produce
ageless organisms, at least if their germ cells and body are distinct –
but we could *make* it happen.

This might take a lot of work. If so, don’t count on seeing effective
immortality any time soon, because society doesn’t put much effort into
it. In part, this is because the powers that be don’t know understand
the points I just made.  Sometimes I wonder what they *do* understand.

