+++
title = "Heterosis"
full_title = "Heterosis"
date = "2013-12-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/12/18/heterosis/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/12/18/heterosis/).

Heterosis

Heterosis, hybrid vigor, is an increase in function in a hybrid
offspring. This effect is responsible for the greatest practical
successes of genetics. It has greatly increased the yield of maize,
and, more recently, that of rice. It’s also important in livestock
breeding.

Probably the the most famous example is the mule, the offspring of a
male donkey and a female horse. Mules are hardier than horses, have
more endurance, and are stronger. They’re smarter than horses or
donkeys. They’re extremely useful in preindustrial agriculture-
sterility is their only real disadvantage.

There are three main genetic explanations for heterosis. One idea, the
dominance hypothesis, is that undesirable recessive alleles from one
parent are masked by dominant alleles from the other parent. The
overdominance hypothesis states that two different alleles can have a
positive effect that is greater than either alone. The epistatic theory
attributes heterosis to positive interactions between non-allelic genes.

Each of these patterns may occur in some cases, but on the whole it
looks as if the dominance theory explains most of what we see.  Note
that this is equivalent to a reduction in genetic load – and thus the
success of hybrids might give us a general idea of how much advantage a
zero-load individual might have.

Hybrid vigor is not something that always happens when you cross two
fairly different parental strains. Sometimes you see reduced vigor
(outbreeding depression). But who wants that? When you see a
pronounced positive effect, the two parental lines are said to ‘nick’.
In general, this happens when the parental strains are genetically
fairly distant. But not too distant, of course. Note that this is a
first-generation effect.

This suggests that crosses between particular human populations might
produce superkids. Clearly, there is no dramatic positive effect in any
of the common crosses – we would have noticed. I’ve seen a study that
observed a moderate IQ advantage in Japanese-European kids in Hawaii,
something like a quarter of a standard deviation, but I don’t think
it’s been replicated, and that’s not enough change to get excited about
in any event.

However.. there are crosses that have never been studied, quite likely
because they’ve never occurred. For example, the two human populations
separated by the greatest genetic distance are probably Bushmen and
Melanesians/Australian Aborigines: I’ve never heard of a cross and I
doubt there has ever been one.

There’s no telling what would happen.





