+++
title = "In Reply"
full_title = "In Reply"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/03/10/in-reply/"
date = "2016-03-10"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/03/10/in-reply/).

In Reply

Ever since we’ve been exploring the idea of unschooling, we’ve been bombarded by questions from concerned relatives and curious friends. Here are our responses – based on our rather limited experience so far with a not-yet-three year old – to you all…. (And for those wondering what all this has to do with us creating our rural idyll, the avowed subject of this blog, the two are extremely closely interlinked for us.
If we are going to unschool, nature will provide the best non-classroom.)

**Un-what?**

Unschooling, self-directed learning, natural learning…. It goes by many names.

**Are you talking about homeschooling? Like those Christian fundamentalists who refuse to send their children to school because they’ll be taught evolution?**

Yes homeschooling, but no not like the Christian right. Unschooling is a subset of homeschooling – in as much as it happens at least part of the time at home – but it definitely is not setting up a mini-school in the home. Parents do not become teachers. There is no curriculum, nor any lessons. And there are no tests or exams.

**So what is unschooling then?**

For us, it’s allowing a child to grow up in normal life, as part of a larger community (John Taylor Gatto – see below – makes the point that we have so successfully sequestered off our young and our old that neither plays an active role in community life), where learning happens naturally every moment. Just as nobody teaches a toddler how to speak, so an unschooled child is not taught to read and write. When he or she feels the need, it will happen and all the evidence shows it will happen fast because instead of being an abstract exercise imposed on them by others with no discernible purpose it will be a direct means to an urgent need to read a particular comic book themselves, or to write letters to landowners asking permission to trap on their land (to give some real life examples). And as parents we will be there to facilitate – to provide books, writing material, feedback if asked and so on. Similarly with every other ‘subject’ you can name.

**So when will they learn to read and write?**

It might not happen until they are eight, or 10 or even later. [Peter Kowalke](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Kowalke)learnt to read at the age of 11. He later wrote for and edited several magazines.

**Ten? Are you serious?**

If that shocks you, let us ask you why you feel it is so important a child is literate from a young age. In India, toddlers are often taught to recite the alphabet and many pre-schools boast the fact that they start their charges early on reading and writing. But to what end? How will a toddler actually use the alphabet? They may become a great source of pride to their parents – and will perhaps have already learnt to do tasks more to earn the praise of their elders (‘clever girl!’) than because they find them interesting – but beyond that?

We like the seven year idea. Both in the traditional Indian system and in Steiner philosophy, children are not expected to engage with intellectual things until they are at least seven. (In fact of course India traditionally looked down upon writing and scribes; teaching and learning was oral and memory championed. How times change.)

**How do they learn without teachers?**

How do children learn *with* teachers? Not very well in most cases. They learn just enough to spout out in the next test. How many of us remember what we learnt in school? Unless a subject is made relevant to the child, unless it is shown to be connected to real life, unless he or she actually wants to learn about it, there usually isn’t much real learning happening.

And it’s not just parents and children who have come to this conclusion; teachers have too. Read John Holt and John Taylor Gatto (details below), two very successful and much-loved teachers who came to realise that even they weren’t helping children learn, and became torch-holders of the homeschooling/unschooling movement.

**Ok so you don’t like mainstream schooling, but what about alternative schools?**

The boat’s still out on this one. It depends hugely on the particular school of course. There are open learning centres which seem to be able to offer children the freedom they get at home in terms of learning. However, other alternative schools are still rigid in terms of timetables – and understandably, because letting a large group of children do different things at the same time is incredibly difficult to manage – and schedules and ensuring that some learning (however alternative) is going on.

We do really like the look of places like the Krishnamurty schools, Centre For Learning and Marudam Farm School, so when the time comes we will investigate this route further.

**So you are proposing to keep your children at home until they’re 18?**

No and no. As in normal life, we will be partly at home and partly in a huge variety of other places where our children can be exposed to all kinds of different environments and people. A lot more diverse in fact than a single institution called school.

And if later they want to go to school and/or university, then of course we’ll help them do that. The point is that it will be their decision not ours.

**Aren’t you imposing your very radical views on your children by not sending them to school? You might ruin their lives.**

Don’t all parents impose their views on their children by *sending* them to school? Just because something is mainstream doesn’t make it good.

Radical – well we embrace that term. We need some fresh thought and action in our screwed up world.

**School didn’t screw me or my children up. We all turned out fine.**

Did you? Did they?

**And how will they pass their exams?** (Indian relatives please move this question to the top of the list)

If they want to pursue something that requires exams, they will do so and we will support them. We’ll help them get the textbooks, study, find a teacher as required and prepare for the exams they need to. There are many options now – like the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) – for those not in a school environment.

Doing exams for the sake of doing exams – getting 10th and 12th class boards, or GCSEs and A Levels, just because everyone else has and is – has little value.

**And what about the real world? How will they ever go to university or get a job?**

Well in fact universities like Harvard, Oxford and MIT tend to welcome children who have been schooled at home. Anecdotal evidence suggest that often they find them to be better students because they are intrinsically motivated and interested in their subject, unlike their regular schooled peers who just want to get a degree with the bare minimum possible. India isn’t so welcoming as of now but we hope that will change as the homeschooling/unschooling movement here picks up pace.

And as for a career, well once someone develops a real passion for something and is allowed to pursue it they tend to do brilliantly in their chosen field.

**Even if you discount the learning part, children need to be with other children. Ok so perhaps we didn’t learn much at school but we did have fun.**

We have thought long and hard about this. If we all lived in tribal village society, there would be plenty of children and adults around to interact, play and work with. But we don’t, and there aren’t.

Children do need to be with other children but not necessarily of the same age group – and most schools still group children by age (see Ken Robinson’s talk below) – and preferably not with others of exactly the same socio-economic background. We would prefer our children to be surrounded by a mix of adults and children from all backgrounds. Yes we will have to work to provide this in our nuclear existence but we feel it’s possible.

**Isn’t it just easier to hand them over to the specialists?**

Yes. It would be. Unschooling is not for the faint-hearted…

And finally, here are some resources that have helped us on our journey so far. As we keep saying to our challengers, we are also more than happy to learn about the other side of the argument. We haven’t yet come to any hard and fast decisions and our minds are open and receptive to new ideas. So if you have a rebuttal to this post, or want to direct us to material upholding a different viewpoint, please feel free to do so.

[John Holt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Holt_(educator)) (including How Children Fail, How Children Learn, Instead of Education)

Dumbing Us Down – [John Taylor Gatto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Taylor_Gatto)

Home-Grown – [Ben Hewitt](http://benhewitt.net/) and here’s a [podcast](http://www.danielvitalis.com/rewild-yourself-podcast/ben-hewitt-on-unschooling-ourselves-and-our-children) with him here on our favourite Daniel Vitalis show

[School Kills Creativity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y2Nz2X0AEXw) (Ken Robinson’s TED talk)

Sangeetha Sriram’s [blog](http://sangeethasriram.blogspot.in/)

Oh yes, one last thing, if you have more questions to add to the above list, let us know and we’ll do our best to answer them…
