+++
title = "House O’Rats"
full_title = "House O’Rats"
date = "2013-04-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/04/04/house-orats/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/04/04/house-orats/).

House O’Rats

Picture the destiny of some rats that stumble into a grain silo full of
wheat. It’s an unbalanced diet, but there sure is a lot of it, and the
rat population explodes, even though they’re not particularly healthy.

Their population increases until there’s just enough grain pouring in to
feed them all (barely), at which point the silo is chock-full o’ rats.
Now they’re hungry as well as malnourished. Once in a while, typhus or
bubonic plague decimates the rats and there’s plenty to eat for a
generation or two, until population catches up again. That doesn’t take
long, because rats breed like.. rabbits?

The silo is big and contains an obscene number of rats – all potential
mutants – and we keep this up for some 400 rat generations. There are
lots of new mutations, some of which pay off in the silo. Natural
selection in the silo favors traits that work better there, and the
rats, they are a changin’. Eventually we see new versions of metabolic
genes that fit them better to this restricted diet \[like lactose
tolerance, or a new and improved ergothioneine transporter\] and new
versions of immunological genes that make them more resistant to the
plagues made common by the crowding. With the crowding, the optimal
behavior changes, and so the rats acquire different dispositions. They
even develop an interesting dominance hierarchy, with [rat
Kings](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rat_king_%28folklore%29).

I mustn’t forget the spigot that spouts ethyl alcohol, CH₃CH₂OH. The
rats adapt to that too – those that survive.

Not content with our simple selection experiment, we also install
complicated mazes with flaming hoops that the rats have to jump through
in order to get extra food and mates: we want rats with different
brains, and eventually we get them. They’re maze-bright and
flaming-hoop-bright. We install treadmills and feed the rats according
to their work output, and eventually they produce more work per amount
of food eaten. They’ve maximized efficiency rather than surge power,
which was more useful back when they were wild and free. Not only that,
they eventually come to *like* being on the treadmill, almost as if it’s
some sort of race.

There are other silos – one full of rice and another full of maize.
They have different mazes and flaming hoops, built at different times:
and there are still wild rats, too, although not as many as in the
silos.

But no matter how much they change, they’re still just a bunch of rats.

