+++
title = "Epigenetics"
full_title = "Epigenetics"
date = "2012-10-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/10/26/epigenetics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/10/26/epigenetics/).

Epigenetics

As I understand it, in some circles, there is a burgeoning hope that
practice in this generation will somehow improve performance in the next
– based on a word they have heard but do not understand. That word is
epigenetics.

Genes can certainly be modified in ways that persist. For example, the
cells in your skin produce more skin cells when they divide, rather than
muscle cells or neurons. Most of your cells have a copy of the entire
human genome, but only certain elements are expressed in a particular
type of cell, and that pattern persists when that kind of cell
divides. We understand, to a degree, some of the chemical changes that
cause these lasting changes in gene expression patterns. One is
methylation, a method of suppressing gene activity. It involves
attaching a methyl group to a cytosine base. This methylation pattern is
copied when somatic cells divide.

The question is whether A. such changes can persist into the next
generation and B. if they do, is this some sort of adaptive process,
rather than an occasional screwup? We’re interested in whether this
happens in humans, so we’ll only consider mammals.

It’s rare, but sometimes it happens. It has only been found to happen
at a few sites in the genome, and when it does happen, only a fraction
of the offspring are affected. Probably the best known example is the
agouti yellow allele in mice. Mice that carry this allele are fat,
yellow, and prone to cancer and diabetes – some of them. Yellow mothers
tend to have yellow babies, while genetically identical brown mothers
mostly have brown babies. The agouti yellow allele is the product of a
recent insertion in the genome, about 50 years ago. For the
overwhelming majority of genes, the epigenetic markers are reset in a
new embryo, which means that epigenetic changes induced by the parent’s
experiences disappear. The embryo is back at square one.  This agouti
yellow allele is screwed up – somehow the reset isn’t happening
correctly.

In mice, the mammalian species in which most such investigations have
been done, the few other locations in the genome where anything like
this happens are mainly retroposons and other repeated elements.

There is another way that you can get transmission across generations
without genetic change. Rats that are nurtured by stressed mothers are
more likely to be stressed. This isn’t transmitted perfectly, but it
happens. Presumably the uterine environment, or maybe maternal
behavior, is different in stressed mice in a way that stresses their
offspring. This reminds me of a science fiction story that abused this
principle. The idea was that alligators (or maybe it was crocodiles)
almost have a four-chambered heart, which is generally associated with
higher metabolism and friskiness. Our protagonist operates on an
alligator and soups up its heart: the now-more-vigorous animal has
better blood circulation and lays healthier eggs that develop into
babies that also have a working four-chambered heart. So ‘normal’
alligators were like stressed mice: fix the problem and you get to see
what they’re really capable of. The problem was that the most
interesting consequence was growing wings, flying around and eating
people. Alligators turned out to be stunted dragons. Not so good.

Anyhow, what reason is there to believe that reading Gradshteyn and
Ryzhik until your eyes bleed will plant the seeds of math to come in
your descendants? None. Oh, I can come up with a scenario, if you want:
but it requires that civilization (in particular, the key part of
civilization, heavy use of weird definite and indefinite integrals and
vast reproductive rewards for those skilled in such things) has risen
and fallen over and over again at fairly short (but irregular)
intervals, so that humans have faced this adaptive problem over and over
and over again. A little like the way in which generations of aphids do
different things in the summer (parthenogenesis) than in the late fall
(sexual reproduction) – although that probably depends on direct cues
like length of day rather than epigenetic changes. Something like Motie
history, maybe. But I don’t believe it. Not even a little bit.

Nature hasn’t even figured out how to have Jewish boys be born
circumcised yet.

So why are people talking about this? Why do people like Tyler Cowen
invoke it to ward off evil facts?

Because they’re chuckleheads, what else?

