+++
title = "Translation for Another 200 Years? "
date = "2021-12-07"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VG1wak0wOUVWWGhQUkUxM1RucFJQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VG1wak0wOUVWWGhQUkUxM1RucFJQUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1626112127Translations%20for%20another%20200%20years2.jpg)

I came to know that Sahitya Akademi has decided to translate ancient
Indian texts like Vedas, Upanishads, Bhagavadgita etc into Indian
languages and has constituted a committee for this purpose with eminent
scholars like Prof Abhiraja Rajendra Mishra, Prof Satyavrata Shastri,
Prof Kapil Kapoor, Prof Nanda Kishor Pandey, Prof Uma Vaidya, Prof
Harekrishna Satapathy and Sri Janardana Hegde. I have nothing against
these great scholars. Each one of them have done the highest and
greatest contribution to the nation, Samskrit language and Indian
languages and literature in particular. I salute them for their service,
tapas and achievements. Here in this short article, I am only trying to
convey about one of the roadblocks for the development of Samskrit and
the need to have a paradigm shift amongst the lovers of Samskrit and the
scholars of Samskrit.  
  
This type of translation from Samskrit to other Indian languages, of the
above-mentioned texts in particular, has been going on for the last 200
years and every other translation is said to be more accurate and
authentic than the earlier ones! Instead, I am of the opinion that the
need of the hour is translation from other Indian languages into
Samskrit language in order to contemporize Samskrit literature, to
create new content, new literature, new words, new writers, new critics,
new journals, new styles and new scholars, to add new dimensions and new
courses in Samskrit studies and to bring the Samskrit language and
literature out from the current stagnation.  
  
For 200 years, people have been reading translations, not Samskrit.
Other languages have thus gotten enriched by such translations, and not
Samskrit literature. Samskrit scholars have gotten enriched, not
Samskrit language. The publishers got enriched, not the Samskrit
language. Those who read translations remained as readers of
translations all their life and few learnt Samskrit language. People buy
Gita Pressâ€™ Bhagavadgita and read the translation, but not the
Bhagavadgita, because they never learn the Samskrit language, they have
been happy with the easy readymade shortcut called translation!
Translated books keep people always dependent on secondary sources.
Translated books are the preferred texts in Ayurveda colleges and the
referred books for Samskrit papers in BA and MA courses.  
  
Translation from Samskrit language to other languages has become a great
obstruction to the development of Samskrit language. For those people
who do not know the Samskrit language, it is the easiest way to know the
content without the difficulty of learning the language. For young
scholars, it is the easiest way to increase their list of publications.
For publishers, it is the easiest product to sell and make money. For
scholars it fetches both good royalty and plenty of awards. For the
politicians it gives them a feeling of satisfaction that they did
something for Samskrit. For the Institutional Heads, it pleases their
bosses and enhances their achievement list. All are happy. The ecosystem
thrives! For how long do we keep doing this business at the cost of
Samskrit? For another 200 years?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 1557 \| 12-07-2021 11:18
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

