+++
title = "Genetics and the"
full_title = "Genetics and the Historical Decline of Violence?"
date = "2012-11-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/11/25/genetics-and-the-historical-decline-of-violence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/11/25/genetics-and-the-historical-decline-of-violence/).

Genetics and the Historical Decline of Violence?

There is an insightful and data-rich blog called [hbd\*
chick](http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/) that is well worth our reading. A
recent
[post](http://hbdchick.wordpress.com/2012/11/23/what-pinker-missed/)
discusses Steven Pinker’s new
[book](http://www.amazon.com/dp/1455883115) about the decline of
violence. I haven’t read the book, but the discussion on hbd\* chick’s
blog suggests that Pinker does not give much weight to the possibility
of genetic change in European history causing the long term declines
that we see, for example from Eisner’s [careful tabulation of homicide
rates in Europe from Medieval
times](http://bjc.oxfordjournals.org/content/41/4/618.abstract).

In the Western European countries for which Eisner found data on
homicide rates there was a bumpy but steady decline from Medieval times
through the twentieth century. Here, for example, is his chart showing
homicide rates in England: note the log scale on the Y axis. The rates
are homicides per 100,000 population.

![Eisner
england](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/eisner-england.jpeg?w=600&h=347 "eisner.england.jpeg")

The data from other European countries are similar but some, especially
Scandinavia, seem to have undergone the change later by a few centuries.

Homicide rates (these are local rates and do not include war casualties)
declined dramatically or so it seems. There is a near hundred-fold
difference between English homicide rates in 1300 and 2000. What if, as
Gregory Clark would suggest, these declines reflect genetic, i.e.
evolutionary changes, in the populations. How much selection would be
required to cause such a decline in violence? An interesting recent
development in human genetics is the resurgence of classical
quantitative genetics as an older faith that we would quickly find
“genes for” one thing and another mostly failed. It seems that RA Fisher
got it essentially right in
[1918](http://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=fisher+1918+supposition+of+mendelian+inheritance&btnG=&hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C45).
A good entree to current literature is
[this](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3182557/) remarkable
paper showing that cryptic distant genetic kinship predicts IQ
correlations just fine.

In this tradition our model is that there is some underlying partially
heritable trait that we might call “propensity to violence”. It doesn’t
matter what we call it since it is just some direction in a high
dimensional space of characters. This trait has a Normal distribution in
the population, and individuals with a high enough value of the trait
commit homicide. In other words homicide is in our model a classical
threshold trait. We assume that selection on this trait is mild so that
directional selection acts to shift the whole distribution up or down.

In 1300 the homicide rate was about 50 per 100,000 people, or 0.5 per
thousand. Homicide must have caused on the order of 1 to 2 percent of
all deaths and a much higher proportion of deaths of young adult males.
Our assumption of a Normal distribution of the underlying trait
immediately implies that the threshold was 3.3 standard deviations
greater than the mean (from any table of the Normal distribution).
Natural selection, social selection we would say in this case, disfavors
homicide and the distribution is shifted so that the homicide threshold
is surpassed by only 1 in 100,000 people rather than 1 in 2,000. By the
year 2000 the homicide threshold is at 4.3 standard deviation from the
population mean. In other words selection has moved the distribution 1
standard deviation in 700 years or 28 generations.

This amount of change, 1 standard deviation, would correspond to a
change in IQ of 15 points or a change in mean male stature of about 2.5
to 3 inches. What strength of natural selection would have been required
to cause this amount of genetic change?

The workhorse of quantitative genetics is the “breeder’s equation” which
says that the response to selection is the product of the additive
heritability and the selective differential, which is the difference
between the population mean of a trait and the mean among parents. It is
usually written as

![Heritability](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/11/heritability.jpeg?w=66&h=19 "heritability.jpeg")

In the present case we need a response of 1/28 of a standard deviation
per generation. Assuming an additive heritability of 0.5 (the true value
is probably 0.8 or so from literature on the heritability of aggressive
behavior in children) the selective differential must be about 1/14 or
.07 standard deviations per generation. In terms of IQ this would
correspond to a one point IQ advantage of parents over the population
average and in terms of stature parents with a mean stature 0.2 inches
greater than the population average. This would occur if the most
homicidal 1.5% of the population were to fail to reproduce each
generation.

Justice was famously brutal and harsh in Medieval and Renaissance
England so this may not be an entirely meaningless exercise. In
[this](http://evoandproud.blogspot.com/2010/07/roman-state-and-genetic-pacification.html)
excellent essay Peter Frost suggests that the nearly the same selection
against violence occurred in the several centuries before the fall of
the Roman Empire, and he provides grisly details of Roman treatment of
criminals.

