+++
title = "Too Much Diversity"
full_title = "Too Much Diversity"
date = "2012-11-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/11/30/too-much-diversity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/11/30/too-much-diversity/).

Too Much Diversity

There’s a new paper out in Nature, by Wenqing Fu and many other people,
about the recent origin of most variants in protein-coding genes. They
conclude that most are less than 5-10,000 year old – younger in
Europeans than in Africans. This is a natural consequence of the shape
of human demographic history – there was a huge population increase with
the advent of agriculture, and more people meant more mutations. That
agricultural expansion happened somewhat earlier in the Middle East and
Europe than in Africa.

More people means more mutations – that was clear to some of us five
years ago. We were primarily interested in the rate at which adaptive
mutations were generated – that increase, coupled with the selective
pressures associated with a very different agricultural way of life, had
to materially speed up adaptive evolution in humans. More so in some
places than others, of course.

A very few mutations are beneficial, some are neutral and many are
deleterious, although the degree of harm inflicted varies widely. So
the population expansion also increased the number of bad mutations –
but unless selection also relaxed, it would not have changed the
*per-capita* number of deleterious mutations, or the distribution of
their effects (what fraction had large, medium, or small effects on
fitness). It increased the diversity of deleterious mutations – they
are more motley, not more common. The article never talks about that
per-capita number, or, if it did , I was unable to winkle it out. It
talks about ages and numbers of mutations – but not the mean number, in
either of the two populations studied (European Americans and African
Americans) . I think it would been a lot clearer, confused fewer
reporters, if it had made that distinction. On the other hand,
depending on the facts on the ground, talking about mutational load
might be a grant-killer. There was a paper earlier this year (with many
of the same authors) that used about half of the same data and did
mention per-capita numbers. I’ve discussed it.

Some of these deleterious mutations have negative effects large enough
to be considered disease genes. You can imagine two extremes. In one,
everyone with schizophrenia has the same nasty mutation. In the other,
virtually every family with members suffering from schizophrenia has a
different causal mutation. That second pattern is bad news for
medicine: it reduces the chance of finding a drug that helps a big
fraction of sufferers. People talk about individualized therapy, but of
course that’s impractical. Hard to test (do we create an army of clones
for phase II?), impossible to share the development costs among many
customers.

Unfortunately, that second pattern is pretty close to reality. Most of
it has little to do with anything that happened a few thousand years
ago – any particular mutation with a strong enough effect to be much of
a schizophrenia risk gene doesn’t last that long. So a recent
(Bronze-Age) increase in the diversity of deleterious mutations doesn’t
make much difference. We were already far from common-disease-common
variant. On the other hand, a population with more genetic load, more
deleterious mutations (and not ones with incredibly small effects),
might well be more susceptible to schiz. But that doesn’t point to a
drug either: it merely says that it is better to have fewer holes in
your genome. That doesn’t suggest a therapy, at least not to me.

The paper says that there may be an excess of weakly deleterious
mutations in Europeans due to bottlenecks back in the Ice Age. The idea
works like this: selection is less efficient in small populations.
Deleterious mutations with an effect s \< 1/Ne drift freely and are not
efficiently removed by selection. This effect takes on the order of Ne
generations – so a population reduced to an effective size of of 10,000
for 10,000 generations ( \~250,000 years) would accumulate a
large-than-usual number of deleterious mutations of effect size
\~10-4. Lohmueller et al wrote about this back in 2008: the scenario
they used had a European ancestral bottleneck 200,000 years long, which
is A. what you need to make this scenario work and B. impossible, since
it’s way before anatomically modern humans left Africa. Back to the
drawing board.

