+++
title = "The genetics of"
full_title = "The genetics of stupidity"
date = "2012-11-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/11/08/the-genetics-of-stupidity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/11/08/the-genetics-of-stupidity/).

The genetics of stupidity

Kevin Mitchell wrote an essay this summer (“The genetics of stupidity”)
that got some attention. The idea is that most or all of the genetic
influence affecting intelligence is genetic load. Although each
deleterious mutation is very rare, the average individual carries many
of them – and some people carry more than others. People with more
messed-up genes than average would be less smart than average.

This has to be part of the truth, and it might be most of the truth,
particularly within a population. People have had no success looking
for single alleles that explain much of the variation in IQ – but as far
as I am aware, all of those studies have been of Europeans. In the next
population you look at, the genetic architecture might be different.
For example, height is highly polygenic in Europeans. No single allele
explains much of the variance, although a few have large-enough
influence to be detectable (unlike IQ, thus far). But the situation is
different in Pygmies. There, we see loci that influence height, as well
as a general tendency of height increasing with the fraction of the
Bantu ancestry.

So you don’t know until you look. It could well be that there are IQ
QTLs among the Pygmies: if nothing else, being bigger, with a bigger
brain, might well increase IQ. If I had to guess, I would suggest that
IQ in Pygmies might also increase with the fraction of Bantu ancestry,
which, if true, would certainly mystify many people.

I doubt if genetic load is the entire story. Selection happens. But
load surely matters, and may be part of the explanation both within and
between populations.

Years ago, I don’t think it was obvious that you wouldn’t find a few
fair-sized IQ QTLs in Europeans. It *was* obvious that genetic load
would be part of the story – I’ve been thinking about it for a long
time. There I go again, using that mysterious and undefinable word
again – ‘obvious’. Have to be careful about that.

