+++
title = "American Civil War?"
full_title = "American Civil War? Richard Hanania thinks it unlikely"
date = "2021-01-13"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/american-civil-war-richard-hanania"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/american-civil-war-richard-hanania).

American Civil War? Richard Hanania thinks it unlikely



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F90f5a71a-55f3-4392-9eac-efc465b30649_1095x851.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/american-civil-war-richard-hanania?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

For this episode of *Unsupervised Learning,* I talked to [Richard
Hanania](https://twitter.com/RichardHanania?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor)
of the [Center for the Study of Partisanship and
Ideology](https://cspicenter.org/reports/). Normally my goal is to
record podcasts that aren’t particularly time-sensitive (e.g., my
conversation last weekend with [Alina
Chan](https://razib.substack.com/p/alina-chan-on-sars-cov-2-and-lab)
about the possibility of “lab leak” of SARS-Cov-2 will be fresh for
months, as will my chat with [Armand
Leroi](https://razib.substack.com/p/armand-leroi-an-evolutionist-in-repose)
about race, eugenics, and Aristotle). They only reach free listeners a
couple of weeks after going live for [paid
subscribers](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe) and my hope is that
the content will remain evergreen long after both. But this is not an
ordinary time, and like many, I’ve been wondering what to say in this
moment that might add value.

Richard is a smart and heterodox thinker whose ideas and opinions are
informed by his background as a scholar of political science. He’s not
“winging it.” Last fall *The Washington Post* published his op-ed,
[Americans hate each other. But we aren’t headed for civil
war](https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/civil-war-united-states-unlikely-violence/2020/10/29/3a143936-0f0f-11eb-8074-0e943a91bf08_story.html).
**My big question for him was if he had updated his assessment in light
of recent events.** We recorded this tonight, January 12th and I’m
releasing it immediately to both
[paid](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe) and free subscribers to
*Unsupervised Learning* because his insights and assessments are timely.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/american-civil-war-richard-hanania?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

In addition to talking about whether the US will erupt in civil war or
suffer a coup in the next decade, we also discuss a new report he
co-authored, [The National Populist Illusion: Why Culture, Not
Economics, Drives American
Politics](https://cspicenter.org/the-national-populist-illusion-why-culture-not-economics-drives-american-politics/).
The conclusion is that a populist economic realignment isn’t happening,
and in much of the podcast we discuss Richard’s belief that Republicans
and Democrats will “regress to the mean.” He believes Donald J. Trump is
a *sui generis* figure, and with his exit, Republicans will probably
want to revert to their old playbook.

We also mull over the possibility that the “[Great
Awokening](https://www.vox.com/2019/3/22/18259865/great-awokening-white-liberals-race-polling-trump-2020),”
a phenomenon first identified by one of the fellows at Richard’s
think-tank, [Zach Goldberg](https://twitter.com/zachg932?lang=en),\*
still has steam left in it, and what that means for the Biden
administration.

Finally, **while recording the podcast we uncover intriguing evidence
that Jon Ossoff, Senator-Elect from Georgia, is “I.D.W.-adjacent.”**

\* It has been brought to my attention that “[Spotted
Toad](https://mobile.twitter.com/toad_spotted/status/915959944087826432) ”
had been using the term “Great Awokening” in the fall of 2017.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/american-civil-war-richard-hanania?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

