+++
title = "Original Wisdom"
full_title = "Original Wisdom"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/12/12/original-wisdom/"
date = "2016-12-12"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/12/12/original-wisdom/).

Original Wisdom

As I turned the last page in *[Original Wisdom](https://www.amazon.in/Original-Wisdom-Stories-Ancient-Knowing-ebook/dp/B005IQ64ZQ?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1&ref_=dp-kindle-redirect)*, I experienced a feeling I’ve never had before when reading a book. I can’t explain what it was but it left a palpable memory.

Robert Wolff’s collection of stories and anecdotes mainly from his time in Malaysia among the aboriginal Sng’oi starts off rather routinely as he describes the difficulty of conducting a nutritional survey designed by Western minds in Suriname. We travel with him to Malaysia where we are introduced to the Malay culture, which again has radically different values to those the West subscribes to, as illustrated by his attempt to save someone’s life by forcibly taking them to hospital. It is though when he starts spending time in the jungle with the Sng’oi that he undergoes a dramatic personal change, a sort of re-awakening, which the reader is graciously allowed to follow, spellbound.

In retrospect, the initial preamble is perhaps needed for both writer and reader as preparation for what follows, a re-seeing of the world as it is. Instead of perceiving the many different parts, Wolff suddenly experiences the whole. This is the oneness of Vedantic truth. It is also the oneness sought and experienced by people throughout time the world over, often aided by substances and rituals that promote access to an alternate consciousness.

If this is all a bit overwhelming on a Monday morning, there are plenty of other interesting, and less life-altering, anthropological points Wolff makes. He talks about how today we are stymied by the endless choices facing us. Throughout human history, people had very little choice in what they ate, wore, owned (if they even had a concept of ownership), did and even who they married. We on the other hand have to make choices about all of these things and more almost every second of the day and it can lead to mental exhaustion. I think particularly of children in this. How many clothes, shoes, toys, choices of activities, food, playmates does a regular city-dwelling child have today? And what effect is this having on them?

There is a brief but revealing chapter on reading and writing, in which the Sng’oi notice their Western friend trying to capture their language in phonetic symbols – bizarre and hilarious they think that he cannot simply store each word up in his brain but has to use this aid to memory – and ask to learn. They master the technique incredibly quickly and easily, enjoying every moment of it, but, still failing to see any use for writing, soon dismiss it. For most of us, increasingly saturated from childhood with information and data, learning anything requires applying ourselves assiduously to the task for a certain amount of time. It also again makes me wonder about how useful literacy really is. I have read about itinerant poet-singers in India who can recite thousands – perhaps hundreds of thousands – of verses from memory, but who, once they learn to read and write, find that their memory power is much reduced. Indeed Vedic tradition in India always spurned the written word and scribes were looked down on; oral transmission of texts and teaching was regarded as far better. So respected is a good oral memory that Sanskrit even has a word to describe the person who can hear something once and remember it, just as the Sng’oi can; *ekasandhigrahin*. In English by contrast we have only such concepts as a photographic memory.

Wolff describes how he has twice been able to somehow know the medicinal properties of a plant he spots, and straight away use the plant in a specific – and correct way – to heal himself from a particular ailment. This, and other anecdotes, lead him to the logical conclusion that the wealth of medicinal herb knowledge in each traditional culture comes not from trial and error, indeed cannot have come from trial and error given how complex it is, but rather from people who can intuitively sense what plant is needed for what sickness or injury. This is again something we see in India: Ayurveda, an amazingly complicated system of herbal-based medicine, is said to have evolved from seers who had this intuitive knowledge.

And the author makes a wonderfully apt point about privacy. As a species we have always slept, eaten and lived at very close quarters. Progress (?) and affluence have seen us build bigger and better dwellings in which each couple or individual has their own bedroom and often bathroom too, and the abundance and ubiquity of food combined with a paucity of time has meant that we often eat alone. We thus have more physical privacy than ever before, and at the same time we are more alienated from each other than ever before. Loneliness and the attendant depression has become a huge problem. As a Westerner in India, I have often struggled with the lack of physical privacy here. It is quite normal for the whole extended family to sleep in one room. At times, due to lack of space, I share a room (well the floor of) with Gautam’s mother, brother, aunt, uncle, cousin… And I have another English friend married to a North Indian who tells me she often shares a bed with her grandmother-in-law. The Sng’oi sleep in whichever hut they feel like that night, huddled up to, touching, the rest of the group. As Jean Liedloff notes in *The Continuum Concept*, the idea that all physical contact is or should be sexual – bar the obligatory and meaningless greeting kiss or hug – is a messed up modern convention which leaves most of us deprived of touch. We always used to snigger at (straight) Indian men who walked hand in hand, but really they are the normal ones and we the perverted.

*Original Wisdom: Stories of An Ancient Way of Living by Robert Wolff*; it’s available on Amazon – read it…
