+++
title = "Cat Ladies"
full_title = "Cat Ladies"
date = "2016-02-10"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/02/10/cat-ladies/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/02/10/cat-ladies/).

Cat Ladies

There’s a new paper out that extends the record of host manipulation by
toxoplasma. We already knew that toxoplasma infections cause mice to
lose fear of cat urine – turns out that toxoplasma infections also cause
chimpanzees to develop a morbid attraction to leopard urine, a marker of
their main predator. Uninfected chimps avoid it. Interestingly, infected
chips don’t seem attracted to lion or tiger urine, which suggests a
specific strain of toxo.

The background is that toxoplasmosis infects many warmblooded creatures
as the intermediate host, but can only sexually reproduce in cats, their
definitive host. These protozoans (apicomplexans, like malaria) need to
have their intermediate host eaten by a cat, and they’ve apparently
evolved methods of manipulating host behavior to help bring that about,
probably through their colonization of the brain.

There is some evidence that toxoplasma in the brain has effects on human
behavior, such as slowed reaction times, reduced long-term
concentration, and, of course, liking the smell of cat urine.

The changes in mice sure look like host manipulation, and I have
wondered if it might be happening in humans – in particular, cat ladies,
but maybe this played a role in the whole human domestication-of-cats
thing. Then again, perhaps it was toxoplasma domesticating humans. But
if this manipulation happens in chimpanzees, you just know it has to
work in humans. This suggests that if you eliminate the toxoplasma in
the brains of cat ladies, say with Atovaquone and Clindamycin, you could
perhaps cure their morbid attraction, just as antibiotics can cure
parthenogenesis in parasitic wasps infected by Wolbachia. Cured, they
might put all their flea-bitten parasites in a sack and throw them into
the river. And get a dog.

About half the human race has toxo on the brain, as if we didn’t already
have enough trouble.

The big question (other than helping explain human craziness) is whether
this is an important part of how cats make a living. It may be that toxo
is an essential ingredient in cat predation strategies: if so, it is
probably very old, and may even go back before cats, perhaps switching
from some creodont.

If toxo naturally can make people like cat piss, it’s already preadapted
to become (with suitable genetic engineering) the model system for many
kinds of infectious behavior modifiers.

