+++
title = "The Parthenon Sculptures: Their Journey from Athens to London"
date = "2020-07-20"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/07/20/the-parthenon-sculptures-their-journey-from-athens-to-london/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/07/20/the-parthenon-sculptures-their-journey-from-athens-to-london/).

A British aristocrat was sent as an ambassador to the Ottoman Sultan-
Selim III. The aristocrat was Lord Elgin, the year was 1799 and what
ensued in the following years forms a basis for passionate debate even
today between Britain and Greece ever since Greece became independent of
the Ottoman Empire in 1832.

But what was this incident? This post is about how a almost half of the
beautiful collection of sculptures of the classical Greece called the
Parthenon Sculptures adorning the magnificent Parthenon of Athens found
their way in the British Museum in London. There has been a very hot
debate around this as the Greeks have been rightfully demanding their
return to Athens. My sympathy though unsurprisingly are towards their
restitution, but in this post, rather than discussing the either side of
the debate on whether sculptures should be restituted or not, I will be
describing that journey, that fateful journey of thousands of miles-
from being Parthenon sculptures to being Elgin Marbles! Although now
they are usually and justly so, addressed as the Parthenon sculptures.

![**Surviving figures from the East Pediment of the Parthenon, exhibited
as part of Elgin Marbles in the British Museum. (Source: Wikimedia
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/elgin_marbles_east_pediment.jpg)

**Background**

A temple of Athena- Goddess of wisdom, war and the crafts, daughter of
Zeus and the patron goddess of the classical city of Athens, is said to
have already been under construction “just before or after the battle of
Marathon in 490 BC but had been razed to the ground by the Persians
during their brief occupation of Athens in 480 BC.”₁ Then in 448 BCE,
the Athenian Assembly voted in favour of the construction of a new
temple – The Parthenon. The work on temple began very next year and by
the year 432 BCE, the temple was complete. Its principal architect was
Iktinos and the sculptor of this magnificent monument was Phidias.
Famous personalities of history who saw its rise into magnificence
included statesman Pericles and philosopher Socrates.

![**The Parthenon (Photo
[Credit](https://www.ancient-origins.net/news-history-archaeology/parthenon-athens-epic-monument-or-mystery-measurements-005497))**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/parthenon.jpg?w=952)

![**An 1868 painting by Sir Lawrence Alma Tadema – Phidias showing
frieze of the Parthenon to his friends** **(Wikimedia
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/1868_lawrence_alma-tadema_-_phidias_showing_the_frieze_of_the_parthenon_to_his_friends.jpg?w=1024)

The Parthenon was later converted like many unfortunate pagan temples,
into a Christian Church and continued as such for the next thousand
years, first as the church of the Holy Wisdom from fifth century CE and
then from early thirteenth century as the church of Our Lady of Athens.
In fifteenth century, Greece became part of the Ottoman Empire. During
the rule of Ottomans, the entire Acropolis, of which the Parthenon was
an integral part, was “occupied by the Turkish troops and not easily
accessible to the visitors”₂ As a result, the Parthenon was now
converted into a mosque to be used by the Turkish garrison. “It’s
mosaics and frescoes were whitewashed or plastered over.”₃

In 1687, the Venetian army which was mostly a mercenary army, besieged
Athens. A war raged between Venice and the Ottomans. During this war,
the Parthenon was being used as a storage facility for gunpowder. A
deadly blow struck by a Venetian mortar caused the entire roof of the
Parthenon to collapse, leaving only the pediments. Many sculptures
including a large Poseidon were later smashed to pieces during an
unsuccessful attempt by the engineers of the Venetian general Franceso
Morosini who tried to bring down the sculptures and take them back to
Venice.

**Lord Elgin**

In 1799, Thomas Bruce, seventh earl of Elgin was appointed as an
ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. This was not his first assignment. He
had been previously posted as a diplomat at various places like Vienna
and Berlin. His original intentions were debatably, to get the drawings
of the famous Greek sculptures. He even put together a team of artists
headed by a painter named Giovanni Battista Lusieri.

![**Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin in 1788 by Anton Graff (Wiki
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/7th_earl_of_elgin_by_anton_graff_around_1788.jpg?w=267)

On their arrival, the entire party was given a very lavish welcome. The
British on their part didn’t waste much time and started to draw the
beauty of various Greek monuments and sculptures. But, the Acropolis at
Athens was a different scenario. Permission by the Ottoman officials was
given only on the condition of monetary benefits. Lusieri thus, asked
Elgin to surpass all of this by directly demanding a *firman* from the
Sultan himself.

Now, the question which naturally arises is why the Ottoman Sultan was
being so generous about this whole affair ever since the arrival of the
ambassador? Why was it likely that the British might as well get the
said *firman*? The answer is good old politics. To bad luck of Greece
and to his luck, Lord Elgin was at the right place, at the right time.
Due to ongoing struggle between the Ottoman Empire and Napoleanic France
for the control of Egypt, Sultan was eager to gain allies and Britain
was being fostered for the same.

> *“As a result, Elgin was able to obtain a **firman** from the Sultan’s
> ministers authorising him to make casts and drawing of the sculptures
> in place on ‘the temple of the idols’, to excavate around the building
> for fragments, and to remove ‘some pieces of stone with inscriptions
> or figures’.”*
>
> **Robert Browning in The Elgin Marbles: Should They be Returned to
> Greece?**

This is where things start to become really complicated and grey. This
“astonishingly vague document” has been under scanner for many years.
Many scholars doubt that Sultan gave the permission to Elgin to obtain
as many sculptures as he could by demolishing the Parthenon. The amount
of sculptures taken away or should we say looted by Lord Elgin clearly
were not what the Sultan meant by ‘some pieces of stone with
inscriptions or figures.’

The other sordid aspect of this saga is that it was the very existence
of unsympathetic Ottomans to say the least, that led Elgin to get these
sculptures out of the Parthenon. Had it been under control of the
Greeks, the whole story could have been very different! Even during the
Greek War of Independence in 1822, the Turkish garrison had started to
break the “surviving walls of the cella to get at the lead shielding of
clamps and melt it down to bullets. The Greek besiegers sent a message
offering to give them bullets if they would leave the Parthenon
undamaged.”₄

**Removal of Sculptures**

Very soon after getting the *firman* in 1801, the removal of the
sculptures was started. A large part of the frieze was dismantled and
they even took various capitals and metopes. Lord Elgin along with
Lusieri “sent to England fifty slabs and two half slabs of the frieze
and fifteen metopes- all that he considered worth taking as he says.”₅
This included a metope panel depicting a battle between Lapiths and
Centaurs and almost 75 metres of the Parthenon Frieze. Some more
sculptures were taken from other monuments on the Acropolis including
four slabs from the frieze of the Temple of Athena Nike. The entire
process of removal also resulted in damaging the Parthenon, especially
the manner in which the slabs were sawed through. “Parthenon was
despoiled of a greater part of its sculptured decoration.”₆

![**Section of a frieze from the Parthenon Marbles
([Credit](https://www.parthenonuk.com/latest-news/41-2018-news/402-the-telegraph-s-polls-on-the-reunification-of-the-parthenon-marbles))**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/07/bmmarbles_poll_1200x628.jpg?w=1024)

**Transportation**

In 1803, the entire collection was “packed up into two hundred boxes
which were then loaded on to wagons and transported to the port of
Piraeus to await there passage to England.”₇ The journey of the marbles
from there was even more arduous. One of the ship wrecked near the
island of Kythira or Cerigo as it was known at that time. It was almost
three years after that finally the marbles were recovered. For two
entire years, the “cargo of the treasures lay on the seafloor”.₈

**Arrest of Elgin and ‘Worth’ of Marbles**

The story from here takes another turn. When Elgin was returning to
London, he was arrested in France and stayed there for three years due
to breaking of Peace Amiens and subsequent hostilities between England
and France. After finally arriving in London in 1806, Elgin started the
negotiations with the British Museums. He had incurred quiet an
expenditure on the removal and transit of the sculptures and wished that
he should be ably ‘compensated’. He estimated their worth at 75000 Euros
but the deal could only be made finally in 1816, when Britain bought it
for 35000 Euros. The ‘worth’ was decided by a Parliamentary Committee.

**Conclusion**

It has to be stated that this entire affair was very controversial from
the start with British society divided on whether this was a good
‘investment’ for the country or not. Some considered it a vandalism like
famous poet Lord Byron and some supporting the move. The Parthenon
marbles were then given by Britain to the British Museum where they are
displayed today in the Duveen Gallery.

Thus, the journey of more than half of the splendid Parthenon Sculptures
from Athens to London was completed. Who knows, if there is a return
journey in the future or not!

**References and Quoted Excerpts** **:**

-   [The Elgin Marbles : Should They be returned to Greece? by
    Christopher Hitchens, Robert Browning and Graham Binns.
    (1,2,3,4,5,6)](https://books.google.co.in/books?id=uurpnvOuErIC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false)
-   [How Parthenon Lost its Marbles by Juan Pablo
    Sanchez](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/magazine/2017/03-04/parthenon-sculptures-british-museum-controversy/)
    (7,8)

