+++
title = "Book Announcement Human"
full_title = "Book Announcement Human Being, Bodily Being by Chakravarthi RamPrasad"
date = "2018-08-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/07/book-announcement-human-being-bodily-being-by-chakravarthi-ram-prasad/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/07/book-announcement-human-being-bodily-being-by-chakravarthi-ram-prasad/).

Book Announcement: Human Being, Bodily Being by Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad

![](https://global.oup.com/academic/covers/pdp/9780198823629)

From the publisher:

Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad offers illuminating new perspectives on
contemporary phenomenological theories of body and subjectivity, based
on studies of classical Indian texts that deal with bodily subjectivity.
Examining four texts from different genres – a medical handbook, epic
dialogue, a manual of Buddhist practice, and erotic poetry – he argues
for a ‘phenomenological ecology’ of bodily subjectivity in health,
gender, contemplation, and lovemaking. An ecology is a continuous and
dynamic system of interrelationships between elements, in which the
salience accorded to some type of relationship clarifies how the
elements it relates are to be identified. The paradigm of ecological
phenomenology obviates the need to choose between apparently
incompatible perspectives of the human. The delineation of body is
arrived at by working back phenomenologically from the world of
experience, with the acknowledgement that the point of arrival – a
conception of what counts as bodiliness – is dependent upon the exact
motivation for attending to experience, the areas of experience attended
to, and the expressive tools available to the phenomenologist.
Ecological phenomenology is pluralistic, yet integrates the ways
experience is attended to and studied, permitting apparently
inconsistent intuitions about bodiliness to be explored in novel ways.
Rather than seeing particular framings of our experience as in tension
with each other, we should see each such framing as playing its own role
according to the local descriptive and analytic concern of a text.

[For more information, link to publisher’s website
here](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/human-being-bodily-being-9780198823629?cc=us&lang=en&#).
