+++
title = "Book announcement"
full_title = "Book announcement Infinite Paths to Infinite Reality by Ayon Maharaj"
date = "2018-08-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/06/book-announcement-infinite-paths-to-infinite-reality-by-ayon-maharaj/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/06/book-announcement-infinite-paths-to-infinite-reality-by-ayon-maharaj/).

Book announcement: Infinite Paths to Infinite Reality by Ayon Maharaj



Ayon Maharaj, *Infinite Paths to Infinite Reality: Sri Ramakrishna and
Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion*, New York: Oxford University
Press, 350 pages, 978-0-19-086823-9.

The book will be published on October 1, 2018. For more details and a
pre-order discount, please click
[here](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/9780190868239?&promocode=AAFLYG6).

*Publisher’s description:*

Sri Ramakrishna is widely known as a nineteenth-century Indian mystic
who affirmed the harmony of all religions on the basis of his richly
varied spiritual experiences and eclectic religious practices, both
Hindu and non-Hindu. In *Infinite Paths to Infinite Reality*, Ayon
Maharaj argues that Sri Ramakrishna was also a sophisticated philosopher
of great contemporary relevance.

Through a careful study of Sri Ramakrishna’s recorded oral teachings in
the original Bengali, Maharaj reconstructs his philosophical positions
and analyzes them from a cross-cultural perspective. Sri Ramakrishna’s
spiritual journey culminated in the exalted state of “*vijñāna*,” his
term for the “intimate knowledge” of God as the Infinite Reality that is
both personal and impersonal, with and without form, immanent in the
universe and beyond it. This expansive spiritual standpoint of
*vijñāna*, Maharaj contends, opens up a new paradigm for addressing
central issues in cross-cultural philosophy of religion, including
divine infinitude, religious pluralism, mystical experience, and the
problem of evil.

Sri Ramakrishna’s *vijñāna*-based religious pluralism—when grasped in
all its subtlety—proves to have major philosophical advantages over
dominant Western models. Moreover, his mystical testimony and teachings
not only cut across long-standing debates about the nature of mystical
experience but also bolster recent defenses of its epistemic value.
Maharaj further demonstrates that Sri Ramakrishna’s unique response to
the problem of evil resonates strongly with Western “soul-making”
theodicies and contemporary theories of skeptical theism. A pioneering
interdisciplinary study of one of India’s most important
philosopher-mystics, Maharaj’s book is essential reading for scholars
and students in philosophy of religion, theology, religious studies, and
Hindu studies.




