+++
title = "The psychological case"
full_title = "The psychological case for disengaged Buddhism"
date = "2018-08-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/05/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/05/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/).

The psychological case for disengaged Buddhism

My [project on disengaged
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/)
has now been submitted to a journal. It’s undergone several revisions by
this point. One of the most important such revisions was suggested
unanimously by BU’s magnificent [CURA](https://www.bu.edu/cura/)
seminar. In an earlier draft had attempted to emphasize the contemporary
constructive significance of disengaged Buddhism by noting how its ideas
were corroborated by some contemporary psychological research. The
seminar participants thought that discussion of psychology did not
strengthen the paper because I didn’t have the space to defend them
fully; the paper would stand best discussing disengaged Buddhists’
claims in their historical context and letting those claims stand on
their own.

I think they were right, and I removed the psychology discussion from
the paper – a little sadly, as I thought the points of that section were
worth making. Fortunately, I have another place to make them: here.

The key Buddhist ideas I discuss in the paper are: that we should have a
detached attitude to the passage of time rather than hoping for
progress; that politics leads our minds to an anger that hurts them; and
that the kinds of goods politics can provide (especially material goods)
do not do as much to fix our suffering as we think they do. And I think
evidence collected by modern psychologists lends some support to each of
these claims.

I had [previously mentioned the psychological
distress](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/)
experienced by liberal Americans after the election of Donald Trump,
distress so severe it causes physical symptoms. [One journalist
reports](http://www.nydailynews.com/opinion/trump-induced-anxiety-bad-eye-started-bleeding-article-1.3997467)
that her anxiety about Trump led to a psychosomatic retinal bleeding so
bad it almost made her blind. It seems to me that such people have
something to learn from the [Cakkavatti Sīhanāda
Sutta](http://www.palicanon.org/en/sutta-pitaka/transcribed-suttas/majjhima-nikaya/141-mn-87-piyajtika-sutta-born-from-those-who-are-dear.html),
a text which some have regarded as politically engaged but which (I
argue in the paper, [following Steven
Collins](https://www.amazon.com/Buddhist-Felicities-Cambridge-Religious-Traditions/dp/0521578426)
is the opposite. In that text, history has been declining rather than
progressing, and it will get worse before it gets better; and so, the
Buddha says, we should “be islands unto yourselves, be a refuge unto
yourselves with no other refuge.” Whether or not the text’s account of
history’s direction is right, it is not hard to imagine how such a
detached attitude to the passage of time could be a balm for those
experiencing such great psychologically induced distress.

Along with these patients’ fear comes anger, an anger that [one
therapist
described](http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-ln-trump-therapists-20170223-story.html)
as “almost irrational”. That reaction seems to confirm the [worries of
Aśvaghoṣa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/)
about the harshness inherent in politics – and the way that harshness
interferes with one’s tranquility.

The negative consequences of anger and violence for their targets should
be obvious. But it is worth noting also how some contemporary
psychological and biomedical research concurs that anger and hostility
have a negative effect on the angry one’s own well-being, a key concern
of these texts. Psychological and medical researchers have observed a
significant correlation of anger not only with [self-destructive
behaviours like bulimia](https://scinapse.io/papers/1974569961), but
with physiological illnesses like [heart
disease](http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/accj/53/11/936.full.pdf) and
[diabetes](https://www-sciencedirect-com.ezproxy.bu.edu/science/article/pii/S0306453005001861).

As for the disengaged Buddhists’ disregard for material goods, it seems
confirmed by the theory of the *hedonic treadmill* (which I [briefly
discussed a long time
ago](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/wealth-is-not-neutral/).)
That is, any perceived gain in happiness from increased income is
temporary at best, confirming the Rajja Sutta’s claim that “not a
mountain of gold would suffice for one”. [Philip Brickman and others
found](http://pages.ucsd.edu/~nchristenfeld/Happiness_Readings_files/Class%203%20-%20Brickman%201978.pdf)
that lottery winners were neither happier than a control group, nor
showed a significant increase in happiness from before they won the
lottery. At the collective level, when a state’s GDP rises, [Richard
Easterlin and others
found](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3012515/) that there
is a short-term boost in happiness but the long-term relationship is nil
– whether the country was rich or poor to start with.

The implications of these studies are debated, but they should give us
pause before dismissing the disengaged Buddhists’ arguments that the
goods of politics are not as important as we think they are. The
Thai-born behavioural economist Nick (Nattavudh) Powdthavee makes the
connection explicit: he told his 90-year-old Thai Buddhist grandmother
about the findings of the happiness literature and she replied “Tell me
something I don’t already know.” And so, [he came to
think](https://www.amazon.com/Happiness-Equation-Surprising-Economics-Valuable/dp/1848312466):

> maybe it wasn’t Philip Brickman and colleagues who first discovered
> that people adapt to changes in life events. It probably wasn’t
> Richard Easterlin who was the first to conclude that economic growth
> for all increases the happiness of no one…. It was actually the Buddha
> who first discovered them over 2,500 years ago.

So various observations from contemporary psychology would seem to lend
support to key claims of the disengaged Buddhists: a detachment from
hope for progress, an avoidance of anger, and a suspicion of material
goods. These observations are not sufficient reason for us to disengage
from politics, at least not on their own, but they are reason to take
the disengaged Buddhists’ arguments seriously in our context, rather
than dismiss them as some outmoded view that we have progressed beyond.
Nor is it sufficient to dismiss the disengaged Buddhists as “selfish”,
when the thoroughgoing Mahāyāna altruists
[Candrakīrti](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/politics-as-ethical-analogy-plato-and-candrakirti/)
and
[Śāntideva](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/)
express at least as much suspicion of politics as the non-Mahāyāna texts
do. Even if we are not fully convinced by their view, it seems to me
that they have figured out something important that most people in our
activist culture have not.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism)
