+++
title = "TenureTrack Position at"
full_title = "TenureTrack Position at the University of Toronto"
date = "2018-08-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/04/tenure-track-position-at-the-university-of-toronto/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/08/04/tenure-track-position-at-the-university-of-toronto/).

Tenure-Track Position at the University of Toronto

It is good news indeed that the University of Toronto will be hiring a
specialist in Indian philosophy. The application deadline is November 1.
I am posting this on behalf of Ajay Rao.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<https://careers.insidehighered.com/job/1580407/assistant-professor-south-asian-philosophy/>

**Assistant Professor – South Asian Philosophy**

**Requisition Title: Assistant Professor – South Asian Philosophy –
1803366  **

The Department of Philosophy at the Faculty of Arts and Science of the
University of Toronto invites applications for a tenure-stream position
in South Asian Philosophy at the rank of Assistant Professor. The
appointment will begin on July 1, 2019.

Candidates must hold a PhD in Philosophy or a closely related field by
the date of appointment, or shortly thereafter. The candidate’s research
will focus on South Asian Philosophy. Candidates must provide evidence
of excellence in research as demonstrated by publications in top-ranked
and field relevant journals or forthcoming publications meeting high
international standards, presentations at significant conferences,
awards and accolades for innovative work, and strong endorsements by
referees of high standing.

The successful candidate will be expected to mount an independent,
innovative and competitive research program.   The successful candidate
must be able to teach a wide range of courses in philosophy from the
introductory to advanced levels, at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. Candidates must provide evidence of excellence in teaching as
demonstrated through teaching accomplishments, the statement of teaching
philosophy, sample course materials, teaching evaluations, and the
teaching dossier submitted as part of the application, as well as strong
letters of reference.  Salary will be commensurate with qualifications
and experience.

The University of Toronto has three campuses, St. George, Scarborough,
and Mississauga, each with its own Department of Philosophy offering
undergraduate programs. The advertised position is on the downtown St.
George campus. The Graduate Department of Philosophy at the University
of Toronto is a tri-campus department, consisting of philosophy faculty
appointed on all three campuses. Graduate teaching and supervision
typically take place on the St. George campus.

The Department of Philosophy at the University of Toronto is widely
recognized as Canada’s best and most comprehensive philosophy department
and as an international leader in the field. The University of Toronto
offers the opportunity to teach, conduct research and live in one of the
most diverse and cosmopolitan cities in the world.

For more information about the Department of Philosophy, please visit
[ http://www.philosophy.utoronto.ca](http://www.philosophy.utoronto.ca).

All qualified candidates are invited to apply by clicking on the link
below.

The following elements of the application should be submitted online (in
pdf format only) by **November 1, 2018**:

• (1) a cover letter and a curriculum vitae, combined in a file labelled
“YourLastName-SAP cover letter and CV.pdf”;

• (2) a research dossier containing a statement outlining current and
future research interests and a sample of academic writing (about 25
pages), combined in a file labelled “YourLastName-SAP research.pdf”;

• (3) a teaching dossier (including a statement of teaching philosophy,
sample course materials, and teaching evaluations) in a file labelled
“YourLastName-SAP teaching.pdf”.

Applicants should also ask at least three referees, but no more than
four, to send letters that are signed and on letterhead directly to
search.philosophy@utoronto.ca by **November 1, 2018**. (If you use
Interfolio, please have them send the letters directly to
search.philosophy@utoronto.ca.)

Please note that the required files for this search must be in PDF
format and must be labelled as indicated above. General submission
guidelines can be found at: <http://uoft.me/how-to-apply>.

If you have questions about this position, please contact
search.philosophy@utoronto.ca.

The University of Toronto is strongly committed to diversity within its
community and especially welcomes applications from racialized persons /
persons of colour, women, Indigenous / Aboriginal People of North
America, persons with disabilities, LGBTQ persons, and others who may
contribute to the further diversification of ideas.

As part of your application, you will be asked to complete a brief
Diversity Survey. This survey is voluntary. Any information directly
related to you is confidential and cannot be accessed by search
committees or human resources staff. Results will be aggregated for
institutional planning purposes. For more information, please see
<http://uoft.me/UP>.

All qualified candidates are encouraged to apply; however, Canadians and
permanent residents will be given priority.

**Job Field:** Tenure Stream

**Faculty / Division:** Faculty of Arts and Science

**Department:** Philosophy

**Campus:** St. George (downtown Toronto)

**Job Posting**: Jul 31, 2018

**Job Closing:** Nov 1, 2018 11:59pm EST
