+++
title = "Is there Indian"
full_title = "Is there Indian political philosophy?"
date = "2015-02-15"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/15/is-there-indian-political-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/15/is-there-indian-political-philosophy/).

Is there Indian political philosophy?

On the Indian Philosophy Blog, commenter Anthony S [asked an important
and difficult
question](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/01/31/why-should-one-engage-in-non-western-philosophical-ideas-two-examples/#comment-102256):
what are good resources for thinking through Indian political
philosophy?

> . I’m interested not so much in comparative philosophy as comparative
> political thought/theory, specifically in terms of Indian and
> “Western” thought regarding the international/global. While I am happy
> comparative philosophy seems to be taking off in recent years, I wish
> the intensity was the same in political science/theory. If anyone has
> some good thoughts/resources regarding any of this, I’d be very
> appreciative.

I started replying in [my own
comments](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/01/31/why-should-one-engage-in-non-western-philosophical-ideas-two-examples/#comment-102285),
but I think the topic deserves a post of its own. I have in the past
found myself frustrated looking for ideas on political theory or
political philosophy in India, and I don’t think I’m alone in this.

I thought of this point while reading [Fred
Dallmayr](http://politicalscience.nd.edu/faculty/faculty-list/fred-r-dallmayr/)‘s
[anthology/textbook](http://www.amazon.com/Comparative-Political-Theory-An-Introduction/dp/0230618634)
on comparative political theory. “Comparative” in this book effectively
means “non-Western”, specifically referring to those traditions that
have sophisticated traditions of logical questioning and reflection
(i.e. philosophy) – and counting Islam as a non-Western tradition.

So the book has sections on East Asia, South Asia and Islam, each one
dealing with both classical sources and modern reformulations. The East
Asia section is by far the strongest, examining the classical debate
between Confucianism and Legalism and recent attempts to apply
Confucianism to the modern state. The Islam section deals well with the
classical work of [al-Farābī](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Farabi),
though it struggles a bit more in modern application; the modern thinker
who shows up most prominently is [Sayyid
Qutb](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sayyid_Qutb), and the application of
his ideas would probably mean the destruction of most of our ways of
life.

The South Asia section, however, is weak on both the classical and the
modern. The classical sections refer pretty much entirely to the
[Arthaśāstra](http://www.amazon.com/The-ARTHASHASTRA-Penguin-Classics-Kautilya-ebook/dp/B008ET4226),
a text whose origins remain obscure – and which, more importantly, might
not ever have been applied or put into practice. The modern sections
offer reflections on [Rammohun
Roy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ram_Mohan_Roy) and [Jawaharlal
Nehru](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jawaharlal_Nehru). Both of these
thinkers’ political ideas are interesting and valuable in their own
right, but the sources of the political ideas are more or less entirely
Western. They could have been written by English colonial subjects in
Africa, Malaysia or the Caribbean. (Rammohun’s ideas on mysticism and
other topics have more strongly Indian sources, but they didn’t seem to
have a strong impact on his politics.) If one is looking for a
distinctly Indian approach to political thought, one will need to look
elsewhere. (One might well question the project of looking for a
“distinctly Indian” political theory in the first place – if
Western-derived ideas were good enough for Roy and Nehru, why shouldn’t
they be good enough for us now? – but I will hold off on that topic
here, for the moment at least.)

A reader with familiarity on this topic will likely have thought of the
most important and prominent exception to it: namely Mohandas K.
(Mahatma) Gandhi. The Western influences on Gandhi go deep as well, of
course – one can certainly argue he drew more from Tolstoy and Ruskin
than anything Indian – but the Indian influences are definitely there,
from the Bhagavad Gītā and especially from his Jain gurus who taught him
*[ahiṃsā](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahimsa)*. The writing on Gandhi
in the Dallmayr book is pretty bad in that it tries, bizarrely, to tie
Gandhi’s work back somehow to the Arthaśāstra, without providing
evidence that he read it or was even aware of it. But leaving that book
aside, one will still find in Gandhi’s politics of non-violence
something that looks much more like a distinctly Indian political
philosophy. One can find something similar in
[Aurobindo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sri_Aurobindo), and perhaps in
the more militant Hindu thinkers comparable to Qutb
([Tilak](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bal_Gangadhar_Tilak),
[Savarkar](http://www.economist.com/news/christmas-specials/21636599-controversial-mentor-hindu-right-man-who-thought-gandhi-sissy),
[Golwalkar](http://www.countercurrents.org/comm-guha281106.htm)). One
way or another, there is very much such a thing as modern Indian
political philosophy, even when we take the “Indian” in a strong sense.

But what about the premodern world? Was there indigenous Indian
political thought before Indians reacted to the British – or to the
Turks and Mughals? The frequent recourse to the Arthaśāstra often seems
a bit desperate, an attempt to reach for the best text available because
we can’t find anything better, even without knowing whether in the
tradition anyone ever read it. What else is there? The *dharmaśāstra*
and *dharmasūtra* texts certainly provide advice on how to run a state,
but it also seems reaching to call them political philosophy or
political theory, for in them there is precious little *reasoning*, only
injunctions (do this, don’t do that) expected to be accepted.

In many ways I think the most interesting premodern Indian political
theory is the
[anti-political](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/)
theory found in Śāntideva and, I would argue, most of the renouncer
(especially Jain and Buddhist) traditions. Śāntideva tells us that kings
should give their kingdoms away; even in texts like the
[Cakkavatī-Sīhanāda
Sutta](http://www.basicbuddhism.org/index.cfm?GPID=29) that give advice
on how to run a kingdom, this advice is subordinated to instructions on
how to be a monk. And Indian philosophy in a strict sense – the use of
logic and argument to reach conclusions about wisdom – was conducted
primarily by monks; they were the ones with the time and resources to do
it. So the institutional conditions of Indian philosophy were such that
it developed very much in anti-political traditions. (The contrast could
not be sharper with early Chinese philosophy, developed by advisors to
rulers!)

But is there *no* Indian political philosophy before the arrival of the
English, or even of the Mughals? Nothing that actually talks about
running a state, without subordinating statecraft to monkhood? That
would be taking matters too far. The
[Mīmāṃsā](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C4%ABm%C4%81%E1%B9%83s%C4%81)
school, advocating the orthoprax performance of Vedic rituals, surely
was arguing for a politics in which those rituals could take place –
though a politics which is hard to love, in which caste (*varṇa*)
distinctions are of paramount importance. But I think we would find more
fruitful forms of Indian political philosophy if we did not define
philosophy so strictly – that is, if we looked beyond argumentative
texts to *stories*. The epics, the Rāmāyana and the Mahābhārata, have a
lot to say about how one should run a state – and not only in their
didactic portions, like the Gītā and the Śāntiparvan (Book of Peace).
(The latter contains hundreds of pages’ worth of advice on how to run a
state, but like the dharmaśāstra, there is little argument for it.)
Rather, I suspect it is the stories themselves, the narrative portions,
that attempt to illustrate what good statecraft looks like – they show
and don’t tell. More explicitly the animal stories of the
[Pañcatantra](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panchatantra) and
[Hitopadeśa](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hitopadesha), full of cunning
tricks and their results, offer their own sort of reasoning, by
illustration and example rather than stated argument. If we want to find
premodern Indian political philosophy, I suspect the stories are a more
promising place to look than any attempt to squeeze political philosophy
out of the Arthaśāstra or dharmaśāstra.
