+++
title = "The Appayya OneTwo"
full_title = "The Appayya OneTwo"
date = "2015-02-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/14/the-appayya-one-two/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/14/the-appayya-one-two/).

The Appayya One-Two

One of the many things I’ve been learning from the special issue of
South Asian History and Culture called [Discipline, Sect, Lineage and
Community](http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/rsac20/6/1#.VN-wT2PvnRU) is
that 16th-century intellectuals like Vyāsatīrtha and Appayya Dīkṣita had
an unprecented awareness not just of the history of the traditions in
which (and against which) they placed themselves—this has been known for
some time, and parenthetically I worry that imputing a historical
consciousness to the 16th-century intellectuals means denying it to
earlier intellectuals simply because they did not declare as loudly that
what they were doing was “new”—but of the dizzying ramification and
proliferation of those traditions in what was for them relatively recent
history. Lawrence McCrea’s article in that issue brings together two
important texts that exemplify this awareness: Vyāsatīrtha’s “Nectar of
Reason” (*Nyāyāmṛta*) and Appayya Dīkṣita’s “Brief Condensation of the
Established Conclusions of the System” (*Śāstrasiddhāntaleśasaṃgraha*),
the latter being essentially a review of scholarship that takes its
departure from the “many diverse streams” (*saraṇayo nānāvidhāḥ*) of
Vedānta.

McCrea shows that, according to Vyāsatīrtha’s exposition in the “Nectar
of Reason,” Advaitins had, at different times and different places,
argued for almost every single intepretation possible of the crucial
Upaniṣadic sentence “the self should be seen, it should be heard about,
it should be thought about, it should be meditated on.” Some said that
the phrase “the self should be heard about” was an “new injunction”
(*apūrvavidhi*), some said it was a “restrictive injunction”
(*niyamavidhi*), and others said that it wasn’t an injunction at all.
The broad spectrum of interpretation on the Advaita side, and the almost
total lack of interest in the question on the Dvaita side, allowed
Vyāsatīrtha to come up with an interpretation (that the injunction in
question is a “new injunction”—a position he elides in his critical
exposition) that makes good sense to him while maintaining an appearance
of consistency within the Dvaita system which the Advaitins manifestly
lacked.

Appayya Dīkṣita, as McCrea also shows, documents the controversy about
this sentence in a way very similar to, and probably indebted to, his
Dvaita opponent Vyāsatīrtha. It seems pretty clear that the traditional
understanding and classification of “injunctions” (*vidhi*s) was, in
Appayya’s view if not in Vyāsatīrtha’s, the source of a lot of confusion
and mischief. People kept arguing about how to classify and understand
sentences like “the self should be heard about” on what must have seemed
like very flimsy grounds: whether the “hearing” and the knowledge it was
instrumental to were directly or indirectly connected, or whether
“hearing” about the self is a included within “hearing” the Vedas more
generally, and so on. In the *Śāstrasiddhāntaleśasaṃgraha*, Appayya
holds his tongue, exhibiting the diversity of opinions rather than
diagnosing it. But one might reasonably suspect that the profusion of
mutually-exclusive interpretations points to something broken in the
analytic machinery of interpretation itself.

Although McCrea doesn’t mention it in this article, he (and several
others) have written about the devastating critique that Appayya Dīkṣita
offered of the traditional classification of injunctions in the
*Vidhirasāyana*. This work is firmly grounded in Mīmāṃsā: the examples
are all typical ritual examples, and much of the discussion concerns
whether the stock examples of “new injunction,” “restrictive
injunction,” and “exclusive injunction” in Mīmāṃsā should really be
thought of in those terms. Yet it seems that Appayya’s interest in the
topic was kindled by the controversy over injunctions in Vedānta, and
particularly in the debate between Dvaita and Advaita thinkers that
would define much of his intellectual output. (This is evident, for
example, in his “Milky-Way of Debates in Prior and Posterior Mīmāṃsā,”
one essay of which focuses on the injunction to Vedic study.) Mīmāṃsā
was “prior” for Appayya not merely in the sense that it focused on the
sequentially prior part of the Vedas, but in a disciplinary sense: in
order to intervene in a debate about injunctions in Vedānta, he needed
to critique the standard understanding of injunctions in Mīmāṃsā without
reference to specifically Vedānta concerns. This strategy seems to me,
in a necessarily impressionistic way, a typical Appayya Dīkṣita move:
whereas other scholars were content to debate each other on specific
points, Appayya first framed the debate in a clear and principled (and
often historically sensitive) way, and then—although not always in the
same texts—went behind the specific points of debate to their conceptual
and disciplinary substructures. It is, in other words, one strategy to
say that your opponent is simply wrong about the interpretation of a
specific passage; it is a far riskier, but sometimes far more effective,
strategy to say that your opponent’s very procedure of interpretation
rests on a mistake.
