+++
title = "I am a place"
full_title = "I am a place"
date = "2015-02-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/26/i-am-a-place/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/26/i-am-a-place/).

I am a place

Perhaps since Wittgenstein, we’ve become a bit cautious about taking
language as a guide to reality, but here is, I suggest, one place where
reflection on language provides a profound metaphysical suggestion about
the nature of selfhood.

Amongst many of the realists in India, it is common to think of the self
as a unique kind of substance, and its states (affective, cognitive,
volitional) as properties. As such, my current state of visual
perception of a computer screen would be schematized as my (the self’s)
possessing the property of visual awareness of a computer screen. And
this particular state of visual perception *(dharma)* does not hang in
space, it is grounded in my self, the property bearer *(dharmin).*

In *[The Character of Logic in
India](http://www.amazon.com/Character-Logic-Indian-Thought-Studies/dp/079143740X/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1424967333&sr=1-1&keywords=the+character+of+logic+in+india)*,
Matilal reminds us that predication in India often uses the locative
case, where here, the primary relation isn’t expressed as
“property—possessor”, but “locatee—location”. In the context of stock
examples of inference, smokiness is located on the mountain, and
therefore, fieriness is also located there.

We may note right away that the two ways of expressing predication often
coincide. Using the genitive of possession or the locative of placement
is then a matter of choice, and they are often used to express the same
things. (E.g., for Rāmānuja, the selves and materiality are “located in”
God, and also owned by him.)

I am not arguing that the “locatee—location” model is always better or
radically different, but rather that the notion of the *self as a
location* seems to me to make sense of what a self is, and what it does,
in a profound way. On this idea:

A self is a unique location of mental states; a unique “place” where
such states may be located. The existence of a self also allows for the
co-location of varied states, the cohesion of which provides the basis
of personhood.

What do we mean by location? I mean that in the “space of selves”, my
self would be the unique place where the cluster of mental properties
that comprise my personality are co-located (as well as the deeper
subsurface states which support it). And this is the difference between
my pains and yours. Mine are located “here”, yours “there”. You would
say the opposite, correctly.

This is why there exist subjects and not simply a world of objects.
Subjects are locations of experience, and hence suffering, pleasure,
harm, and the rest. This is why they have moral worth, and why we must
*navigate* our dealings with them with more care than with mere objects,
which are unfit to be the location of such states.

In terms of personal identity, the self as location is not sufficient
for diachronic or synchronic personal identity, but—at least the
realists would argue—it is necessary, as it is needed to co-locate
mental states, doing so for a host of states both synchronically and
diachronically.

The self as unique location also make sense of notions of haecceities or
uniqueness (sometimes mirrored by talk of viśeṣa in India). You can
strip away all of my current properties and I’d cease to be a person, by
my deep self is still a unique location of possible states and
relationships. It need not be seen as an “essence” in a robust sense,
but an irreducibly unique place that may uniquely locate possible
subjective states.

One nice feature of this way of thinking of mental predication is that
one need not hold that a self is a *substance* in a deeply
metaphysically laden way other than noting that it is a place where one
can locate and co-locate psychological properties.
