+++
title = "Tricky words prāp"
full_title = "Tricky words prāp"
date = "2015-02-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/23/tricky-words-prap/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/23/tricky-words-prap/).

Tricky words: prāp-

The hardest part, I find, about the philosophical vocabulary of Sanskrit
is not its enormity or its technicality, but the fact that it includes a
couple of “basic” or even “common-sense” words whose import, in any
given context, can be difficult to determine and impossible to
translate. I’ll focus on *prāp-* right now, since I think that is the
hardest, but many of these remarks could equally apply to *gam-*,
*bhū-*, *jñā-*, *sādh-*, etc.

The first problem is the impossibility of word-for-word translation,
which results from the impossibility of translating Sanskrit words, with
all of their amazing suffixes, into corresponding English words. We
don’t have productive causative suffixes, for example. Big deal, you
might say. But let’s say we decide to translate *prāp-* with “obtain,”
or “apply,” or “attain.” These translations might work in some cases,
but what about derivatives like *prāpti*? “Obtainment” isn’t English.
“Application” is different. “Attainment” works in some contexts but not
in others. Then we have the choice of rendering suffixed formations with
paraphrases: “causes to attain” and so on. But when these pile up, the
English paraphrase becomes unintelligible: something is to be caused to
be attained, or the instrument of causing to attain, or a thing that
causes something else to be attained.

For these reasons, I suppose, most scholars have tried to translate the
meaning rather than the words. But this involves a judgment about what
the meaning in fact is. I am thinking in this context of the
translations of *prāpaṇīya-* in Dharmottara’s exposition of
Dharmakīrti’s *Nyāyabindu*. Stcherbatsky translated it as “definitively
realized” (importing the notion of *adhyavasāna* into the translation).
Arnold translated it as “intended,” because he saw the problem that
Dharmottara was addressing in terms of the modern debate about
intentionality. I have to say I prefer McCrea and Patil’s simple and
literal translation of “attainable.”

In the case of Dharmottara, we can see that “attaining” an object and
its “attainability” is related to the criterion of practical efficacy on
the one hand. On the other hand, it is the cognition itself that “causes
us to attain” the object and therefore makes it “attainable” by
presenting it to our awareness in a certain form—which leads me to think
that “presentation” is not a bad translation for the causative *prāp-I-*
in this epistemological sense.

In the context of the discussion of rules within Mīmāṃsā, *prāpta-*
refers to something that is “given.” Although “given,” in English, is a
funny word when you think about it, and *prāpta-* is no less complex.
Frequently we are asked to imagine what *would be the case* if a certain
rule did not operate; what is *prāpta-* is “given” but only
hypothetically, or indeed counterfactually. And we can see that this
evolves out of a longstanding idiom in Mīmāṃsā (and other learned
discourse) where *prāp-* and its derivatives refer to the horizon of our
expectations: *kiṃ prāptaṃ*, what would we expect? But these naive and
even colloquial uses are, in some texts anyway, enlisted to do some
heavy philosophical lifting. Again, I am thinking of the discourse on
rules, where the question is precisely how a rule can apply (a condition
that is itself called *prāpti-*) or refer to something that is “not
given” (*aprāpte*). Don’t certain things (what things?) have to be
“given” in order for us to sensibly understand rules, even rules that
generate a new obligation, in the first place?

I may just be confusing myself, but these are some of the issues in
producing accessible translations of Sanskrit texts for English-speaking
readers: you want to be readable, but you also want to make clear the
conceptual connections that are inherent in the choice of Sanskrit
words; you want to relate to contemporary discussions, or at least be
relatable to those discussions, but you don’t want to insert your own
judgments into the text. Or do you? What other words fall into this
category? What solutions have you come up with?
