+++
title = "Call for Papers and"
full_title = "Call for Papers and Panel Proposals Including for a Special Workshop on How to Incorporate Asian Texts into Traditional Philosophy Courses"
date = "2015-02-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/19/call-for-papers-and-panel-proposals-including-for-a-special-workshop-on-how-to-incorporate-asian-texts-into-traditional-philosophy-courses/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/19/call-for-papers-and-panel-proposals-including-for-a-special-workshop-on-how-to-incorporate-asian-texts-into-traditional-philosophy-courses/).

Call for Papers and Panel Proposals: Including for a Special Workshop on How to Incorporate Asian Texts into Traditional Philosophy Courses

Posted on behalf of Brian Bruya:

CALL FOR PAPER AND PANEL PROPOSALS

Including for a Special Workshop on How to Incorporate Asian Texts into
Traditional Philosophy Courses

2016 Eastern Division Meeting of the American Philosophical Association

January 6-9, 2016, Washington, DC

The Society for Asian and Comparative Philosophy welcomes proposals for
our panels at the American Philosophical Association’s Eastern Division
meeting. Proposals regarding**any aspect of Asian or comparative
philosophy**are welcome.

*This year, we especially welcome paper and panel proposals for a
Special Workshop on How to Incorporate Asian Texts into Traditional
Philosophy Courses. Workshop papers should be targeted at non-Asianists
who want to incorporate Asian texts into a traditional philosophy
course. Proposals for incorporating Asian texts into courses in any area
of philosophy are welcome, including ethics, epistemology, metaphysics,
aesthetics, introductory courses, philosophy of religion, philosophy of
mind, moral psychology, logic, environmental philosophy, philosophy of
gender, philosophy of law, social/political philosophy, etc.*

Whether for the special workshop or other areas of Asian and comparative
philosophy, please submit individual paper abstracts or complete panel
proposals.

Paper abstracts should be 150-200 words in length.

Complete panel proposals should include: panel title, a 150 word
introduction to the theme of the panel, and a 150 word abstract for each
of the papers.

Include each presenter’s name, e-mail address, and institutional
affiliation.

No simultaneous submissions, please.

Please submit these materials no later than May 7 to Brian Bruya at
<bbruya@emich.edu>.
