+++
title = "Untangling the Golden"
full_title = "Untangling the Golden Age"
date = "2015-02-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/08/untangling-the-golden-age/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/08/untangling-the-golden-age/).

Untangling the Golden Age

The seventh and eighth centuries were, as Jean-Marie Verpoorten said, a
“Golden Age” for Mīmāṃsā, when the two most important exponents of the
system, Kumārila and Prabhākara, lived. But it was also a “Golden Age”
for other systems. It was the time of Dharmakīrti, who was regarded by
Buddhists and non-Buddhists alike as *the* Buddhist philosopher, and it
was when Śaṅkara formulated the system of Advaita Vedānta that would
eventually come to be identified with “Indian Philosophy” itself.

But what appears to be a “Golden Age” in terms of textual production of
lasting significance is a “Dark Age” in terms of our historical
knowledge. We know next to nothing for certain about the dating,
relative or absolute, of the most important works, to say nothing of the
particular social, institutional or even geographic contexts in which
they were produced. Take the well-known case of Kumārila and Prabhākara:
although there are some suggestions (from later commentators) that one
knew of, and criticized, the work of the other, the evidence is
inconclusive, and it could well be that neither knew of the other’s
work. Much more scholarly attention has been devoted to the relationship
between Kumārila and Dharmakīrti, but here, too, the evidence is
inconclusive.

So far, we’re talking about a lack of historical information—a lack that
we feel particularly acutely with respect to the “Golden Age” of the
seventh and eighth centuries, but one that isn’t particularly uncommon
in Indian philosophy as a whole. But there are a few other features of
this “Golden Age” that I find somewhat stranger, and while I’m sure
there are explanations out there, I wanted to register here their very,
well, weirdness.

The first is the duplication, if that is the word, of commentaries.
Śaṅkara might be taken to represent a “typical” philosopher: he writes
one commentary on all of the important works of his system, as well as
self-contained works that introduce the basic ideas of the system. So
far so good. Now Dharmakīrti writes a number of works which build upon
each other and reframe his basic ideas. There is nothing particularly
strange about this, either—Diṅnāga also “repackaged” his earlier work in
his *Pramāṇasamuccaya*—but Dharmakīrti kept producing new texts in a way
that goes beyond simple repackaging and replying to objections. The real
puzzle here is the Mīmāṃsā authors. Kumārila and Prabhākara are both
well-known for their commentaries (or series of commentaries) on
Śabara’s Bhāṣya: Kumārila’s *Ślokavārttika*, *Tantravārttika*, and
*Ṭupṭīkā*, and Prabhākara’s Bṛhatī (also called the *Nibandhana*). But
they are supposed to have also written other commentaries on the same
text which are no longer extant: Kumārila’s *Bṛhaṭṭīkā*, and
Prabhākara’s *Laghvī* (also called the *Vivaraṇa*). Why would they write
two commentaries on the same text? Scholars have suggested that Kumārila
wrote the *Bṛhaṭṭīkā* in order to elaborate and defend his earlier views
in the wake of criticism from other philosophers, but others have
argued, more convincingly in my view, that the fragments of the
*Bṛhaṭṭīkā* do not specifically refer to or presuppose any such
criticisms. An equally important question is why these commentaries were
lost, especially when the “other” commentaries (at least the
*Ślokavārttika* and *Tantravārttika*) were read and commented upon so
frequently.

The question of survival brings me to the second strange fact, which is
the tangled and obscure network of citation and circulation more
broadly. Kumārila’s *Bṛhaṭṭīkā*, apparently his final and definitive
work, is known principally (if not exclusively—I don’t have all of the
relevant scholarship in front of me) from quotations in a Buddhist work,
Śāntarakṣita’s *Tattvasaṃgraha*. Who was actually reading authors like
Kumārila and Prabhākara, what works of theirs were they actually
reading, and why were they reading them? Let’s jump from the Buddhists
at Nālandā to Śaṅkara and his students, who are thought to be roughly
contemporary with Kumārila and Prabhākara. Among the earliest references
to Kumārila and Prabhākara are found in the works of Maṇḍanamiśra, whose
own relationship with Śaṅkara is still a subject of debate. Then we find
an extensive discussion of Prabhākara’s ideas in the *Pañcapādikā* of
Padmapāda, one of Śaṅkara’s students. It is not at all surprising that
Mīmāṃsā should have been studied among Buddhists and Vedāntins, and in
longstanding Buddhist institutions and more recently established
Vedāntin institutions. But it does point to the asymmetry between these
groups and Mīmāṃsakas, whom we might expect to have been drawn from more
localized and less centralized networks of Vedic study. It also
highlights another asymmetry: whereas Dharmakīrti’s and Śaṅkara’s works
attracted commentaries of their own almost immediately, some generations
seem to separate Kumārila and Prabhākara from their earliest
commentators (Umbeka and Śālikanāthamiśra), and it’s not clear whether
these commentators themselves had access to the “complete works” of
either philosopher.

Since these are not questions, but more like expressions of a vague
puzzlement, I’m not sure what answers to expect. But they do lead me to
wonder whether there are other, and possibly more robust, ways of
studying the connection between these philosophers than
Quellenforschung. (Elisa’s work on citation practices is a step in this
direction, I think.) The content of the conversation is obviously what
we care most about, but the nature and conditions of the conversation
are important too—even if it seems impossible to know anything for
certain about them—especially because they shaped the archive that has
come to represent, at least to us, one of the “Golden Ages” of Indian
philosophy.

(I refer to J.-M. Verpoorten’s Mīmāṃsā Literature in the Gonda *History
of Indian Literature* Series and L. McCrea’s “Transformation of Mīmāṃsā”
in *Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy*.)
