+++
title = "Tenuretrack job posting"
full_title = "Tenuretrack job posting in Asian Philosophy"
date = "2015-02-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/09/tenure-track-job-posting-in-asian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/09/tenure-track-job-posting-in-asian-philosophy/).

Tenure-track job posting in Asian Philosophy

The deadlines for the job market in philosophy are increasingly spread
out, rather than clustering around October-December. For those
philosophers still on the job market, I’d like to draw your attention to
a post with a deadline of February 15, 2015: [West Chester
University](http://philjobs.org/job/show/3504 "West Chester Assistant Professor")(link
to Philjobs ad).They are looking for an assistant professor whose AOS
is Asian Philosophy for a tenure-track position. A colleague of mine
from UT-Austin, Steve James, is there as a recent hire in epistemology,
and has said excellent things about the department.

Below is a longer description of the job from their [human resources
page](http://agency.governmentjobs.com/wcupa/default.cfm?action=viewJob&jobID=1012989&hit_count=yes&headerFooter=1&promo=0&transfer=0&WDDXJobSearchParams=%3CwddxPacket%20version%3D%271%2E0%27%3E%3Cheader%2F%3E%3Cdata%3E%3Cstruct%3E%3Cvar%20name%3D%27CATEGORYID%27%3E%3Cstring%3E%3C%2Fstring%3E%3C%2Fvar%3E%3Cvar%20name%3D%27PROMOTIONALJOBS%27%3E%3Cstring%3E0%3C%2Fstring%3E%3C%2Fvar%3E%3Cvar%20name%3D%27TRANSFER%27%3E%3Cstring%3E0%3C%2Fstring%3E%3C%2Fvar%3E%3Cvar%20name%3D%27FIND_KEYWORD%27%3E%3Cstring%3Ephilosophy%3C%2Fstring%3E%3C%2Fvar%3E%3C%2Fstruct%3E%3C%2Fdata%3E%3C%2FwddxPacket%3E "HR West Chester Asian Philosophy position").

**Job Title: 15-84 Tenure-Track Assistant Professor of Philosophy**  
Join a vibrant campus community whose excellence is reflected in its
diversity and student success. West Chester University is seeking
applicants for the position of Assistant Professor of Philosophy,
tenure-track position, to begin August 2015. AOS: Asian Philosophy; AOC:
Open. Normal teaching load 12 hrs/semester. The Department awards both
BA and MA degrees in Philosophy, BA degrees in Religious Studies, and
Graduate Cer­tificate Programs in Applied Ethics. The department houses
the Peace and Conflict Studies minor program and the College of Arts and
Sciences offers teaching opportunities in the Honors College and in
Women’s and Gender Studies. The University is also home to the Frederick
Douglass Institute.

The successful candidate should demonstrate the ability to teach
introductory courses in Philosophies and Religions of India,
Philosophies and Religions of the Far East, as well as upper division
and graduate courses related to the AOS. In addition, the successful
candidate should demonstrate the ability to contribute toward our
General Education program by teaching introductory courses in Philosophy
and/or Religious Studies.

Evidence of scholarly aptitude and earned Ph.D. in Philosophy or
Religious Studies; com­pletion of the Ph.D. required by August 30, 2015.
AOS: Asian Philosophy; AOC: Open.

Preference will be given to the candidate who demonstrates the ability
to include diversity and social justice issues in their syllabi.
Undergraduate education is the department’s primary mission and
candidates must have a dem­onstrated ability to teach diverse students
with varied learning styles. Preference will also be given to candidates
who could contribute in some way to one or more of the programs
mentioned above which are housed in the department and the College of
Arts and Sciences. The Philosophy Department is committed to the notion
of shared governance, so candidates with demonstrated administrative
aptitude will be strongly preferred.

In order to be considered a finalist, applicants must successfully
complete an on-campus interview, which includes both a teaching
demonstration and a scholarly presentation.

Submit application materials online at the WCU Employment website:  
http://agency.governmentjobs.com/wcupa/default.cfm. Please submit
complete dossier including CV; writing sample; graduate transcripts;
evidence of effective teaching (esp. formal teaching evaluations);
e-mail addresses of at least three references who will submit letters of
recommendation; and at least two course syllabi, one for a graduate
level Asian Philosophy course (choice of topic is open), and one or more
other course syllabi relevant to AOC. Please have your three references
send letters directly to: PHI Search Committee, Department of
Philosophy, Anderson Hall 108, West Chester University, West Chester, PA
19383. The Screening Committee will begin evaluating applications on
February 15. The filling of this position is contingent upon available
funding.

West Chester University of Pennsylvania, a member of the Pennsylvania
State system of Higher Education, continues to build a culturally
diverse, broadly trained faculty capable of foster­ing an inclusive
environment which is necessary to help prepare our students for the
future. West Chester, located 25 miles west of Philadelphia, is
convenient to major cultural and commercial institutions, recreational
activities, and is within driving distance of Wilming­ton, DE, NYC, and
Washington, DC. Salary and benefits competitive.

Developing and sustaining a diverse faculty and staff advances WCU’s
educational mission and strategic Plan for Excellence. West Chester
University is an Affirmative Action/Equal Opportunity Employer. Women,
minorities, veterans, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to
apply. The filling of this position is contingent upon available
funding.

All offers of employment are subject to and contingent upon satisfactory
completion of all pre-employment criminal background checks.
