+++
title = "Call for Papers"
full_title = "Call for Papers ‘Religions in Chinese and Indian Cultures A Comparative Perspective’ Group, American Academy of Religion"
date = "2015-02-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/20/call-for-papers-religions-in-chinese-and-indian-cultures-a-comparative-perspective-group-american-academy-of-religion/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/20/call-for-papers-religions-in-chinese-and-indian-cultures-a-comparative-perspective-group-american-academy-of-religion/).

Call for Papers: ‘Religions in Chinese and Indian Cultures: A Comparative Perspective’ Group, American Academy of Religion



Posted on behalf of Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad:

\[Please note that Ram is especially looking looking for a paper on
Hindu Monasticism\]

Call for Papers: ‘Religions in Chinese and Indian Cultures: A
Comparative Perspective’ Group, American Academy of Religion

AAR Conference, Atlanta November
2015:<https://www.aarweb.org/2015-annual-meeting-in-atlanta-nov-21-24>

Monasticism and Its Cultural Contexts

The institutionalization, in the form of the Buddhist*sangha*, of the
already existing patterns of renunciation in ancient India transformed
the expression of asocial individuality into a community of common
purpose. The*sangha*developed as a community of ordained monks or nuns
leading highly disciplined and regimented collective lives in pursuit of
a doctrinally significant awakening, supported by the lay community.
This led to dynamic and often dialectic patterns of interaction with
other norms, doctrines, social formations and loci of power. The entry
of Buddhism into China led the*sangha*to have an even more radical
impact on society, in a civilizational context where renunciation of
familial ties was a radical idea. Clearly Buddhist monasticism’s
evolving and distinct forms of organization have had a major impact on
religious lives in both India and China. It was also controversial, and
was often challenged within both Indian and Chinese cultural contexts.

This year’s panel seeks to look at forms of religious life in India and
China through the lens of the*sangha*. Papers can cover various aspects
of the issue: the changes in the nature of the*sangha*over time and
cultural context(s); non-Buddhist developments, like the various
Advaitic, Śaiva and Śrīvaiṣṇava orders of renouncers or orders of
Daoists such as Lingbao and Quanzhen, etc., that functioned as responses
or even direct challenges to Buddhist conceptions of monasticism;
patterns of resistance to or alternatives to the*sangha*model of
spiritual life.

An ideal proposal will be comparative in its coverage, involving India
and China, but historical, conceptual or some combination of both in its
methodology. To name a few possibilities, papers could address some form
of monastic practice across Indian and Chinese contexts; the
intellectual, political or institutional competition between Buddhist
and other monastic organizations; textual critiques of renunciation and
renunciatory communities; or particular challenges that faced
the*sangha*in different contexts. Topics can be within a Buddhist
context, or comparatively with other Indian and Chinese traditions, or
even entirely on other traditions.

Please contact the co-chairs with any queries.

Ram-Prasad <c.ram-prasad@lancaster.ac.uk>

Tao Jiang <tjiang@rci.rutgers.edu>

