+++
title = "Goodness as preventing"
full_title = "Goodness as preventing suffering"
date = "2015-02-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/01/goodness-as-preventing-suffering/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/02/01/goodness-as-preventing-suffering/).

Goodness as preventing suffering

A while ago I referred to Śāntideva’s thought as “[ethics without
morality](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/ethics-without-morality/)”
– a deliberately provocative formulation based on Shyam Ranganathan’s
[eccentric
definition](http://www.amazon.com/Ethics-History-Indian-Philosophy-Ranganathan/dp/8120831934)
of morality as that which conduces to anger. (I don’t agree with Shyam’s
definition myself, but putting matters in those terms for the sake of
argument helps us to make an interesting and important point.) The idea
for Śāntideva is that because everything has a cause, no one is truly to
blame for their actions, and therefore we should not get angry at them.

Mark Siderits, in a 2008 [article in
Sophia](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11841-008-0043-x),
has called this view “Buddhist paleo-compatibilism”: “compatibilism”
meaning roughly that while Śāntideva thinks it morally significant that
everything has a cause, he still thinks it appropriate to blame people
for bad actions.

I don’t think that that is what Śāntideva means, based on a reading of
the Sanskrit text of Bodhicaryāvatāra chapter six. I think Siderits
reads a great deal into verse 32 that is not actually there, and that is
at odds with Śāntideva’s explicit argument in verses 22-33. But I won’t
expand on that particular point here, because overall I find the
detailed textual argument less interesting than the more general
constructive argument. (And in a blog post, as opposed to a journal
article, I can take this approach.)

On my reading (as on [Charles
Goodman’s](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/20010085?sid=21105650217733&uid=2&uid=3739696&uid=3739256&uid=4)),
Śāntideva is not a compatibilist but a hard determinist. When he says we
shouldn’t ever get angry at people for their actions, he means it; and I
think he *does* mean, in a strong sense, that people should not be held
[morally
responsible](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/justice-without-moral-responsibility/)
for their actions.

Siderits seems to find the hard-determinist reading implausible because
Śāntideva throughout his text speaks of anger and other problematic
emotions, whoever they belong to, in clearly negative and critical
terms:

> Śāntideva heaps scorn on those who respond to provocation with anger.
> He thus appears to believe that those who fail to engage in Buddhist
> practice are blameworthy. The self-determination argument seems to
> show that there can be no responsibility, yet one can be blameworthy
> only for that for which one is responsible.

But I don’t think this follows. I understand Śāntideva’s position as
working similarly to that of another hard determinist, [Baruch (Benedict
de) Spinoza](http://www.iep.utm.edu/spinoza/). Spinoza’s major work was
called the [Ethics](http://home.earthlink.net/~tneff/index3.htm), and
some commentators have said it is not his ethics but his metaphysics,
because it seems to be primariy descriptive of how the world is. But to
say that is arguably to misunderstand Spinoza.

Spinoza opposes the idea of free will, and in so doing it almost seems
like he abolishes the “ought”, the idea that we *should* do anything.
For we no longer really make decisions and have choices, we just follow
deterministic causal chains. In so doing, he introduces a new idea of
what “ethics” would mean. As I understand it, Spinoza’s metaphysics
abolishes not only free will but *possibility*: everything either
happens or it doesn’t. And so it is not meaningful to speak of what we
should do – only what the effect of our reflection will be.

But it is on this latter point that Spinoza’s ethics remains ethical in
some sense. For he does say some things are good and others bad – and I
think he can do so consistently. The same, I suspect, is true of
Śāntideva. Spinoza claims that the highest good (*summum bonum*) is
knowledge of God, which comes with blessedness (*beatitudo*). Words like
“good” can then be defined in *terms* of this *summum bonum*.

Such a claim departs from common usage of the term “good”, of course,
but Spinoza is not aiming to represent common usage. Rather, he
descriptively articulates a highest good that is defined as it is at
least in part because (so he argues) it is the ultimate aim of human
desires when those desires are correctly viewed. If this is accepted,
then “good” and “bad”, and even “should” and “should not”, mean *no more
and no less* than “conducing to the ultimate good”. They can then be
reduced to entirely descriptive terms, possibly even terms that are
entirely empirically falsifiable. (Most
[consequentialist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/03/consequentialism-and-lying-to-oneself/)
ethical positions could probably allow for a similar reduction, if one
wished to make it.)

I think it is fruitful to understand Śāntideva in a way very similar to
Spinoza. In his eighth chapter he famously claims that [everyone wants
to prevent
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/the-buddhist-problem-of-value/),
and the only mistake involved is when we try to end only our own rather
than else’s. The good then becomes understood *in terms of* preventing
suffering. This seems particularly plausible when one notes that the
most common words connoting good and bad in Śāntideva’s work are *puṇya*
and *pāpa*, which is to say [good and bad
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/translating-pu%E1%B9%87ya-and-papa/).
(I have [previously
argued](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
that the concept of *puṇya* has a great deal in common with Greek
*eudaimonia*, human flourishing.) So to say bad things about angry
people (“heap scorn” on them) is just to say that what they do conduces
to suffering. And to say that we should do something is just to make the
claim that it will conduce to ending suffering.

So why would Śāntideva even bother composing a text like the
Bodhicaryāvatāra that praises what ends suffering and criticizes what
conduces to it? Because it so happens that the causal chains to date
have awakened his mind and made him the sort of person who acts with the
goal of ending suffering. (The idea of acting with a goal is hardly
incompatible with determinism – only the idea of independently
*choosing* a goal. A bacterium’s actions are causally determined, but it
acts with the goal of reproducing itself. It may not have first-person
reasons, but it does have [dative
reasons](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/01/what-it-means-to-have-a-reason-for-action/).)
And the fact that he is the sort of person who now has that goal causes
him to compose a text which, he thinks, will cause other people to
become that sort of person as well. Since the text seems like it has
some chance of causing others to prevent suffering, it seems likely that
composing it will help prevent suffering. And we may therefore speak of
this text as good.

So too, we may speak of those who get angry as bad, because their anger
conduces to suffering. But that does not mean assigning them
*responsibility*; it only means understanding the way in which the
chains of causation have led them to be the sort of people who cause
suffering. Since we are the sort of people who prevent suffering, which
is to say good people, we will want to act against such bad people, but
we do not assign them responsibility for their badness any more than we
assign responsibility to the bile that causes a stomach ache – though it
too is bad because it causes suffering. And it is because he gets all of
this that Śāntideva knows not to get angry at anybody – even when he
points out that their actions are bad, which is to say they lead to
suffering.
