+++
title = "Lessons for Hindus from"
full_title = "Lessons for Hindus from the terminal phase of the Qing dynasty"
date = "2014-09-27"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/09/27/lessons-for-hindus-from-the-terminal-phase-of-the-qing-dynasty/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/09/27/lessons-for-hindus-from-the-terminal-phase-of-the-qing-dynasty/).

Lessons for Hindus from the terminal phase of the Qing dynasty

The Qing/Manchu were the last of the steppe tribes to conquer and rule
China. Initially strong and conscious of their own identity, they tried
to avoid Sinicization which had subsumed previous steppe dynasties such
as the Yuan dynasty or their own Jurchen ancestors whom the Mongols
conquered. But by the 19^(th) century, internal weakness combined with
mleccha aggression paved the way for a series of disastrous rebellions
and wars which led to their overthrow in the early 20^(th) century by
the resurgent Han nationalism.

One may ask how all this is relevant to the issues facing Hindus today?

A quick glance at the 19^(th) century Qing history shows that many of
the factors responsible for the disasters that befell the Manchu & their
Han subjects are present in today’s India but at an even more advanced
stage. Let us then take a quick survey of the century.

In the 1820’s the Ghazi Jahangir Khoja launched a Jihad against the Qing
and even briefly defeated them to conquer Altishahr in 1826-27 but the
Qing dispatched an overwhelming force which crushed this Ghazi.

This was followed by the first Opium war wherein the Qing were dealt a
crushing blow by the same barbarians who conquered us (with Hindus
serving as the faithful lackeys/cannon fodder for the mlecchas against
Qing). The defeat only increased the contempt of other would be
aggressors and paved the way for a series of disasters.

The first Opium war wasfollowed by the bloodbath of the Taiping
rebellion (1850-1864) led by the chIna brother of Jesus who founded his
own mutation of the original preta cult. The end result was an estimated
20 million dead accompanied by immense devastation and further weakening
of the dynasty before it was put down. As this 14 year conflict raged
on, the Rus moved in and conquered nearly 1 million sq. km’s (they
barely evenneeded to fireany shots for victory) of sparsely populated
land along the Amur river which was formalized by the Treaty of Aigun.
The parallel to the cult of the chIna brother of Jesus is of course the
immense growth of rice preta’s in Andhra & Tamilnadu who can serve as
future fodder for their mleccha masters.

As if the above were not enough the 17 year Panthay rebellion broke out
in 1856 and lasted till 1873. The rebels were the followers of Muhammad
in Yunnan in Southwest China and at least over a million were said to
have died before it was crushed. Just as this jihad was crushed, another
massive jihadist uprising known as the Dungan rebellion (1862-1877)
broke out and spread over Shaanxi, Gansu, Ningxia, and East Turkestan
(or Xinjiang as the Han imperialists call it). This time the maru’s in
East Turkestan even managed to establish an independent khilafat of
sorts for a short period under the leadership of Yaqub Beg and were
supported by external powers like the Ottoman empire, Rus empire, and
the British empire. The Rus moved in again and occupied strategic areas
while the Manchu-Han were battling the jihad which they finally managed
to crush after a long war of annihilation characterized by wholesale
massacre of civilians on both sides. It is said that between 8 and 12
million people lay dead in this rebellion accompanied by a massive
reduction in Muslim numbers due to the massacres. For good measure, the
china-s also practiced advanced sunnat on the sons and grandsons of
Yaqub Beg who ended up as Imperial palace eunuchs after their
castration. I do not know accurate statistics for the Muslim numbers but
have seen upper bound estimates of 10% in the Qing empire and after this
rebellion they were reduced to less than 2% of the empire (i.e. an over
80% reduction in numbers). If 10% of maru-s can cause such damage, what
do Hindus think our 15%+ maru-s filled with much more Islamic zeal can
do?

As if all this was not enough, the Nien rebellion (1851-1868) broke out
in parallel in northern China due to lax response of the Qing gov’t to
floods and according to Valerie Hudson, a skewed sex ratio caused by
selective female infanticide. This rebellion was said to have resulted
in 500,000 deaths and was referred to by Hu Jintao in talking about the
dangers of the skewed sex ratio in contemporary PRC. In India too, many
bhrashta’s engage in the papa of bhrunahatya
(<https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2012/11/25/abortion-an-astika-view/>)
particularly of girls with the result that Hindus have a very skewed sex
ratio. The Nien rebellion should serve as a warning bell for the
nincompoop leaders of Hindus about the catastrophe awaiting us if we
continue on the same path.

In 1856 the second Opium war broke out and lasted till 1860, this time
the drug peddling British barbarians were joined by their fellow
mlecchas, the French, the Americans, and the Rus. The result was another
crushing defeat with a humiliating treaty including financial and
territorial losses to the British and Rus.

In 1884-85 the Sino-French war broke out followed by another humiliating
defeat in which the Qing lost control of Northern Vietnam. By 1894-95
the first Sino-Japanese war broke out and while most outsiders expected
the Qing to win, the newly modernizing ushAputra-s dealt them a
humiliating defeat which ended in the loss of Taiwan, Korean
independence etc. An important detail to note is that as this war was
being fought, another Dungan jihad broke out simultaneously in 1895 and
was crushed by 1896. Our domestic maru’s too can launch such an internal
jihad while our secular sena is busy fighting an external war with the
Sino-Pak combine (the Qing had no delusion of secularism nor were they
bound by any Geneva convention), are Hindus prepared for such an
eventuality?

Finally between1898-1900 the anti preta Boxer rebellion broke out and
was crushed rather easily by the mleccha powers. The china-s wished to
uphold their religious traditions against the preta-s but suffered a
humiliating defeat with the intervention of the mleccha sena-s. Bharata
too could suffer the same fate even if a Hindu gov’t comes to power and
wishes to uphold dharma against the preta and maru aggressors, are the
Hindus ready for a military showdown in case of such an intervention by
mleccha powers?

**Conclusion**

The china-s do not call this the “century of humiliation” without
reason, it was truly a terrible period for their civilization as it was
for ours and at the hands of the same forces. The differences creep in
when considering the luck of the china-s & their tenacity. They retained
a semblance of independence because no mleccha power wished the others
to be the sole conqueror of china and china-s fought valiantly against
odds to retain much of their conquered land (e.g. East Turkestan). One
may compare this with the cowardly Hindu response of giving into
partition without a fight and even celebrating it as a triumph!

In addition the china-s remember this era of humiliation and seek to
avenge it while the Hindus are reduced to repeating puerile nothings and
even praising the British barbarians as bringing us the “rule of law”
and other such nonsense. A large section of Hindus have such little
knowledge of history that they even claim the British liberated us from
Islam (instead they strengthened Islam) when in fact they took over the
land from the Marathas who had already eradicated Islamic political
power from much of India.

LetHindus also mull over the enormity of sacrifices the china-s had to
make to keep their land. For example the Taiping rebellion alone was
said to have killed 20 million. Are we prepared to sustain 60 or 80
million dead in war (considering contemporary India has 3 or 4 times the
total population of the 19^(th) century Qing empire)? Are Hindu
civilians ready to form militias to wage war against their maru
neighbors if they launch a nationwide jihad during an external war with
PRC?, for this is what the Han civilians did during the Dungan jihad or
Taiping rebellion including conducting large scale retaliatorymassacres
of maru civilians.

Instead we see well meaning Hindus (some of them even rather well known
Hindu “intellectuals”) ignorantly prattle claims that the Hindus
supposedly conquered the china-s civilizationally 2000 years ago. By
contrastthe china-s are sharpening on the advice of Lord Shang, and Sun
Tzu even as wewe have forsaken Chanakya for Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam. I
guess one can’t expect any better from a civilization which seems to
have forgotten the great God Indra and is instead enthralled by the
various proliferating Babaisms. May the great thunderer take pity on his
unworthy children and guide them to light from such puerile
preoccupations for otherwise we may end up in the museum at best or the
maru’s may not even afford us that luxury and obliterate even the traces
of our civilization completely.

And let the right thinking Hindus reading this contemplate the brave
fight of the china-s and mull over whether today’s Hindus are prepared
for such sacrifices instead of mouthing boastful feel good nonsense.

