+++
title = "“Management of Savagery”"
full_title = "“Management of Savagery” by Abu Bakr Naji Analysis from a Hindu viewpoint"
date = "2014-09-01"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/09/01/management-of-savagery-by-abu-bakr-naji-analysis-from-a-hindu-viewpoint/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/09/01/management-of-savagery-by-abu-bakr-naji-analysis-from-a-hindu-viewpoint/).

“Management of Savagery” by Abu Bakr Naji: Analysis from a Hindu viewpoint

**Preamble**

Even after our long struggle against the marUnmattas, few Hindus have
any inkling of the aims and motives of the unmada, let alone its
foundational principles and internal processes. The majority of Hindus
choose not only to believe the propaganda of the whites and the taqiyya
of the marUnmattas but also mix their own romantic conceptions with
these false ideas, thus aiding the unmadas and which causes them to
exult at the gullibility of the nivAsi­s (dwellers) of Jambudvipa. As a
result, Hindus are correctly judged as having no discernment or
concentrated strength to speak of, and therefore are treated as
weaklings to be gobbled up and divided up amongst themselves by these
predators. Amidst this, Hindus after their military defeats have been
denuded in the financial, ideological and social aspects of their
civilization. The extent of the degradation (and the amnesia imposed
upon us) is such that even Hindu elites have no inkling of their own
civilizational principles and processes. This has left both the educated
and the laity defenseless against the crude but apparently well
justified assertions and claims of the monotheists and they are forced
to go on the defensive, thus ceding a lot of ground to enemies. Since
the profound and sophisticated nature of the brahma­kshatra
politico­ritual systems is beyond the grasp of most or would not be
accepted from emotional considerations, it is not possible for us to
educate the average Hindu and make him consign his resources to a Hindu
pUrnayuddha, which alone can match the scale and intensity of the white
plans for dominance or the Islamic jihad. It is true that the unmadas
have been effectively refuted by the barahima
(<http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/04/01/5030/>), that the
jihad has been rolled back several times by people of any given varna or
jati. Yet collectively we have been losing territories and international
influence, and are essentially a football for various forces around the
world, getting kicked around by all and sundry. The much vaunted success
of Indians is merely the use of high end hindu talent as slaves by the
whites which is never adequately rewarded. It is doubly debilitating,
the Hindu civilization’s best are weaned away from their ancestral
culture and their efforts used to denigrate and destroy the very culture
they came from. In this snowballing crisis, there seems to be no route
for the hindu civilization, i.e. the genetic and the memetic heritage of
bhArat to survive beyond the next 4 or 5 decades except as a slave
minority in some mleccha lands akin to the Jews.

In light of this the average Hindu might ask­why should we try and
preserve a losing ideology, which in addition has the famous
stratification of society into varna­s? The answer, as has been hinted
in various places is that the monotheisms are merely covers for the
replacement of populations by the dominant holders of the ideology; In
Islam the Arabs will almost certainly replace every other ethnic group,
even the Turks and Persians at a later stage. It follows that even if a
Hindu jati/Hindu converts to a monotheism, after its/his political and
cosmetic purposes are served they/he will certainly be disposed off
genetically by various pressures; we can see it in operation in the
Philippines, Latin America, Persia, Egypt, Central Asia etc. where
entire ethnicities have been wiped out and replaced partially by
Arabic/White genetic material. This process will only amplify and
continue, and the populations will get more White and Arab as time spent
under Islamic and Christian dominance increases. Thus the monotheisms
will end even the genetic existence of the ethnicities grouped as
Hindus. In this struggle for existence, our memes too shall play a great
role, and the memes that have resulted in the survival of every kind of
jAti into modern times, are the brAhminical or brahma­kshtra memes. This
important fact is glossed over by the proponents of liberalism who, in
their rants against Hinduism never mention the ethnicities and the great
similarity of populations all over the monotheist lands; in the whole of
europe only a few like Basques, Sorbs survive (as Christians) from the
pre monotheist eras. Apart from the Romas, who are brutally treated and
are late entrants to Europe not many have survived the monotheist
inspired racism and extermination campaigns. On the other hand, even in
vaidika times there had been some sort of accomodation with the various
non Arya communities by the Arya­s; for example the nagas of various
regions, some nishada sthapatis were allowed to sponsor yajna-s, Rana
Pratap fought marUnmattas alongside the bhilla­s, the sanskritization of
many shudra jatis (as mutual opposition with brahmanAs waned over
centuries, ended post gupta age) and the entry of Avarnas into public
life in the modern republic of India. These successful social processes
of integration are never acknowledged as the credit would have to go to
Brahmanical Hinduism. On the other hand one can clearly see how
Blacks/Filipinos are treated by whites, and by Muslims who explicitly
enslave them. So, if we want to see our children and their children, we
have to remove monotheism from the world especially Islam whose rate of
Arabizaton & Turkization is extremely rapid.

The removal of monotheism is a problem whose scale is gargantuan, and
nature most obtuse (very strong biological prallels exist as the acharya
has explained
<http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/07/20/khilonmada-charcha/>).While
we heathens instinctively feel that there is something wrong about their
ways, we are unable to completely get at the core of their existence,
and understand why they perform a specific action or not. Conversely in
trying to understand us Hindus as a single group, they too made errors
which have now been corrected, thus paving the way for our destruction.
While the monotheists know our ways intimately, we have no knowledge of
theirs; very few Hindus have studied Arabic, or have anything more than
a superficial knowledge of Christianity and the western civilization.
This places us at a serious disadvantage when faced by monotheist
aggression at every level from the military (leads to less/wrong
motivation) to intellectual (they can dismiss our understanding of our
own texts, and shout us down when it comes to theirs). So it must be a
top priority (apart from military production & training, modern heavy
industry) for Hindus to study the monotheists’ dogma and most critically
work out how they actually operate and whose recommendations and orders
amongst them are obeyed and carried out. Towards this end, a literate
Hindu might voluntarily take up an area say the economy of the whites,
or evolution of the church, learn Arabic and the ideas of the Koran etc.
and produce Wiki like articles at the level possible in his spare time.
This will act as a kernel for future correction and expansion by Hindus
as their ability improves. While more scholarly and exhaustive tomes
might exist, it is important for Hindus build up their own understanding
and strength, which alone leads to confidence and the capacity to win
genuine victory in war. As for the study, rebuilding and rejuvenation of
our own traditions, it is too great a task to be done by amateurs, and
anyway institutions exist for that activity, which can be prodded and
encouraged through other methods to improve their quality and
productivity.

**Introduction**

This write up tries to outline the salient points in the document
“Management of Savagery”
(<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Management_of_Savagery>) which is
available for download
(<http://azelin.files.wordpress.com/2010/08/abu-bakr-naji-the-management-of-savagery-the-most-critical-stage-through-which-the-umma-will-pass.pdf>).
The document lists the basic theory and the operational aspects but what
is critical is present in the first 50 pages, which shall be our focus.
The rest of the pages contain operational details, which, while being of
great interest, follow from the general theory of acquiring power
outlined before. The other points of interest shall be outlined in the
next post, time and energy permitting.

The document is remarkable in many ways. While the Muslims had always
proclaimed their intentions, the thinking and the principle have been
hidden, or at least never noticed by Hindus (even now, we have to rely
on an English translation made by a mlechCha). While it does not reveal
much about the exact chain of command of the Sunni leadership, we can be
confident of the following:

-   The work has been done by a solid scholar of the Sunni school, with
    access to the highest class of shaykhs, who are regarded as absolute
    authorities, and their advice followed to the letter.
-   It must be noted that the author is unfazed by modernity and aims
    only to impose the sharia worldwide; a common mistake is to assume
    that the Muslim clergy is backward and obscurantist while they
    themselves show complete clarity about the nature of modernity and
    use it to further the imposition of the sharia.
-   The maxims of Ibn­Khaldun are reiterated (implicitly) as though they
    were axioms and well known; therefore it does represent an authentic
    strain of Sunni Islam.
-   The author does not so much emphasize on Islamic practices as much
    as the imposition of the authentic version of the sharia and the
    obedience of the populace to the shaykhs of Islam, the expansion of
    which is the primary theme of the document.
-   The references, effort made and the general aim of the document
    indicate that it is unlikely to be a red herring meant to deceive
    non Muslims.
-   The striking brazenness of releasing the document to the public
    underlines the confidence that the Sunnis have in their theory and
    calculations that they can afford to openly broadcast their long
    term aims and the methods for their achievement. This implies that
    they have worked out in some detail the methods of acquiring power
    and have a definite roadmap for imposing sharia on the rest of the
    world.
-   The author has clearly identified the weaknesses of their enemies:
    in particular the effects of media and communication, Geneva
    convention (which skews any battle in favour of the Muslims) and the
    economic systems of the whites which are declared as being based on
    deceptions and false foundations.
-   The author’s strategy depends in crucial way on his enemies’
    following of certain rules and the assumption that the media and
    communications will continue as before, and that the media greatly
    inflates the actual coercive capabilities of the superpower.

These preliminary observations already indicate the depth of
understanding of politics that the Sunni Muslims have and must alarm all
Hindus who are completely ignorant of these dangerous plans against
them. Till now not a single word has been written in the Indian media
about this work; while whites and no doubt even the Japanese have set
their best men on it, our strategic “experts” wax eloquent on outdated
frameworks and betray an utter lack of understanding of real politick.
Their loose talk, facile analysis and slapdash productions will cost
Hindus dearly, much like how kAshmira was lost as its intellectuals
reveled in producing exquisite literature and arcane philosophy. (Also,
if this is the level at which the Muslims are operating, what do the
whites have in store for us? Their skills and techniques are way beyond
these levels and must be operating in a more subtle way which we do not
have any inkling of).

In his introduction, the author outlines the various groups that are
fighting for Islam, and classifies them according to his own views
(which can be deemed absolutely authentic). Some of them were on the
correct path, following sharia methods and politics, whereas some that
failed like the Egyptian Muslim brotherhood, erred in some point of
strategy, or the application of sharia rules, or had their ideology
contaminated with that of other undesirable entities, which led to their
destruction. The lack of obedience to the shaykhs and infighting, and
the mismanagement of these movements is highlighted by the author, who
at the same time acknowledges, to varying degrees their contribution to
Islamism. He lists the advantages and drawbacks of the movements that
have written programs (Jihadi Salafism, Sahwa Salafism, Ikhwan,
TurabiIkhwan, and popular Jihad like Hamas). He advocates Jihadi
Salafism and recommends it after modifications in consideration of human
limitations, and rejects others on grounds like:

-   Inability to progress to the stage of power.
-   Incorrect teaching and dissemination of Islamic practices.
-   Neglect of some sharia conditions.

The Ummah is now asked to prepare for the stage of management of
savagery which must follow current times. This stage is crucial as the
correct steps shall result in the quick establishment of a sharia
Khilafat, while failure will only increase the savagery which in itself
is not too harmful for the Ummah, indeed far less harmful than existence
under a non sharia regime.

Henceforth where the comments presented are those of the author of this
analysis; it will be indicated as such.

**Some History**

When a large empire falls, the successor is rarely able to inherit it
intact; several distant regions descend, on account of the different
powers and human nature, into savagery. For example, the peripheral
states of the Khilafat, which disintegrated, were stabilized by the
Sykes-Picot treaty and the recognition and help given to the new regime
by the superpowers of the day. Some regimes collaborated with the
imperialists and thus were permitted to rule\[1\],while others were
independent; however that did not matter as most of them soon gravitated
towards either of the superpowers for aid and strength, and acted as the
peripheral states for a superpower, even as a cover in the form of the
UN was provided to hide the reality of a bipolar world. Without support
the regimes collapsed and lapsed into the stage of savagery which had
been avoided by the stabilizing influence of a superpower. This collapse
could be caused due to various factors including that of subversion by a
rival superpower. From the standpoint of Islam, this phase under the
influence of a superpower caused nothing but the dilution of sharia and
the weakening of Islam in these regions (e.g. the presence of secular
Arabs, and Shia), and the plunder of resources by the influenced regimes
spread inequity among the Muslim masses.

The belief system of the host society was not allowed to govern the
state. The two components of power, that of the masses and that of the
army were placed at loggerheads with each other. The masses were
diverted by entertainments and luxuries, and those that did protest were
put down by the army which was purchased with money. This kept the state
within the orbit of the superpower. Thus the setup is stable and those
who plot to overthrow the regime by inciting the public or the army are
doomed to fail, and even if a revolt does occur, the old regime will
only be replaced with a new figurehead, as the superpowers are quite
skilled in the management of such events. \[2\]

Comments:

\[1\] The transfer of power to INC and Jinnah is a good example

\[2\] The author clearly rejects working with or within any existing non
sharia regime.

**Analysis of the balance of power**

The superpowers dominated through a mixture of overwhelming military
power and propaganda. Propaganda was critical as even great superiority
was not sufficient to assert its power and dominate the peripheral areas
far away from the central regions. The regimes co-opted took part in
this as their own survival and luxuries were dependent on the
superpower. Thus while the actual coercive power was not at all
sufficient, propaganda gave an inflated picture of this power, which
prevented the masses from asserting themselves and deterred their
enemies. But as time went by the superpowers, believing their own
propaganda and convinced of their internal stability, overextended
themselves when some weaknesses and fissures were revealed.

The military power of any state depends completely on the cohesion of
its society and its institutions, and if society decays (through
hedonism, lack of values, exclusive love of worldly things), its
military power itself becomes a liability. The collapse can be very
rapid if many factors are present as they reinforce each other. The end
of the USSR is a classic example where, after initial weaknesses were
exposed, the pre existing decadence of society hastened the fall of the
superpower. The war in Afghanistan crippled the Soviets economically and
accentuated the ills of their society. The blows to their economy were a
critical factor since those societies’ values were worldly; scarcity of
money resulted in unfulfilled worldly desires that increased the
competition which soon led to crime in society. Thus cultural
annihilation in their society was achieved through the denudation of
their economy. The people and states at the periphery began to move away
from the declining power whose image was shattered and with it its
legitimacy to rule.

The shaykh Abdallah Azzam had calculated the above, not even taking into
account the withdrawal of USSR from Afghanistan. He asserted that the
economic cost alone would ruin the Soviets, which in fact played out
just as he said.

However, some of these regions through efforts of existing
administrations and help of the Americans who stabilized them, were
prevented from turning into regions of savagery (which result in the
periphery of large states that collapse), and are a part of the American
order under their influence. Now it is the turn of Americans to face
what the soviets did. In Afghanistan and Chechnya, the stage of vexation
and exhaustion is underway.

The great effects of the victory against the Russians are:

-   In spite of the overwhelming superiority of the Russian army, its
    foundational weaknesses were exposed by the Taliban of Afghanistan,
    which in turn inspired even more many more Muslims to jihad from
    faraway lands (Tajikistan, Egypt, Tunisia), and showed that a
    military superpower could be defeated.
-   Even though the Russian army was greater than the American army (in
    materials, viciousness of men, capacity to take losses), it was
    still done in by the moral decay of Russian society.
-   Various Islamic movements have been “purified” by exposure to combat
    for 30 years and can now be used for coordinated and sharia based
    action rather than random, uncoordinated and less effective action
    as before

Now we can state the goals that can be achieved:

1\) Remove respect for America and increase confidence of Muslims:

-   The American media’s productions must be shown to be fake and the
    propaganda of Americans must be completely removed. This will reveal
    the actual power of America which is far less than projected.
-   The superpower must be made to engage Islam directly and not by
    proxy, which will force even the puppets to side with Islam.

2\) Human aid for the struggle will continue because:

-   Of the inspirational value of spectacular attacks.
-   America’s control over the regimes shall be exposed.
-   Direct attacks by America (which will be forced) will compel Muslims
    to help.

3\) By exposing the media as false:

-   American public, used to hedonism will see inability to hold the
    periphery and agitate as their luxuries lessen.
-   They will fear the onset of savagery and will ask their government
    to stop engaging Islam.

Comments:

This strategy, which has been released, is quite sound and not as
fantastic as one might think. The shaykh has carefully explained the
reasons as to why it should succeed. As for Hindus, they are nowhere
near such deep, long range attempts and will fall to concerted Islamic
action (first terrorism & denudation of economy and then the actual
conquest by army). Our society too is rapidly moving towards the
decadence as present in Russia. Note that our society is incapable of
tolerating strife and shortages and gore, which Islamist societies can.

**The Management of Savagery**

Upon the fall of the strong empire, some regions far from the centre
enter a state similar to that of Afghanistan before the Taliban, when
the law of the jungle was the only one in force. At this time it is not
possible to control the region as well as an administration should, but
only to manage the barbarism that exists, which has to be done keeping
in mind the aims of Islam. In such a land, even criminals hope that the
situation would be managed by some strong authority. Sharia provides the
following recommendations for such governing regions, as Islamic regions
have passed through this stage in the past:

-   Spreading internal security.
-   Providing food and medical treatment.
-   Securing the region of savagery from the invasions of enemies.
-   Spread sharia in all its aspects among the people (other points can
    be seen in the document).

Such administrations have been established at critical junctures in
Islamic history:

-   After the hijra (migration of Muhammad & his followers from Mecca to
    Medina), before zakat and jaziya were instituted.
-   During the crusader wars as shaykh Umar Mahmud Abu Umar says: It was
    these many small administrations of savagery (centered on some small
    castles and citadels) at the periphery of the Christian kingdom
    that, through constant terrorist attacks exhausted the enemy and
    vexed him; they unceasingly harried and denuded the Christian
    kingdoms. Thus when they united, the enemy was already tired and the
    battle of Hatin was only a formality; what made the victory possible
    were the constant raids by the small savagery based rulers.
-   al-Imam-al-Sayyid in mid 19th century, stirred the Sunni square of
    Kashmir, Afghanistan, India, Pakistan; it resulted in the separation
    of Pakistan and is a source of everlasting inspiration for the
    jihadis of that region.

We \[the core Muslims\] are now in the stage of vexation and exhaustion
of the enemy and must prepare for the next state by studying management
as taught in the west, and apply it if it does not contradict sharia.

Comments:

\[1\] Invariably, the muslim victory is preceded by a long series of
raids and terrorist activities (e.g. Armenia, Greece and nowadays
against the Hindus of India, see:
<http://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/09/27/madrassa-and-terrorists-in-the-expansion-of-dar-ul-islam/>)
till the country falls and is converted.

\[2\] Terrorist activities like that of the Turkish sipahis and ghazis
in India constitute the vexation and the exhaustion of the enemy (in
medieval India too cities were selected for terrorist action by Muslim
irregulars).

\[3\] The shaykhs are unanimous on the point that such efforts on the
part of the Muslims alone can lead to the next stage and thence to the
establishment of sharia and the conversion or decimation of the kaffirs.

\[4\] Therefore the very existence of marUnmada shaykhs is an
existential threat to any non-marus and survival demands that the said
element be neutralized.

**How to establish an Islamic state**

There are various stages of jihad which are as follows: the stage of
vexation and exhaustion known as stage VH, stage of chaos and savagery
known as stage CAS and the management of savagery known as stage MOS. In
addition states can be divided into “priority” states and the other, and
the stages that have to be passed are different for those labeled as
priority states compared to the other states.

The priority states are the ones such where stage VH is underway. These
states include the Hejaz, Pakistan, Nigeria, Yemen etc. Fighters should
concentrate on these regions and avoid dissipating their energies
elsewhere, and their actions should be guided by the central high
command. Further, the entire region covered by the borders need not be
involved; stage VH might be restricted to a few towns and areas as in
crusader times, and the aim should be to establish stage MOS regions
which are under the guidance of the high command. As these areas are far
away from the centre of the superpower, pockets of stage VH should be
made by taking advantage of the geography and gradually moved to stage
CAS. To quote the Sunni directly:

> The normal, small operation and its results must be considered very
> valuable. Sometimes the small operation leads to harmful results, or
> problems, or the discovery of other groups preparing for a specific,
> medium operation. If those who are undertaking small operations are
> able to advance and develop themselves for the undertaking of a
> specific medium operation, then they must do so, even if the small
> operation has to be cancelled for its sake. However, in general, the
> best path of advancement for nascent groups toward the undertaking of
> qualitative operations is to carry out small operations in the
> beginning, which they undertake with sound movements and precautions.

The goals of stage VH are as follows:

1\) Weakening the enemy and collaborator regimes, strike and perform
continuous attrition both militarily and economically. Striking is easy
as sleeper cells are present everywhere, and the superpower or enemy’s
interests can be struck at different places. This will aid economic
draining of the enemy as he has to provide security for all his assets
spread over a wide area, and far away from the centre of his power.

2\) Attracting more jihadis through public and spectacular operations at
the medium level which can be done without the HC’s involvement.

3\) Removing the control of the existing regime so that management of
savagery can come to pass.

4\) Prepare terrorists for the gore which will come in the management of
savagery.

The goals of stage MOS are many and can be seen in the document, and are
all in accordance with sharia. To proceed towards the goal, the
superpower must be attacked with a series of strikes at its varied
interests. This will reduce its prestige among the Ummah. The enemy will
either avenge itself upon Islam or launch a limited war. In the first
case there is not much possibility of holding out for long, and it will
enable us in our goal of arriving at stage MOS as in Afghanistan. In the
latter case, it will not have an enemy to attack but many small stage
VH, CAS or MOS regions which will increase in number if they are
attacked. If not attacked, anyway recruitment will continue due to the
spectacular nature of the strikes against the superpower.

Now, the masses in the places where the super power is present will rise
against it as it has fallen in their esteem. The superpower will find it
difficult to hold out so far from its periphery. At home too, the
economic drain will result in discontent spreading amongst the
hedonistic population which will demand an end to the war and
engagement.

By harrying the armies of the puppet regimes, foreigners, petroleum, and
the economy, the superpower can be forced to open conflict or at least
its image can be damaged beyond repair. Once this happens groups in
regions of stage VH and stage CAS can be persuaded and managed such that
they establish stage MOS regions which will herald the sharia age in
those lands.

As for the non priority states they can be first denuded by constant
raiding and attack by states in stage VH/MOS near them. Once a proper
administration is established in stage MOS states, the weakened non
priority state can be conquered using the usual preparations and
techniques.

Here we end our look into the document. In the future, deva­s
permitting, we shall see the operational recommendations and their
counters and attempt to formulate a response that can help us overcome
the marUnmattas.

Comments:

\[1\] Note the use of terrorism as an integral aspect of policy, and its
coordination and management throughout the world; especially Pakistan
which is held to be in stage VH, and it conducts terrorism in India.

\[2\] The strategy is a deep one involving all elements of political
power, and clearly identifies the different components of power
including the media. It provides for methods to undo the power of the
media and use it against the superpower and is sophisticated in its
combined use of terror, media and stage MOS regions to achieve its
ultimate goal: the worldwide imposition of sharia.

\[3\] Hindus don’t have anything to match the document in breadth and
depth of political vision and future planning. As a defeated people, we
have forgotten to expand our territories and influence and meekly accept
the narratives that have been foisted on us. We remain non­aggressive
and peaceful due to inability, both physical and intellectual.

**Conclusion**

This is just one of the strategies for the expansion of the marUnmada,
which is sound, and likely to be effective, as it considers economic,
psychological and social factors in addition to military and terrorist
action. The USA itself has a reasonable chance of falling unless they
have an even better plan worked out; but the nature of this plan is that
it is based on very basic principles and is long range, and impervious
to external meddling; recommended actions of terrorism must result in
the calculations of the shaykhs coming to pass, as the whittling down of
any enemy, the constant terror tactics will ultimately wear the enemy
down economically, in manpower and in willpower, given that they have an
inexhaustible supply of jihadis and the extreme fanaticism of every
Muslim. This ace up their sleeve can never be removed, even by America
and that is what makes their victory possible.

From the Hindu standpoint we have virtually no counter either in arms,
or in social cohesion or in the intellectual abilities of our elites.
Indeed moral decadence, a much abused phrase must be used for a society
whose best men prefer luxuries and recognition from their civilizational
enemies instead of fighting for their own. May the deva­s change the
state of affairs!

