+++
title = "The First Dark Age"
full_title = "The First Dark Age"
date = "2014-06-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/06/12/the-first-dark-age/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/06/12/the-first-dark-age/).

The First Dark Age



[![ncomms3486-f2](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/ncomms3486-f2.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/ncomms3486-f2.jpg)



A little over five thousand years ago, something bad happened in central
and western Europe. Farming had arrived earlier, and flourished for
several hundred years, accompanied by population increase (see the graph
above, showing estimated population density over time in that region,
from a recent
[paper](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3806351/) in Nature
Communications.). Then there was a population collapse, on the order of
that caused by the Black Death, but longer lasting. It doesn’t look as
if this was caused by climate changes.

Ways of life changed. In Britain and Ireland, cereal farming seems to
have [stopped
completely](http://www.antiquity.ac.uk/ant/086/ant0860707.htm) for
hundreds of years (except in the Orkney Islands). Instead people were
raising cattle and pigs.

But were they the same people? We know that there were big genetic
changes in northern Europe somewhere around this time, in which the
Sardinian-like farmers occupying almost all of Europe were replaced by
another population with substantial amounts of WHG-like ancestry
(western hunter-gatherer) and ANE (ancestral north Eurasian: Sibermen)
ancestry.

Something similar seems to have happened somewhat earlier in the
Balkans: there had been many agricultural settlements, some large,
exhibiting advanced metallurgy- but everything stopped. The tell
settlements ended.  No permanent settlements in the Balkan uplands can
be dated between 3900 and 3300 BC.

We’re going to have look again at the archaeological record in the light
of what we know and are learning from ancient and modern DNA analysis.
Gimbutas and Gordon Childe are looking better and better: most
contemporary archaeologists are not.













