+++
title = "The Time Before"
full_title = "The Time Before"
date = "2014-06-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/06/04/the-time-before/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/06/04/the-time-before/).

The Time Before

Although we’re still in an ice age, we are currently in an interglacial
period. That’s a good thing, since glacial periods are truly unpleasant
– dry, cold, low biological productivity, high variability. Low CO2
concentrations made plants more susceptible to drought. Peter Richerson
and Robert Boyd have suggested that the development of agriculture was
impossible in glacial periods, due to these factors.

There was an earlier interglacial period that began about 130,000 years
ago and ended about 114,000 years ago. It was a bit warmer than the
current interglacial (the Holocene).

The most interesting events in the Eemian are those that didn’t happen.
In the Holocene, humans developed agriculture, which led to all kinds of
interesting trouble. They did it more than once, possibly as many as
seven times independently. Back in the Eeemian, nichevo. Neanderthals
moved father north as the glaciers melted, AMH moved up into the Middle
East, but nobody did much of anything new. Populations likely increased,
as habitable area expanded and biological productivity went up, but
without any obvious consequences. Anatomically modern humans weren’t yet
up to displacing archaic groups like the Neanderthals.

So, it is fair to say that everybody back then, including AMH, lacked
capabilities that some later humans had. We could, if we wished, call
these new abilities ‘behavioral modernity’.

The Bushmen are the most divergent of all human populations, and
probably split off earliest. They are farther from the Bantu (in genetic
distance) than the French or Chinese are.

According to some models, this split (between the Bushmen and other
populations of sub-Saharan Africa) occurred more than 100,000 years ago.
Recent direct measurements of mutations show much lower rates than
previously thought, which tends to place such splits even farther back
in time.

The question is whether they split off before the development of
practical behavioral modernity.















