+++
title = "More Stories from"
full_title = "More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections Part 1"
date = "2014-12-18"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-1/).


					More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part 1				



[ December 18, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-1/ "Permalink to More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part1")

-   in [Personal](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/personal/)
-   [1
    Comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-1/#comments)

# More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part1

There are still a few more interesting stories that ought to be shared
fromSiṁhapurī. Recently, over the past few months, there has been some
talk in Bhārata about taking a leaf from the success story of Siṁhapurī.
Both Nareśa of the Rāṣṭra Rājyam and Chandra of the Āndhra deśa have
made statements to the effect that they want to see Siṁhapurī in Bhārata
deśa. Indeed, surmounting many difficulties, this upadvīpa that was once
politically part of Malayadvīpa has seen roaring success and many will
attribute that achievement to the Prathamah Pradhānamantrin of Cīna
ethnicity, who ruled Siṁhapurī with an iron fist for decades after it
attained svatantra.

Now, of course, with the passing of power to the next generation, he
occupies the post of Mantraṇāmātya, an office that was specially created
by the Rājyam so as to enable him to give his much sought-after counsel
to the younger ministers. He frequently publishes books, detailing his
views on various subjects. In one of his most recent books, which
comprises a set of interviews done over several weeks to extract his
opinions on some of the most controversial subjects and whose title we
may render in saṃskṛtam as Kaṣṭa Satyāni, he speaks as if the sole
purpose of doing so was in service of candor.

**On the issue of the Marūnmatta-mārga**: “I have to be candid to be
valuable but I do not want to offend the Marūnmattas. I think we were
progressing very nicely until the surge of the Marūnmatta-mārga came and
if you asked me for my observations, the other communities have easier
integration.”

**To the question whether his views on Marūnmatta- mārga were shaped by
the attack on the Gopuradvayam in Krauñca-Dvīpa:** “No, no, I’ve seen
this develop with the rise of the Pṛthvyodhbhava-Taila exporting states
and their exporting of their form of Marūnmatta, especially the Saudya
and Vahābya forms of Marūnmatta because they have the money and they
build their Ālayas all over the world.”

And with his characteristic prescience, “We sent a team to study what
they did in Āṅglīka-Deśa. They have different kinds of Marūnmattas who
cannot unite. Because of their free speech laws, they have allowed all
kinds of preachers to purvey highly inflammatory upadeśams in their
Mohamattālayas…If we had accepted Saudya money for the Ālayas, we will
get Saudya preachers. Luckily we have pre-empted that by having the
Mohamattālaya Sthāpatya Nidhi so that we do not need their money.”

One can only wish the Devas will inspire Nareśa to grasp the gravity of
the situation and place a ban on foreign funding that is detrimental to
the Dharma and could compromise the security interests of the nation (or
already is) by feeding virulent and hateful ideologies.

**NOTE: The intentional use ofsaṃskṛtam, despite the artificiality and
possible inconvenience to readers, is not only because we need to free
our discourse from constructs, but also because it is necessitated by
the author’s circumstances. Decipher, read, enjoy and keep mum.**

To be continued…

Tags: [bharat](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharat/),
[bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[fanatic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/fanatic/),
[fanaticism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/fanaticism/),
[life](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/life/),
[marunmatta](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/marunmatta/),
[personal](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/personal-2/),
[pragmatic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/pragmatic/),
[security](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/security/),
[stories](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/stories/),
[terrorism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/terrorism/)

