+++
title = "More Stories from"
full_title = "More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections Part 2"
date = "2014-12-24"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/24/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/24/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-2/).


					More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part 2				



[ December 24, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/24/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-2/ "Permalink to More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part2")

-   in [Personal](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/personal/)

# More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part2

[In the previous
article](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/12/18/more-stories-from-si%e1%b9%81hapuri-and-malayadvipa-and-reflections-part-1/ "More Stories from Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa and Reflections: Part 1"),
we had briefly reviewed some of the comments made by the
Vṛddhamahānītijña of Siṁhapurī in a recent pustaka with regards to the
threat posed by the Marūnmattas. The candor was appreciated in secret by
the intellectuals who shared the same sense of foresight in this regard
and could anticipate the impending danger, but the honesty came with a
small price-i.e. In the Sāmānya Nirvācana that happened in that very
year, the Marūnmattas indeed took offense as people generally do when
presented with overwhelming evidence for a reasonable proposition which
they nonetheless have to disagree with for reasons beyond rationality.
It was initially speculated but eventually canonized that there was a
loss of votes from the demographic and also that this loss was in good
part ascribable to the statements made. Of course the ruling party won
again but the Vṛddhamahānītijña was compelled to apologize and revoke
his statement. To make things worse, a rahasyavacana made by him in
confidence about this very viṣaya, stating that the Marūnmatta-mārga is
a viṣa**–**mārga, was leaked. And I was reminded of the good advice
offered by Manu whose words the Veda praises as medicine.

satyaṁ brūyāt.h priyaṁ brūyānna brūyāt.h satyamapriyam.h \|

priyaṁ cha nānṛtaM brūyādeṣa dharmah sanātanah
————**Mānava-Dharmaśāstra 4.138**

“Let him speak the truth, Let him speak pleasantly. Let him not speak
the truth that is unpleasant. Let him not speak a pleasant falsehood.”

If only that Cīna Mahānītijña had heeded this good advice, the
aforementioned problems would not have arisen. Nevertheless, one cannot
but help admire his boldness, brutal honesty and clarity of thought.

But admiration, even if based on a certain intellectual kinship, can
always be qualified and the Prathamah Pradhānamantrin is no exception to
this. In the same book which was the object of contention, which I had
titled, “Kaṣṭa Satyāni”, he had mentioned a few comments about another
topic: his observations about Brāhmaṇas, the caste system (That train is
never late!) and the overall standing of Bhāratavarṣa as a nation
vis-à-vis Mahācīnadeśa. My initial reaction was that of surprise as I
had not expected a person of Cīna ethnicity to actually speak of
Brāhmaṇas. Moreover, Varna is rather invisible and unimpressive in its
overall influence over identity construction among the Indians who have
to live as a minority amongst other ethnic groups, the majority of whom
is the Cīna group and would be thus hardly relevant to the people here.

The surprise was followed by a slight sense of trepidation as the
Mahānītijña (who is a devout believer in the doctrine of genetic
determinism, especially with regards to intelligence and to be honest, I
have certain sympathies towards that idea as well although[ **this would
do a far better
job**](http://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2009/02/12/genetic-determinism-sociology-and-history/)
of elucidating that point than I can, with my limited training in
genetics.) went on to single out the Brāhmaṇas for their exceptional
intelligence and “high literary capabilities” which were necessitated by
their duty to know the religious texts, which were in saṃskṛtam. Over
the course of time, I have heard many explanations, which are more or
less of the same substance, that focus on the Brāhmaṇas’ way of life
that contributes to their “high level of intelligence” (The inverted
commas are because this conclusion arises not from any empirical data as
far as I am aware of and purely from observations, which are nonetheless
seconded by my own to some extent).

The trepidation was because I feared that a Pandora’s Box was opened and
those Abrāhmaṇas who read these comments of that Mahānītijña might take
grievous offense and vent their anger at those fellow Hindus whom they
know to be Brāhmaṇas. The cause of this anxiety lies in my own roots and
it would be difficult for the reader to sympathize if you are not a
Brāhmaṇa, especially one from the Tamil land. Perhaps this would have
been undue paranoia on my part given that I had grown up far away from
the heat and the dirty politics of it all. But a person is not shaped
merely by his own experiences but the narratives he hears from family
and friends would have a certain impact as well. Add to that the
not-so-subtle Brahmadveṣa in movies. And I will never forget the day
when I went to a local library and came across a book in the Tamil
section, with the cover depicting Rāma Dāśarathi standing as accused in
a court. The actual contents of the book were more ambitious than the
cover, incriminating many more apart from the Ikśvāku hero, with the
lion’s share of the venom reserved for the evil and oppressive
Brāhmaṇas. If this should happen in a country dominated by the Cīnas
most of whom are unacquainted with the Dharma, it only meant that there
were Dravidian ideologues among those who recommend Tamil books to the
libraries. For my part, I wrote a letter and got the book removed from
the library but the implications remained in my mind: As long as I live
among other Indians who are not Brāhmaṇas, my identity as a Brāhmaṇa is
going to be an unavoidable subject of discussion, whether for good or
bad, even in a country whose overwhelming majority ethnic group has no
real knowledge of the castes and no concern for Hindu dharma in general.

To make it worse, the Mahānītijña went on to contrast the unequitable
Indic system with the allegedly superior Cīna social model of
meritocracy where the vidvān class in Mahācīnadeśa spreads its genes to
a multitude of his wives and concubines, enabling social mobility.
Meanwhile, the Brāhmaṇas had cunningly and selfishly kept all the good
genes to themselves, effectively short-changing the rest of the nation
in terms of “good genes”. Of course, he did not use the pejorative terms
to describe the Brāhmaṇas as in fact he had a high opinion of the
Brāhmaṇas. But, that is how the mind of an average Abrāhmaṇa would
render that innocuous “observation”, at least as far as my paranoid mind
envisioned it. However, there were numerous problems with his
observations and cross-cultural comparison, which can be easily ignored
if the reader reacts too viscerally. Firstly, the so-called meritocratic
system in Mahācīnadeśa, was really an imperial examination system that
depended upon rote memorization and thus not an exemplary model.

Secondly, the idea of an exclusive Brāhmaṇa group was a key factor in
the production of a diverse and complex body of intellectual output that
enriched the civilization and also allowed that group to be effective
carriers of a common culture in their migrations within Bhāratam. Also,
the foreign migrations of Brāhmaṇas into South-East Asia helped extend
Bhārata’s soft power and cultural dominion over much of the region. It
was the destruction of the Brāhmaṇa class that resulted in the weakening
of Bhārata’s collective identity.

Thirdly, by making claims about how the other communities have been
deprived of the “good gene pool” of the Brāhmaṇas, one is not merely
reiterating the rather false stereotype of the exploitative and selfish
Brāhmaṇa, but is also insulting the other communities as if they made no
progress or achieved nothing significant on their own. These points
would be elaborated in a future post in greater detail.

Going to Malayadvīpa, we note one of its recent leaders who is similar
to the Prathamah Pradhānamantrin of Siṁhapurī in some crucial ways; and
yet his Parama-Vairi. We may style him as Mahādhīra or indeed the
Mahādhipa of the Malaya-Jana who had many educated leaders before and
after him, none of whom are impressive as him. Though I personally do
not like him for the Marūnmatta fanaticism and Malaya racism (which is
ironic because his father was of Ardha-Kerala descent) which served to
alienate the Indian Hindus even more than before, one has to admit that
he had a certain boldness and vision, values that are clearly lacking in
many political leaders of today. Regarding the similarities with the
Mahānītijña of Siṁhapurī, he too believes in the relationship between
ethnicity and intelligence, subtly hinting in an early book of his at
the idea that the Malaya-Jana might have poorer genes, accounting for
their weaker overall performance as compared to the other communities.

Coming back to the case of Brāhmaṇas, whatever intelligence we may have
acquired by virtue of “good genes”, it is apparent for me that those
effects are eroding rapidly. The social environments and political
cultures of Siṁhapurī and Malayadvīpa are vastly different, but they
both impact the Brāhmaṇas in profoundly adverse ways. In the former, the
unabashedly materialistic attitude towards education (all in the name of
“pragmatism”), while giving an opportunity to excel in a meritocratic
environment (with some occasional caveats), utterly destroys the
creative instinct and the idea of pursuit of knowledge for its own sake,
two great values that made the Brāhmaṇas truly worthy of reverence as a
class. As a consequence, they take a disdainful attitude towards their
own heritage, which does not bear any “practical utility” for them, and
their interests revolve around purely hedonistic and base pleasures. On
the other hand in Malayadvīpa, the alienation of the Hindus as a group
and forced imposition of the Marūnmatta faith on the whole nation, has
deprived the Brāhmaṇas of their spiritual sustenance (In contrast, there
are more than 20 temples in the very tiny Siṁhapurī and the rituals are
performed very frequently with ardour and fervour and a Kumbhābhiśekam
for a major temple can witness even a Cīna Mantrin attending as a guest
of honour with eager and respect) and the affirmative action policies in
favor of the Malaya-Jana have forced the small Brāhmaṇa population to
focus efforts on eking out a respectable living. As a result, the
Brāhmaṇas bereft of guidance themselves, let alone the ability to guide
the rest of the Hindus spiritually, have become addicted to various
“Gurus” and “Swamis” cults. With respect to even basic knowledge of
their traditions, they have become utterly powerless and meekly accept
whatever is thrown at them by a domestic priest.

I am reminded of a very short 2-day trip to Malayadvīpa during when a
Vṛddha Brāhmaṇa, who hosted my stay, told me that he wanted to ask me a
question regarding the Sandhyopāsana. As usual, I cheerfully obliged.
Apparently, he wanted to do it properly after decades of having not done
it. He then asked me to help him with the enunciation of certain words
for the gotrābhivādanam whose text a family priest and friend of his had
given him. When I examined the text, I was surprised to find that Atri
was mentioned first (Indeed he is Ātreya gotrodhbhava) but Nidhruva as
the second! I was 100% sure that Nidhruva is the son of Kaśyapa and thus
it would not make sense here. But then the answer struck me. Obviously,
his father had failed to pass the information regarding the exact
pravara and the Ṛṣis and owing to lack of practice and interest, the
information died off from memory. And being the passive recipients who
mindlessly repeat what the priests tell us at rituals without
appreciating what it is, why would any priest bother to explain? Given
the mythological precedent of Kaśyapa being the mythical ancestor of all
beings, the priest might have sincerely thought it would be a good idea
to substitute the name of Nidhruva for the unknown names of the
descendants of Atri. And this level of understanding is prevalent among
those who pride themselves to be “orthodox” Brāhmaṇas. If this should be
any indication of the eventual fate of Brāhmaṇas, then I say that fate
looks ominous.

