+++
title = "Indian Union – a result"
full_title = "Indian Union – a result of treachery, fraud, foolishness and sin"
date = "2013-06-23"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/06/23/indian-union-a-result-of-treachery-fraud-foolishness-and-sin/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/06/23/indian-union-a-result-of-treachery-fraud-foolishness-and-sin/).

Indian Union – a result of treachery, fraud, foolishness and sin

We are back from our vacation. Said vacation was filled more with
musings about the state of rAs.t.ra and dharma than with any relaxation.
Why should Hindus hold bhArata as a sacred land? What binds them to it?
Is it merely being born here? If so, should the second generation Hindus
in the Americas and Europe simply not care about bhArata?

Or is it that the biija of dharma was sown in this soil and hence, we
revere this country? But then, should we also care about our mahAmada
neighbors who have inherited the same sacred geography? To me, the
reason behind the love for what we call as ‘India’ today is a result of
its being a Hindu majority nation. It is the Hindu-ness of this nation
which makes me revere it. Of what use is a sacred place which does not
have a living culture? The nr.simha mandira of mUlasthAnapura has been
destroyed by the mahAmada-s. Of what use is that place now? It can
regain its earlier respect only when it is conquered, cleansed and made
sacred once again with a new temple.

Thus, the sacredness of land is based on three aspects – people, culture
and history. If even one of them is negative, the land loses its sacred
status. By adapting modernism and liberal communist ideals, we are
losing our roots. When we lose our roots completely, India will cease to
be a sacred land. Bali might remain the only candidate then. For even
Nepal is going to doldrums with the Communists gaining in strength.

The current trend in India is not very encouraging. Many of the
so-called Hindutva/pro-Hindu organizations are not as much pro-Hindu as
they are anti-abrahamist. Many of them are liberals who simply are
unable to free themselves completely from their traditions. They try to
solve their dilemma by inventing a new system – these misguided people
are supported by neo-vedantins and neo-yoga masters. Could this new
system replace the robust traditions? I can see only failures in its
future. Many of the new brigades have become anti-ritual. They deride
several Hindu traditions in the name of ‘modern scientific thoughts’.
Some go to the other extreme by trying to find nuclear weapons in
mahAbhArata! Neither of these two schools seems to have much sense in
their approach. Even more deplorable is the fact that very few among
these ‘pro-Hindu’ schools have actually read the vaidika, paurAn.ika and
dharmas’Astra literature in any great depth. Most of them depend on a
few neo-vedantin writers or even worse, white indologists. And the
neo-vedantin self-styled gurus who show themselves off as ‘well read’
prove to be ‘not so well read’ when you read their literature and
compare the same with our traditional texts.

Recently, I came to know about one such ‘nugget of wisdom’ given by a
popular guru: he had stated “…it is wrong to claim that there is only
one God but rather the truth is that there is only God and nothing
else”. It was claimed that he is a great exponent of s’an\~karAdvaita
literature. But this statement is so far away from the advaita of
s’an\~kara. God can be translated as iis’vara in devabhAs.A. While
san\~kara accepts the existence of an iis’vara in the vyavahArika world,
he certainly does not call the Brahman of pAramArthika satya as
iis’vara. As the famous phrase about advaita goes: ‘jiivo brahmaiva nA
paraH’. It is the soul which is brahman. To use the word ‘God’ for the
jiiva does not show valid scholarship. Rather, it is another example of
how neo-vedantins make absurd claims about traditional texts. Their
focus seems to be towards trying to prove themselves ‘more monotheistic’
than the abrahamic monotheistic religions. Such attempts are utterly
nonsensical. They are as absurd as the claims made by certain Hindus
regarding the text of the mahAmada-unmattas: “koran is about peace”,
“all religions call for peace”, “jihadis have misinterpreted koran” (as
if these brain addled guys know koran better than the mullah-s and
jihadi-s!!) etc etc.

Now, many Hindus are hailing the chief minister of gurjara as though he
is the savior of the Hindus. But they seem to have forgotten that no one
who is trying to work within this system can bring about a true change.
The very system is rigged against us. The birth of the Indian Union is
mired in treachery, fraud and foolishness. To put it in very simple
terms: when any property is split among the siblings, it has to be done
properly. One cannot give a portion to a brother and call the rest of
the property as common property. That is a farce, an injustice. The
secularists love to say that Hindus and the mahAmada-s are brothers.
Even if we accept this, the Hindus have been cheated out of their
property. While their mahAmada ‘brothers’ got Pakistan, Hindus got
nothing which they could call as theirs. Our ancestors proved to be
extremely foolish in that they never opposed this move with full force.
Even the current composition of Hindu masses seems to point that we are
mostly fools – after all, we care more about the various castes than
dharma. We care more about money and individual comforts than the state
of dharma. The meteoric rise of various jAti based parties show that we
have completely lost our vision and are running around like headless
chickens. The varn.As’rama dharma has vanished completely. We have a
perverted form of jAti system which has severed all relationship with
dharma and is nothing but a millstone around our stone now. It leads
only to internal squabbles and makes things easier for the abarahamists.

Moreover, the constitution of this Indian Union showers several special
considerations on the minorities. Hindus have been living in a
semi-dhimmi status in this land – both as a result of their mental
conditioning as well as the constitution. Unless the constitution is
changed, there can be no real empowerment of Hindus. Any government
which comes to power will be shackled by this constitution and will not
be useful to us.

The so-called pro-Hindu parties and their leaders are mostly liberals.
We cannot expect them to push for a complete change in this
constitution. Many of them do not even want a Hindu state but only a
state which does not favor minorities. This is not the solution to our
problem. This will not set right the injustice meted out to us. What is
occurring in India is a great sin. The land of dharma is being subverted
into nothing more than a cheap imitator. History shows us that the
communities with liberal tendencies die out pretty soon and are replaced
with more virile communities (read ‘Sex and Culture’ by J Unwin). By
adopting these destructive ideologies, we are moving towards a path of
self destruction. If there is no correction in near future, there will
come a day when the dharma will cease to be sanAtana and may become
extinct much like the pagan religions of Europe. Then, bhArata will also
lose its sacred status. ‘Nationalists’ seems to miss this completely.
Thus, Hindus need a new brand of politics, a paradigm shift. Otherwise,
the current brand of politics will lead to nothing but their extinction.

