+++
title = "HunterGatherer fish and"
full_title = "HunterGatherer fish and game laws"
date = "2013-09-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/09/18/hunter-gatherer-fish-and-game-laws/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/09/18/hunter-gatherer-fish-and-game-laws/).

Hunter-Gatherer fish and game laws

I don’t think that there are any. But then how did they manage to be
one-with-the-land custodians of wildlife? Uh….

Conservation is hard. Even if the population as a whole would be better
off if a given prey species persisted in fair numbers, any single
individual would benefit from cheating – even from eating the very last
mammoth.

More complicated societies, with private property and draconian laws
against poaching, do better, but even they don’t show much success in
preserving a tasty prey species over the long haul. Considers the
aurochs, the wild ancestor of the cow. The Indian version seems to have
been wiped out 4-5,000 years ago. The Eurasian version was still common
in Roman times, but was rare by the 13th century, surviving only in
Poland. Theoretically, only members of the Piast dynasty could hunt
aurochsen – but they still went extinct in 1627.

How then did edible species survive in pre-state societies? I can think
of several ways in which some species managed to survive voracious
humans, but none of them involve green intent.

First you have to realize that driving a prey species to extinction is
unusual: it doesn’t happen often with normal predators. Specialized
predators obviously can’t do it – when their prey gets scarce, so do
they. On the other hand, unspecialized predators generally won’t be as
efficient. On the gripping hand, at any given moment, a predator and its
prey have been co-evolving (and co-existing) for millions of years.
Both are highly optimized – which means that further improvements would
be difficult – and it shouldn’t easy for the predator to suddenly
develop a crushing superiority. This argument doesn’t apply to newly
introduced predators, of course.

Mass extinction is even less likely, because even an unspecialized
predator should become rare when the total amount of prey (all relevant
species) goes way down.. Unless this potent predator is really an
omnivore — but that means even less specialization in predation.
Omnivores (bears, for example) usually aren’t that effective.

If we go back far enough, protohumans simply weren’t very good hunters,
because they weren’t smart. Lions manage to be pretty good predators
without being particularly smart, but humans, who don’t have impressive
natural armament, have to succeed in hunting through tools and social
cooperation. They were probably death on turtles early on, but in
general early humans advanced slowly, giving prey species lots of time
to adapt – African and Eurasian species, that is.

The pace of innovation gradually increased, and I can think of some
species in Africa and Eurasia that were probably ganked by humans a long
time ago – but it wasn’t dramatic. Progress in hunting, new tactics and
weapons, was still slow enough to allow adaptive response in prey
species. Consider the Neanderthals: I can’t think of a single species
they wiped out.  Wimps.

By the Upper Paleolithic, modern humans were innovating much more
rapidly, and human-driven extinction starts to become really important.
It wasn’t just better hunting that mattered. Better food preparation –
getting more out of each carcass – increased human density, and thus
hunting intensity. You might think that greater efficiency would mean
that we didn’t need to bring down as many beasts – not so, in a
Malthusian world.

Developing new ways of gathering food other than hunting, such as
fishing and better preparation of plant foods, meant that human density
could stay high even as mammal biomass crashed. Innovations in clothing
and housing let people colonize the high Arctic, and eventually the
Americas. Invention of boats and rafts led to the colonization of
Australia and numerous islands.

We were omnivores and generalists: population collapse of prey species
couldn’t stop us. We could kill anything – but the biggest threat of
extinction was to large animals, which were worth a lot (mucho calories
for the tribe) and bred slowly. Worst off were those animals that had
never had a chance to adapt to humans.

There were some modifying factors. It probably wasn’t just adaptation
to humans that saved much of the African megafauna: African pathogens
may have played a role too, keeping human numbers down and possibly even
creating natural game preserves (I’m thinking of sleeping sickness).
Contrariwise, Australia and the Americas were almost disease-free, as
far as humans were concerned.

War is bad for us, good for our prey. The no-man’s land between
hostile tribes is oddly full of game, since people are afraid to go
there. In much the same way, rabbits flourished next to the Berlin
Wall, while Asiatic black bears and musk deer inhabit the Korean DMZ.

It may be that it took some time for the original Paleoindians to split
into hostile tribes: life may have been particularly difficult for the
megafauna during that period.

It’s also possible that there was enough violence to reduce human
density below the caloric Malthusian limit.

Once in a while a local taboo may have preserved a species, but it would
have have to have lasted a long long time to keep a species alive until
today. Unlikely.

Blitzkrieg may be not quite the right word, but dense megafauna should
have been able to sustain a fairly dense human population – for a while.
After most of the megafauna bit the dust, human population density
would have decreased (remember, this was before agriculture), and this
might have saved some of the medium-sized animals that we still have
today, like white-tailed deer: not as valuable a target as the giants,
just as hard to catch, and more prolific.

Modern humans meant to make tools, and meant to have steaks, but there’s
no reason to think that anyone intended to drive anything to extinction,
or tried to avoid such extinction. I will say that some of the
PaleoIndians may have heard their grandfathers complaining about how
much better hunting was in their day (and how the strawberries were
sweeter, and the girls prettier) – but I doubt if anyone listened.

