+++
title = "International Seminar at"
full_title = "International Seminar at RMIC, Gol Park, Kolkata"
date = "2018-01-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/28/international-seminar-at-rmic-gol-park-kolkata/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/28/international-seminar-at-rmic-gol-park-kolkata/).

International Seminar at RMIC, Gol Park, Kolkata

![Ramakrishna Mission Institute Center, Gol
Park](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/38735149414_87f9a82c86_o-300x300.jpg)

At the beginning of January, I traveled from Singapore to Kolkata to
join a group of scholars from around India as well as the US and New
Zealand–this was for a seminar at the [Ramakrishna Mission Institute of
Culture](http://sriramakrishna.org/) that Jaysankar Lal Shaw organized
in his efforts to engage in what he calls
“cross-cultural-multidisciplinary philosophy.” For administrative and
organizational reasons that I’m not privy to, the seminar was conjoined
with a commemoration of Sister Nivedita’s 150th birth anniversary, and
so the seminar had two components.

There’s no way I can do justice to all of the talks in a single blog
post, and anyway, Anand Vaidya, who also attended and was part of
organizing, will be posting–plus there will be a seminar proceedings
published at some point. Instead, this post aims to reflect on the
variety of methods and topics that fell under the heading of
“cross-cultural-multidisciplinary philosophy.”

**1. Thoughts on methodology in general**

![JL Shaw delivering
keynote.](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/RMIC-ShawKeynote_Fotor-207x300.jpg)

There were a range of different approaches to Indian philosophy at the
seminar. Prof. J.L. Shaw’s keynote set out an argument that Indian
philosophy, in particular Nyāya, is able to resolve some difficult
problems endemic to Western philosophy. For instance, since Nyāya
doesn’t postulate such tertiary entities as propositions, their approach
to truth, that is, the truth of cognitions, can dissolve some
pseudo-problems plaguing philosophy in the West. (This theme is familiar
terrain for readers of Shaw’s work.) In a presentation that struck me as
a challenge to this approach, Prof. Nirmalya Narayan Chakraborty’s panel
presentation, “Cross-Cultural-Multi-Disciplinary-Philosophy” argued that
comparative philosophy of the often-called “Matilal strategy” is
inappropriately defensive, taking Western problems as a starting-point,
and trying to show that Indian thinkers could rise to equality with
them.

Most presentations did not touch on methodology explicitly–though Prof.
Anand Vaidya’s did, which I will get to in a moment–but the presence of
Sister Nivedita (visually and thematically) in the conference proved an
interesting place for reflection. There were a few papers, mostly
historical in nature, discussing her life and work. Three opening short
lectures: Swami Abhiramanandaji, “Why do we adore Sister Nivedita?”,
Prof. Radharaman Chakrabarti, “Sister Nivedita–Her Social Philosophy,”
Sri Sakti Prasad Mishra, “Sister Nivedita and Indian Nationalism,” and
then some academic sessions: Prof. Indrani Sanyal, “Sister Nivedita and
Sri Aurobindo,” Prof. Tapan Chakraborty, “Philosophy of Sister
Nivedita,” and Prof. V.N. Sheshagiri Rao, “Sister Nivedita’s Humanistic
Interpretation of Swami Vivekananda–A Reappraisal.” From these talks
emerged a few themes. First, Nivedita (born Margaret Noble) was
respected for her willingness to enter into the viewpoint of her new
home in India, challenging, for instance, the lack of women’s education
on the basis of traditional viewpoints and not Western sensibilities.
Second, there was a lot of controversy over her position vis a vis the
nationalist movement. Prof. Indrani Sanyal used the term [“terrorism,”
taken from Sri Aurobindo’s own
writings](https://www.aurobindo.ru/workings/sa/37_08/0209_e.htm), in the
course of reflecting on Aurobindo and Nivedita’s positions regarding
violence. This led to a lot of heated discussion about the valence of
the term, the propriety of its use, and whether Nivedita constituted a
“freedom fighter” or not.

[![File 15-1-18, 8 08 16
PM](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/File-15-1-18-8-08-16-PM-e1516018199805-225x300.jpeg)](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/File-15-1-18-8-08-16-PM-e1516018199805.jpeg)The
political implications of philosophical methodology became quite
apparent during the course of the seminar–whether in the choice of terms
(avoiding or using “terrorism” when it was present in an original text)
or topics (avoiding or using “Western” categories in “comparative”
thought). On that second topic, I’ll incidentally recommend Alexus
McLeod’s article “[Methodology in Chinese-Indian Comparative
Philosophy](https://t.co/VpfhU9W7Zk),” in the Bloomsbury Research
Handbook of Chinese Philosophy Methodologies (Ed. Sor-hoon Tan), 2016,
as he points out the implications of avoiding Western categories in
favor of doing “East-East” comparative work. In any case, despite not
learning much about what Sister Nivedita’s actual arguments were–I
suppose for that I’ll need to read [her complete
works](http://www.holybooks.com/wp-content/uploads/The-Complete-Works-of-Sister-Nivedita-Vol-1.pdf)–I
found the discussion around her as a historical figure educational.

**2. Historical, intra-traditional, and constructive approaches**

There are always a number of ways to carve out categories, but this
seminar seemed to me to include three main kinds of approaches to Indian
philosophy. One is historical, in the sense of using textual (primarily,
though it needn’t exclude material) resources to understand the
development of Indian thought. My own paper on Kumārila Bhaṭṭa and his
engagement with Dignāga in the *Tantravārttika* is an example of this
approach, as was Prof. Samiran Chandra Chakrabarti’s “Evolution of Vedic
Rituals,” which traced the development of the paribhāṣa-s in the
śrautasūtra-s. Neither paper really attempted to engage comparatively
with Western categories–mine mentioned that the problem of non-referring
terms is an issue for other thinkers, too, but my thesis was not that
Kumārila’s approach is (or is not) a solution to this issue in the West.
Instead, my focus was understanding the dialectic between a
*pūrvapakṣin* and Kumārila through identifying the thinkers represented,
by doing textual work. Further, neither of these papers presented the
authors as being within or without the tradition–although Prof.
Chakrabarti’s opening Vedic chants did indicate a difference between his
position and mine with regard to the tradition! Still, the arguments
therein were not dependent on staking a claim about the tradition’s
veracity.

![Professors Indrani Sanyal, Krishna Roy, and Tara
Chatterjee](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/RMIC-ISanyalKRay-and-TChatterjee_Fotor-219x300.jpg)

In contrast, there were some talks which were presented as being
explicitly within the tradition. For instance, Prof. Rupa Bandyopadhyay
explicitly presented her talk, “The Nyāya and the Advaitic theories of
erroneous perception” as assuming the Nyāya tradition’s viewpoint, as
did Prof. Prabal Kumar Sen’s “Samshaya and Samshayavaada.” Sen was
focusing on understanding the different views of the relationship
between cognition and doubt, while Bandhyopadhyay the relationship
between genuine and erroneous perception. These talks were scholarly in
their range of knowledge of the Sanskrit texts–in question and answer,
the speakers were able to recite passages from memory to speak to
questions. And during question and answer, some audience members brought
up connections with other Indian textual traditions as well as Western
philosophy.

![Professors Anand Vaidya, V.N. Sheshagiri Rao, P.K. Sen, and
Purushottama Billimoria, with JL Shaw with
microphone.](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/RMIC-VaidyaRaoSenBillimoriaShaw_Fotor-300x204.jpg)

Other talks engaged in a “constructive” approach–which is not to say
that the speaker did not identify themself as being within, or speaking
from a particular tradition (for instance, Jay Shaw’s work is Nyāya in
its orientation, and Anand Vaidya’s training is analytic). However,
these talks aimed to bring Indian philosophy into conversation with
other traditions. These included (and here I omit summary for the sake
of space) Prof. Anand Vaidya’s “Perception and Panpsychism: Nyāya and
Vedānta Philosophy in Conversation with Analytic Philosophy,” Prof.
Ramakrishna Bhattacharya’s “Materialism in the East and the West,” Prof.
Amita Chatterjee’s “Do Our Epistemic Intuitions Vary Across Cultures?”,
Prof. Purushottama Billimoria’s “Aestheticizing Dharma’s Pathos:
Mahābhārata to Tagore’s Paintings and Poems,” Br. Ayon Maharaj’s “Hard
Theological Determinism and the Illusion of Free Will: Sri Ramakrishna
Meets Lord Kames and Saul Smilansky,” and Prof. Laura Guerrero’s
“Buddhist Pan-metaphoricalism, Fictionalism, and Meaning” (not on the
program, but a replacement for Prof. Kalyan Baghchi’s talk. The
methodology in these talks varied–to take just a few examples: Anand
Vaidya’s approach (as he’s discussed here before) is to integrate
experimental philosophy, comparative philosophy, and analytic
philosophy, whereas Ramakrishna Bhattacarya’s talk was more in the
classical comparative style, and Amita Chatterjee was interested in a
critical take on the methodology of work in experimental philosophy
using Śrīharṣa’s method of presenting cases as a corrective from within
the Indian tradition.

![Profs. Chakrabarti and Billimoria discussing Frits Staal and Vedic
mantras, with Prof. Krishna Roy
moderating.](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/RMIC-Chakrabarti-Bilimoria_Fotor-300x205.jpg)

**3. Comparative philosophy is inevitable**

Prof. Nirmalya Narayan Chakraborty said in his talk entitled
“Cross-Cultural-Multidisciplinary Philosophy” that, for students in
India, comparative philosophy is inevitable. (I think about this
sometimes when analytic philosophers ask for evidence that other
countries like China and India take Western philosophy seriously–as if
its study there would be a simple inverse case to the study of Chinese
and Indian philosophy in the US.) While the kind of comparative
philosophy he’s discussing is a particular sort–that of
Indian/European-“Western” comparison, I think I agree with those who
would say comparative philosophy, understood in another way, is
inevitable anywhere. While there may be more in common historically
between, say, Quine and Sellars, than Śrī Harṣa and Zhuangzi (to take
two possible points of comparison), still, analytic philosophers working
on the former pair, or any other discussion in which more than one
philosopher’s work is interpreted and engaged with, are doing
comparison. It’s just not always with awareness that they are doing so.
Chakraborty’s talk focused on the different ways in which philosophers
in India engaged in comparison from the colonial period onwards, and how
it ought to be done, further. His talk generated a lot of discussion
about how to characterize this history (for instance, he characterizes
B.K. Matilal’s work as part of a “defensive” style which tried to show
Indian philosophy was on part with Western thought) as well as what
lessons to draw from it.

What emerged, for me, at least, out of this wealth of topics and
approaches was a simultaneous sense of the potential for work in Indian
philosophy along with the difficulty of–and importance of–collaboration
among philosophers with these different skills and approaches. Often,
question-and-answer sessions were comprised of ground-clearing and
confusion-elimination rather than making substantive philosophical
progress on a problem, since the motivations for, and implication of, a
question from (for instance) an analytically-trained philosopher aren’t
always immediately apparent to someone more historically or
intra-traditionally grounded, and vice versa. (Although, frankly,
ground-clearing and confusion-elimination can be themselves forms of
progress.) There are always difficulties with finding common vocabulary,
identifying where assumptions overlap, and so on–but this, in my mind,
speaks to the importance of more practice at this kind of conversation,
and in finding willing participants with the ability and patience for
navigating it.

![Profs. Nirmalya Narayan Chakraborty, Kuntala Bhattacharya, J.L. Shaw,
Sabujkoli Sen, Uma Chattopadhyay, and Br.
Ayon.](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/RMIC-ChakrabortyBhattacharyaShawSenChattopadhyayAyon_Fotor-300x162.jpg)

Please note that all images are by Malcolm Keating, 2018.  
[![Creative Commons
License](https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/)  
This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/).
