+++
title = "Ultimate and"
full_title = "Ultimate and conventional truth in Wilfrid Sellars"
date = "2018-01-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/).

Ultimate and conventional truth in Wilfrid Sellars

Let me begin with a guessing game, for those readers who consider
themselves relatively widely read in philosophy. I am thinking of a text
that examines two different views of human beings. It examines on one
hand the view that humans are entities that act on the world of the sort
that one can tell stories about, using language, living in communities,
giving and taking. It juxtaposes this view on the other hand with the
view that humans are collections of smaller imperceptible particles that
operate strictly according to universal laws of causation. The texts
comes to the conclusion that the latter view is the one that corresponds
to reality, with the former simply an appearance or convenient way of
speaking. Which text is this?

If you guessed [Wilfrid
Sellars](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/sellars/)‘s “Philosophy and
the scientific image of man”, you would be right. If you guessed the
[Milindapañhā](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milinda_Panha), the
Questions of King Menander – or the Theravāda texts that follow it, such
as Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga or many Abhidhamma texts – you would also
be right.

When I read Sellars’s article this analogy was striking to me. Sellars
is situated firmly within the twentieth-century
[analytic](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/analytic-and-continental-philosophy/)
tradition of English-language philosophy. Unlike his fellow analytic
philosopher [Derek Parfit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derek_Parfit),
who had at least a passing familiarity with Buddhism that he places in
an appendix to his very Buddhist-like *Reasons and Persons*, I have seen
no evidence that Sellars knew or cared about Buddhist philosophy. And
yet the position Sellars describes is one startlingly similar to way
Theravāda Buddhists describe the distinction between ultimate and
conventional truth. (It is quite different from the way *Madhyamaka*
Buddhists, like Śāntideva, describe that distinction – but that is to be
expected, since their position arose as a critique of the views in the
Theravāda Abhidhamma.)

The basic issue here is the application of
[atomism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/)
to human beings, to persons. Many philosophers through the ages have
come to an atomist position of some sort, according to which things are
reducible to imperceptible individual particles; for example that was
the position of Democritus and Epicurus, the subjects of [Karl Marx’s
dissertation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/02/the-very-young-marx/).
Of course modern biologists and physicists, with the help of microscopes
and similar tools, have examined worldly phenomena and observed an
ever-smaller series of particles that make them up. What Sellars’s
article does is acknowledge that human beings are made up of those
particles, and then take up the question of what to do about our
everyday “manifest” picture of human beings as the kind of beings who
act on the world with distinct individuality, the kind we can tell
stories about.

It is in taking up that question that Sellars’s concern comes very close
to the Milindapañhā, which may be the oldest Buddhist text to articulate
a distinction between conventional and ultimate truth. The monk Nāgasena
insists to the Greek king Menander (Milinda, in Pali) that while
*ultimately* (*paramathato*) the person (*puggala*) is not to be found,
he can still speak of himself and of the king as a convention
(*voharo*), a mere name (*nāmamatta*). (p. 28 in the PTS edition) But
the ultimate reality described here is not the ineffable,
uncharacterizable reality pointed to by the later Madhyamaka tradition.
Rather, it can quite accurately be characterized and described, as
[atomized
parts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/).
A chariot has no ultimate existence any more than a person does; what
*does* have that ultimate existence is the chariot’s *parts*, the
wheels, the axle and so on. And so likewise, the person has no ultimate
existence, but what *does* ultimately exist is the [five
aggregates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skandha) – material pieces
like hairs and bones, and sensations (*vedanā*), concepts (*saññā*),
memory traces (*saṅkhāra*) and consciousness (*viññāna*).

The biggest difference between Sellars’s scientific picture and the
Milindapañhā’s: the Buddhist view departs not only from modern science
but from Democritus, Epicurus and Marx in that it is not at all
*materialist*. The particles that make us up can be organized into five
\_khandha_s – bundles, “aggregates” – and only \*one\* of these consists
of matter. The other four are mental. For Sellars, by contrast, the
scientific image is characterized by its physicality and materiality.

Yet just like the Milindapañhā, Sellars’s scientific image is a
*reductionist* one – even an atomist one. The scientific image is not
inhabited by persons, or for that matter by chariots, but by minute
entities like cells, biochemical compounds – and atoms. And where the
similarity between the two gets most striking is when Sellars describes
the manifest image: “The point I wish to make now is that since this
image has a being which transcends the individual thinker, *there is
truth and error with respect to it, even though the image itself might
have to be rejected, in the last analysis, as false.*” (“Philosophy” 14,
emphasis in original)

The manifest image, with its persons and tables and chairs, at least may
not be true in the “last analysis” – which is exactly to say that it may
not be *ultimately* true! And yet there is still truth and error with
respect to it – a truth we can reasonably call conventional. The
ultimate truth is constituted by small particles, not by King Menander
or his chariot. Yet conventionally it is still true to say King Menander
arrived at the discussion in a chariot – as it would be *false* to say
that he arrived in an airplane. This much, Sellars and the Milinda
share. And it suggests that Buddhists and modern scientific philosophers
have something to learn from each other, since both are engaged in the
project of trying to square a precise reductionist understanding of
reality with a more conventional world of human beings and everyday
objects.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/01/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/)
