+++
title = "Notice of online course"
full_title = "Notice of online course in Indian philosophy"
date = "2018-01-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/26/notice-of-online-course-in-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/26/notice-of-online-course-in-indian-philosophy/).

Notice of online course in Indian philosophy

Submitted byMelanie Johnson-Moxley:

PHIL 4810/7810  
PHILOSOPHY OF INDIA  
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI-COLUMBIA

Instructor: Dr. Bina Gupta, Curators’ Research Professor Emerita of
Philosophy

Semester: 4-week online summer course, starts June 4 and ends June 30,
2018.

Course Description: “Indian Philosophy” refers to the philosophical
concepts, theories, and schools that developed in the Indian
sub-continent. Leaving aside some of the foundational texts of Indian
philosophy as the Vedas, the Upaniṣads, and the Gītā, the course will
focus on the classical schools of Indian philosophy, e.g., Buddhism,
Sāṃkhya, and Vedānta. The course is intended to correct a number of
common misconceptions about Indian philosophy, such as the idea that
Indian philosophy lacks theoretical rigor, that it is theology at best,
and that it is motivated by practical concerns rather than the
disinterested search for theoretical knowledge that (allegedly)
characterizes Western philosophy. It will demonstrate that there exist
an amazing variety of epistemological, metaphysical, and ethical
conceptions in Indian philosophy. These conceptions contain very
sophisticated arguments and counter-arguments that were advanced by the
defenders of each thesis and its opponents. No philosophy or
philosophical system exists in a vacuum; a philosophy neither originates
nor develops bereft of some undergirding context. It is a product of the
contemporaneous and preceding cultures and exerts a decisive formative
influence on the social and cultural achievements of ages that follow.
Keeping this in view, though the schools will be introduced in
historical order, the exposition of each school will focus on certain
key questions and issues. The primary goal of the course is to bring out
the theoretical, discursive rigor of Indian philosophy, using analytic,
exegetical, and phenomenological methodologies.

Course Specifics: This is an instructor-led course with weekly
assignments in the Canvas learning platform through Mizzou Online. 3
credit hours. Meets humanities requirement for Gen Ed. Prerequisite:
sophomore standing. Recommended: one prior course in philosophy. Course
credit from Mizzou Online courses can be transferred to other colleges
and universities.

Online Course Access: Early Summer 2018 enrollment begins on March 5,
and regular registration one week prior to the start of the classes. For
registration, visit [https://online.missouri.edu/enrollment-
procedures/registration-dates.aspx](https://online.missouri.edu/enrollment-%20procedures/registration-dates.aspx).
For information about Mizzou Online, visit online.missouri.edu. If you
have difficulty logging in to the course or you do not see the course
listed, please contact the Mizzou IT Help Desk.

About the Instructor: Dr. Bina Gupta is a University of Missouri
Curators’ Distinguished Professor Emerita. She been researching, writing
and teaching in Indian and comparative philosophy for more than four
decades. She has authored or edited thirteen books—including An
Introduction to Indian Philosophy, Reason and Experience in Indian
Philosophy, The Empirical and the Transcendental: A Fusion of Horizons,
and Consciousness, Knowledge and Ignorance. She has given more than 150
addresses, presentations, and commentaries at conferences worldwide.

[Final Indian Phil Flyer
REV](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/01/Final-Indian-Phil-Flyer-REV.pdf)
