+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-06-16"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/16/laguda-sadhana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/16/laguda-sadhana/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## laguDa sAdhana

Note on the laguDa sAdhana mentioned in the kAlI tantra:

On the specific amAvAsya which also happens to be Tuesday, the vIra is
to bring a branch of viShNukrAnta and bury it in the shmashAna. While
not clearly given in the mUla, we perhaps should assume that the sAdhaka
is to acquire a shava and place it in the location where the branch is
buried. Then he acquires a live fish from the fish-market and places the
fish in water (in a water container presumably) while uttering the mUla
mantra, in the shmashAna. With this jala an abhiSheka is performed to
the corpse. After smearing his eyes with this jala, like an a\~njana, he
offers parts of the fish on the head, heart, stomach, and face of the
corpse.

A japa is then done which supposedly grants the vision the sAdhaka a
vision of bhairava holding a laguDa. The sAdhaka is to perform the japa
looking at the bhairava unperturbed and without fear. If the sAdhaka has
enough bhAgya it is said that bhairava may offer him the laguDa through
which he might roam around like vishveshvara.

Some details seems unclear and incomplete in the text but bear
similarity to the [procedure outlined in the
kulachUDAmaNi](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/page/2/)

This entry was posted on June 16, 2021 at 10:33 am and is filed under
[kAlI](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/shakta/kali/),
[shAkta](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/shakta/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/16/laguda-sadhana/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/16/laguda-sadhana/trackback/)
from your own site.

