+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-06-24"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/24/garudopasana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/24/garudopasana/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## garuDopAsana

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/garuda-thangka.jpg?w=544)

Like in many topics of interest to a Hindu, the earliest references to
garuDa come from the shruti. Of particular note would be the
[atharvavedIya tArkShya
yAga](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/08/25/atharvavediya-tarkshya-yaga/)
along with the standard vaidika mantra-s (suparNosi garutmAn…) and the
[vaidika-tAntrika
deployment](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/08/19/veda-mantrokta-ashu-garuda-vidya/)
of the gAruDa vidya.

Though popular as the vAhana of nArAyaNa, garuDa upAsana can be
independent of vaiShNava or shaiva associations. This becomes apparent
on seeing the atharvavedIya tArkShya yAga and also by looking at
procedures of gAruDa sAdhana-s in some lineages, the deployments of
which are independent of viShNu or vaiShNava mantra-s. This gains
strength when examining the shloka-s explaining the garuDa tattva where
he is praised as the form of indra, hayagrIva, viShNu, dhAta and vidhAta
and essentially as sarvadevAtmaka. Such upAsana and deployments might
constitute the earliest elements/phases of garuDa upAsana.

At a next stage, garuDa gets associated with the vaiShNava and shaiva
sAdhana-s. gAruDa vidya-s have become an essential aspect of these new
mata-s where the success gained through gAruDa deployments are
attributed to the respective highest deities of those mata-s. The
shaiva, parAkhya tantra refers to the efficacy of gAruDa mantra-s and
draws analogy to further it’s siddhanta, while a vaiShNava might point
out to an implicit paratva of nArAyaNa by referring to the efficacy of
garuDopAsana, though the later might not be the standard approach with
texts or AchArya-s of those traditions. The idea being that, as viShNu
is propitiated by garuDa, the former must be capable of granting
higher/greater phala than garuDa.

The efficacy of garuDopAsana is recognized, acknowledged and adopted
sincerely by both nAstika mata-s. The importance of garuDopAsana is
clear when a bauddha text draws attention to the efficacy of gAruDa
mantra-s as an analogy to explain the working of bauddha mantra-s,
similar to the shaiva parAkhya. The jaina mantra manuals on the other
hand recommend the upAsana of garuDa either independently or at times
combined with other mantra-s.

In the shaiva realm:

As a lot is already written on this topic by various
[scholars](https://garudam.info/), not much will be said other than
citing references where requried. A list of [shaiva gAruDa tantra-s can
be seen in this
link](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/03/26/the-primary-tantras-of-rudra/)
the same of which is reproduced below and only the AkAsha bhairava
kalpa’s gAruDa material will be mentioned in addition to the below.

“***purvasrotas- gAruDa tantras***  
1) haram 2) hu\~NkAraM 3) bindusAraM 4) kalAmR^itaM 5) devatrAsaM 6)
sutrAsaM 7) shabaraM 8) kAlashabaraM 9) pakShiRajaM 10) shikhAyogaM 11)
shikhAsAraM 12) shikhAmR^itaM 13) pa\~nchabhUtaM 14) vibhAgaM 15)
shulyabhedavinirNayaM 16) kAlaShThaM 17) kAlA\~NgaM 18) kAlakUTaM 19)
paTadrumaM 20) kambhojaM 21) kambalaM 22) kuMkumaM 23) kALakuNdaM 24)
kaTAhakaM 25) suvarNanekhaM 26) sugrIvaM 27) totalaM 28) totalottaraM”

As viSha bAdha is something that can afflict all beings, one can find
practitioners of gAruDa vidyA-s among many sections of the society from
well versed vaidika and Agamika scholars to the Hindu laity and beyond.
It is no surprise then, that a good number of nAstika-s and even the
Islamic sorcerers take up the practice of garuDa mantra-s, as unlike
moxa (or the vague and unverifiable theories associated with the
subject), the success of viShamantravAda is either apparent in a matter
of minutes or not, like in this example: A certain successful case of
viShamantravAda along with an occidental academic treatment of gAruDa
material can be found in
[Garudam](http://garudam.info/files/Scorpion%20Sting.mp3).

The Muslim mantrin Abdul Sattar from Andhra desha has in his collection,
a long garuDa mAlA mantra which begins like a Sanskrit daNDaka with more
Telugu pada-s towards the end, and the usage we are informed, is not
only as a panacea for viSha bAdha, but has a wider application like
those of “high deities”. In the Hindu tAntrika tradition, part from
viShamantravAda, gAruDa deployments can be seen in the context of
breaking some of the most severe tAntrika prayoga-s involving the
mahAvidyA-s.

Among the bauddha tAntrika-s, we see garuDa being deployed for both
offensive and defensive purposes as can be seen in various anecdotes as
also in some bauddha texts. In [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=glAeITjrVSg&t=1918s) we see a
bauddha AchArya instruct his students in the practice of the bauddha
Black garuDa as a defense against the SARS virus. While details can be
delved into at a different time, there are few other bauddha practices
which deploy garuDa mantra-s for “weather magic”, primarily with the
intent to protect crops. In the jaina realm, we see the standard garuDa
pa\~nchAkShari deployment in the bhairava padmAvatI kalpa. In a
different place, jaina mantra manuals suggest the usage of a certain
chaNDa garuDa mantra which is combined with shaiva and vaiShNava
mantra-s.

There are few forms of garuDa in both the Hindu and Buddhist tAntrika
traditions. The bauddha forms are more popular over the internet which
go as [red garuDa, green garuDa or the famous nine headed black
garuDa](http://tibetanbuddhistencyclopedia.com/en/index.php/Garuda_Rituals).
In the Hindu realm one can find different forms in the kAshyapa saMhita.
In the context of aghora-nR^isiMha AvaraNa pUja, we find the mention of
shrI garuDa, tArkShya garuDa, Ashu garuDa, kShipra garuDa, svarNa
garuDa, mR^ityu garuDa and ketu garuDa.

[See this for a brief and well informed note of garuDa upAsana from
kAmakoTi
maNDali.](https://www.kamakotimandali.com/2021/03/31/garu%e1%b8%8da-upasana/)

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/image.png?w=445)

![<https://www.himalayanart.org/>](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/image-1.png?w=543)

![<https://www.himalayanart.org/>](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/image-2.png?w=616)

This entry was posted on June 24, 2021 at 11:18 am and is filed under
[gAruDa
tantra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/garuda-tantra/),
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/24/garudopasana/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/06/24/garudopasana/trackback/)
from your own site.

