+++
title = "Event on Ethan Mills’"
full_title = "Event on Ethan Mills’ “Three Pillars of Skepticism in Classical Indian Philosophy”"
date = "2019-02-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/02/19/event-on-ethan-mills-three-pillars-of-skepticism-in-classical-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/02/19/event-on-ethan-mills-three-pillars-of-skepticism-in-classical-indian-philosophy/).

Event on Ethan Mills’ “Three Pillars of Skepticism in Classical Indian Philosophy”

Readers who are in Singapore may be interested in an upcoming book
discussion hosted by the Bras Basah Open and Yale-NUS College, on
Thursday, 7 March 2019 from 20:00-22:00 UTC+08. From the [Facebook
Event](https://www.facebook.com/events/799147423772781/) description:

[![Copy of register at
youthnetworkcon2019.com](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/02/skepticism_poster-1-212x300.jpg)](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/02/skepticism_poster-1.jpg)This
is a discussion on skepticism about philosophy in late Classical India,
with reference to Ethan Mill’s work Three Pillars of Skepticism in
Classical India: Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi, and Śrī Harṣa (Rowman, 2018).
Through a study of the “three pillars” of Indian skepticism near the
beginning, middle, and end of the classical era: Nāgārjuna (c. 150-200
CE), Jayarāśi (c. 770-830 CE), and Śrī Harṣa (c. 1125-1180 CE), the book
argues that there is a category of skepticism often overlooked by
philosophers today, that is, skepticism about philosophy. This book will
show how late classical Indian philosophical discourses can illuminate
understandings of the limits and value of philosophy today.

This discussion will be led and moderated by Farhan Idris and Malcolm
Keating. Farhan Idris will outline the arguments in the book, and
elaborate on the theme ‘skepticism about philosophy’. Malcolm Keating
will be providing us with the philosophical contexts of skepticism in
classical Indian philosophy. They will then engage Ethan Mills, who will
be present via teleconference, about his book. Participants will be able
to pose questions and engage with the author during the session.
Readings (selected chapters) will be provided by email after
registration.

Please register here to receive the readings:
<https://brasbasahopen.typeform.com/to/cOB7Kx>

7th March (Thurs), 8-10pm, Yale-NUS College, Classroom 18 (Cendana),
Ground Floor

For readers outside of Singapore, we will try (technology willing!) to
record the conversation via Skype so that it can be available after the
event.


