+++
title = "Emotions in"
full_title = "Emotions in Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta philosophy Distance and closeness"
date = "2019-02-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/02/02/emotions-in-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-philosophy-distance-and-closeness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/02/02/emotions-in-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-philosophy-distance-and-closeness/).

Emotions in Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta philosophy: Distance and closeness

The main thing which stroke me when I started working on the theory of
emotions in Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta is that emotions can be useful and are
not to be avoided. In other words, unlike some Sāṅkhya-Yoga
philosophers, the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta authors do not think that one
should aim at some form of ataraxìa. Why not? Because one needs emotions
in order to start one’s path towards the good. Moreover, emotions are
not just useful as preliminary steps, insofar as emotions are present
also in the liberated state (again, unlike in the Sāṅkhya, Yoga and also
Nyāya and Buddhist Theravāda schools).

This does not mean that all emotions are necessarily good. The emotions
which are praised are, chronologically speaking, dejection and
desperation and then confidence, love (ranging from friendship to
passion and awe) and possibly compassion.

Dejection and the absolute desperation in one’s ability to improve one’s
condition are absolutely needed at the start of one’s spiritual path. In
fact, as long as one thinks to be able to achieve something, no matter
how small, one is unconsciously doubting God’s omnipotence and locating
oneself above Him. Paradoxically, one’s extreme dejection and the
feeling that one will never be saved, since one is not even worthy of
begging God for help, are therefore the preliminary step for God’s grace
to take place. One’s feeling of extreme distance from God is therefore
way closer to Him than the self-conscious confidence of a person who
were to think that they are a good Vaiṣṇava.

Once God’s grace has touched one, one feels blissed and joyfully
responds to God’s grace with an emotional overflow of confidence and of
love. The hymns of the Āḻvārs, which have been recognised as being as
authoritative as the Veda for Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, display a vast
array of love. One can love God with maternal love (*vātsalya*), looking
at Him as if he were the young Kṛṣṇa. One could also love God with
admiration, looking at Him as the ideal king Rāma, and so on. This vast
array is less variegated in the reflections of the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta
philosophers, who rather focus on their feeling of reverence and awe for
God. For instance, Tamil and Maṇipravāḷa texts insist on one’s being a
slave (*aṭiyēṉ*) of God.

The interesting element here is that this feeling is not instrumental to
the achievement of God’s favour. One does not present oneself as a slave
in order to secure God’s favour and then be able to raise to a higher
status. By contrast, one’s ideal condition, the liberated state one
strives to reach is exactly permanent servitude (as described in
Veṅkaṭanātha’s *Rahasyatrayasāra*).

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
