+++
title = "Why bother to look at"
full_title = "Why bother to look at material from South Asia, when there is so much interesting stuff in “our” tradition?"
date = "2019-02-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/02/26/why-bother-to-look-at-material-from-south-asia-when-there-is-so-much-interesting-stuff-in-our-tradition/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/02/26/why-bother-to-look-at-material-from-south-asia-when-there-is-so-much-interesting-stuff-in-our-tradition/).

Why bother to look at material from South Asia, when there is so much interesting stuff in “our” tradition?

From time to time and never by scholars, I am confronted with some
variant of this question: “Why bother to look at material from South
Asia, when there is so much interesting stuff in
`our'' tradition?". As examples for the richness of`our” tradition the
Bible, the Ancient Greek and Latin classics, European philosophy etc.
are mentioned.

Once again, let me repeat that I never received this question from
scholars, who at most would say something like “It would be nice to deal
with it, unfortunately I am too busy with my own materials”. Scholars
know all too well that research is not and cannot be a priori limited by
geographic, historical or cultural boundaries. **If one were to a priori
limit one’s research to a specific geographic, historical or cultural
area, one would run the serious risk to mistake presuppositions typical
of the area one researches about with intuitions of general value or
even “universal” elements of human understanding.** This risk is even
higher if one is researching on the same cultural area one belongs to,
because in that case no distantiation at all may take place.

For instance, let us consider a linguist who were to do research on
their own mother-tongue and decide that number and gender are “basic
categories of language”, and perhaps even affirm that there are only two
numbers and three genders. Would not one laugh at the linguist’s
naivety? Would not one immediately object that they should study further
languages and check whether their conclusion are right against the
background of such languages?

The same would apply to the case of an ethicist who never researched
into ethical systems different than the one they were educated in. Would
not one say that they risk to mistake their own ethical values with
universal ones?

Long story short, **one needs to go outside one’s own house in order to
see it in the right perspective**. This is also the reason why I
strongly recommend to all students to take some classes dealing with
topics which are far away from them in history, culture or geography.
Even if they want to specialise on, say, art-history or medicine as they
know it in their own country, they should reach out to gain a broader
perspective. This suggestion of mine becomes even more imperative in the
case of philosophy. As a matter of fact, a philosopher should first of
all be someone who is not afraid to ask questions and unsettle what they
thought to be the case. Therefore, they must also constantly look for
stimuli from the outside, which could prompt new questions and new
unsettlements.

Thus, if we refrain from engaging with other perspectives, we would do
better by calling things by their names and call our departments
“Euro-American psychology/architecture/literature…”, as discussed not
too long ago by Jay Garfield and Bryan Van Norden
([here](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html)).

Then, there is our **ethical obligation towards our neighbours**, which
should make us consider it our duty to try to work for mutual
understanding instead of refusing any confrontation whatsoever. How can
we expect our students and co-citizens to feel welcome if we refute to
engage with anything but the well-known?

Now, at this point I feel I should deal also with the objections I would
prefer never to hear.

1.  **“The Western model is now dominating the world. Why should we
    bother learning about any other?”**

    Well, I will probably not convince you, if the language of
    domination is the only one you understand. **Would you** however
    **be ready to draw all the consequences** you would need to **and,
    for instance,** decide that there is no need to study the ancient
    Greek culture, or be ready to **learn Chinese** and give up Adam
    Smith, if China turns out to be the dominant culture of the 21st c.?

    More seriously, don’t you think we have an ethical obligation to
    make the world a place where there is not only one dominant model?
    Don’t you think that, especially when we deal with philosophy and
    ethics (mentioned separately to put more emphasis on it) **it is
    irresponsible and ethically blameable to try to impose a single
    model**? Would you really want someone else to do it with you?
    (Don’t be too sure that what you call “ the Western model” includes
    everything you care for. For instance, does it include a special
    status for religious belief or rather laicity?)

    Last, suppose you don’t care about ethical issues and only care
    about profit. Still, the fact that what you call “the Western model”
    is now allegedly “dominating the world” might at most mean that a
    few nations within “ the West” developed some successful economic
    and/or military tools. **To claim that “the Western model” should
    automatically be the best one in every possible domain and that
    nothing can be gained even from an utilitarian point of view by
    taking inspiration elsewhere is just a non sequitur.** After all, we
    know that unexpected results came from theoretical research on
    various topics (for instance, airplanes are now rough and not
    smooth, because biological researches on the sharks’ skin showed
    that this helps reducing the amount of fuel needed).

2.  “In India live hundreds of millions of illitterate people, why
    should we care?”

    (This objection literally made me tremble when I first heard it.
    Fortunately, it is getting rarer and rarer).

    Well, we should care for all the altruistic and even for the selfish
    reasons mentioned above. Moreover, even in your own terms, i.e.,
    even considering that illiterate people are not worth engaging with,
    there are hundred of millions of Indians, not just in South Asia,
    but all over the world. Many of them are, for instance, A.I.
    engineers in the Silicon valley and also take advantage of their
    heritage to develop new tools, e.g., for computational linguistics.
    Are you sure that we should not engage with them?  
    Moreover, following your assumptions, one should also not engage
    with Chinese and East Asian people, I guess, nor with most people in
    Africa. Are you really sure we are not missing out on too much?
    While you are closing doors and windows, other people are engaging
    in fascinating enterprises.

**How do *you* react when confronted with such questions?**
