+++
title = "Gay genes"
full_title = "Gay genes"
date = "2019-09-23"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/09/23/gay-genes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/09/23/gay-genes/).

Gay genes

A recent
[paper](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6456/eaat7693)
discussed the results of a GWAS study of same -sex behavior, based on
data from the UK Biobank. The data wasn’t ideal – it was based on
self-reporting, and asked whether the respondent had *ever* had a
same-sex experience, rather than trying to detect orientation… But
that’s life.

They found two SNPs that influenced both male and female homosexuality,
two that affected males only, one that affected females only. All had
very small but statistically significant effects.

If we had lots of SNPs, we could look for trends ( are they
predominantly expressed on certain tissues or processes ?) but with
only 4 in males and 3 in females, not really possible. It does look as
if the genetic architecture of homosexuality only partially overlaps
between the sexes ( 0.63) – usually, say for things like height or iq,
the overlap is close to 100%. So the genetics, like every observation,
suggests that male and female homosexuality are qualitatively different.
Yet the degree of shared genetic influence is also interesting – I don’t
think it would be predicted by most strategy models.

The fraction of the variance influenced by these few SNPs is low, less
than 1%. The contribution of all common SNPs is larger, estimated to be
between 8% and 25%. Still small compared to traits like height and IQ,
but then we knew that the heritability of homosexuality is not terribly
high, from twin studies and such – political views are more heritable.

So gene influence homosexuality, but then they influence everything.
Does it look as if the key causal link ( assuming that there is one) is
genetic? No, but then we knew that already, from high discordance for
homosexuality in MZ twins.

Most interesting to me were the genetic correlations between same-sex
behavior and various other traits.



[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/gwas-correlation.jpg?w=640&h=837)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/gwas-correlation.jpg)

The genes correlated with male homosexuality are also correlated ( at a
statistically significant level) with risk-taking, cannabis use,
schizophrenia, ADHD, major depressive disorder, loneliness, and number
of sex partners. For female homosexuals, risk-taking, smoking, cannabis
use, subjective well-being (-), schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, ADHD,
major depressive disorder, loneliness, openness to experience, and
number of sex partners.

Generally, the traits genetically correlated with homosexuality are bad
things. As far as I can see, they look like noise, rather than any
kind of genetic strategy. Mostly, they accord with what we already knew
about male and female homosexuals: both are significantly more likely to
have psychiatric disorders, far more likely to use drugs. The
mental-illness association maybe looks stronger in lesbians. The
moderately-shared genetic architecture seems compatible with a noise
model.

The strategy ideas never made sense ( in terms of a workable
kin-selection, sexually antagonistic, or other genetic model) , but I
think this study makes that clearer.

Find that homosexuality was genetically correlated with various kinds of
unpleasantness was apparently an issue in the preparation and
publication of this paper. The authors were at some pains to avoid
hurting the feelings of the gay community, since avoiding hurting
feelings is the royal road to Truth, as shown by Galileo and Darwin.

