+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-11-12"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/11/12/durga-aradhana-in-the-vaishnava-context/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/11/12/durga-aradhana-in-the-vaishnava-context/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## durgA ArAdhana in the vaiShNavacontext

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/11/vasudevasya-bhagini.jpg?w=313)

The context for durgA ArAdhana in pA\~ncharAtra Agama can be as part of
the discipline of invoking certain deities on a given tithi i.e. [the
tithi-yAga](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/08/23/sequence-of-devatarchana-for-the-paksha/)
to use the technical pA\~ncharAtrika term as also in the contexts of
graha nigraha and shatru nigraha^(**1**).

As per the parama saMhita and the sanatkumAra saMhita, aMbikA/durgA is
to be invoked on every navamI and is to be worshipped with red flowers
and red meat. The sanatkumAra saMhita has more detail on the durgA yAga,
the appropriate place for a durgAlaya (the saMhita used the word
durgA-sthAna) in the grAma along with the form and the parivAra
chatuShTaya. durgA is to be mediated as black, three eyed, with
sha\~Nkha, chakra, shUla, pAsha, a\~nkusha and dhanuH (+bANa?) and
dressed in red. The great devI who is addressed in the saMhita as
yoganidrA & AryA has as her parivAra jayA, vijayA, pUrNA & puShkalA.
pUrNa is to be shown as holding tAmbUla and of pleasing form while
puShkalA holds a kanduka and a darpaNa. The devI AryA is to be invoked
on a navamI and is offered various puShpa-s along with offerings of
blood and meat (…pUjayed vividhaiH puShpaishcharubhirmAMsashoNitaiH).

The sanatkumAra also suggests that the aparAjitA vidyA is to be seen as
two kinds, vaiShNavI and durgA of which the former is to be deployed for
vashya and the later for nigraha i.e. punishing the enemies, as
mentioned in the padmodbhava saMhita. The available copy of the
padmodbhava saMhita does have this material on
durgA-vaiShNavI-aparAjitA. These vidyA-s are to be deployed in a
pA\~ncharAtrika mantravAda context, for the purpose of winning over the
gandharva and vidyAdhara graha-s. In the mantravAda section, we see
slightly different usages where both nR^isiMha and durgA are invoked in
a single mantra to arrest inimical graha-s**²**.

The parama saMhita, suggests that for crushing enemies, one is to invoke
durgA & kR^itya ([perhaps a veiled reference to
pratya\~NgirA](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/02/20/pratyangira-and-kritya-prayoga/))
and according to the text, durgA & kR^itya arose from the gadA of
viShNu. In the pAdma saMhita we have a clear reference to vanadurgA and
her mantra. Apart from the usual works which deal with the [subject of
vanadurgA](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/20/two-streams-of-vanadurga-upasana/),
the pAdma saMhita has probably the first and direct reference to
vanadurgA and her mantra along with that of giri durgA^(**3**).

As an interesting aside, a note will be made on a brief procedure
extracted from the prathama parichChedaH of nR^isiMha kalpa which in
turn is part of krama dIpikA. The procedure is meant for uchchATana of
deva graha-s and it involves invoking nR^isiMha who is flanked by the
eighteen handed viShNu-durgA on the left (of nR^isiMha) and an eight
handed nArasiMhI (pratya\~NgirA) towards the right. The procedure
involves establishing maNDala with invocation of nR^isiMha, viShNu-durgA
and nArasiMhI with their respective mantra-s along with invoking
hanumAn, garuDa, bhairava and bhadrakAlI in various kuMbha-s. The
procedure ends by offering bali after uttering the mAlA mantra of
nArAsiMhI, which it is said will destroy mahAbhUta-s. A third context
where nR^isiMha and durgA are combined would be the mahAvidyA stotra
from which the vanadurgA mahAvidyA system originated. It is said that
for the utkIlana of the mahAvidyA stotra the sAdhaka is to perform 108
japa of nR^isiMha mantra. In some traditions in Andhra, the nR^isiMha
gAyatri is deployed during the siMha yAga which is done as part of durgA
pratiShTha or during the brahmotsava^(**4**) held in durgA Alaya-s.

The vaikhAnasa stream has its own paddhati-s for durgA pratiShTha of
which a very brief outline is provided below. The source being the
vaikhAnasa durgA kalpa in 235 shloka-s, which is part of the bhR^igu
saMhita

The durgA kalpa starts with a brief description of durgA mahimA and
durgA pujA mahimA after which the topic of pratiShTha is discussed from
AchArya varaNaM, bAlAgAra, biMbamAnaM, laxaNam, sthApana desha, parivAra
kalpanaM, pratiShTha krama, pradhAna homa, and nyAsa. nityArchana is
then dealt with elaborately along with snapana and then the procedure
for conducting the utsava. The deity is called as viShNu mAyA, yoganidrA
as in pA\~ncharAtra. Unlike the pA\~ncharAtra system which deploys a
certain durgA pa\~nchAkShari and an elaborate dhAraNa/mAlA mantra for
durgA, the vaikhAnasa system deploys the durgA sUkta extensively along
with the durgA bIja. This system suggests two different images for durgA
a four handed one which is termed saumya and an eight handed form of
durgA for shatru nAshana. The saumya form of the chaturbhuja durgA is
said to be sarvaprANihitA and as puShTidAyinI. There is a difference in
the durgA parivAra in both systems. In the vaikhAnasa system, umA- ramA,
ga\~NgA – yamunA , nandagopa – yashodA, Aditi – diti, yaxa – vidyAdhara,
a\~NgIrasa – mR^ikaNDu form the elaborate parivAra of durgA. shaiShikI &
jayatsena are also to be propitiated after the siMha. The murti mantra-s
utilized in the durgA nityArchana would be the names “durgAM
kAtyAyanI\~M cheti vaiShNavIM vindhyavAsinIM”, in the appropriate
vibhakti.

The durgA kalpa referred to above is meant for pratiShTha and does not
treat personal sAdhana or durgA at an individual level like the
pA\~ncharAtra saMhita-s do. It will be interesting to know or explore if
there are vaikhAnasa works which deal with personal sAdhana of durgA.

Notes:

1: The devI purANa gives a similar scheme of devatArchana based on
tithi.

2: Likewise, there are at-least two occasions where nR^isiMha or
sudarshana-nR^isiMha are part of durgA yantra-s.

3: Another place where the giri durgA mantra is supposedly discussed, is
the atharvaNa rahasya(-Agama)

4: This can be seen in the Andhra publication by name
durgA-brahmotsava-kalpaM, compiled by shrI indraganTi sadAshiva shankara
prasAda sharman

This entry was posted on November 12, 2021 at 12:03 pm and is filed
under [durgA -
daurgAgama](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/durga-daurgagama/),
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/11/12/durga-aradhana-in-the-vaishnava-context/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/11/12/durga-aradhana-in-the-vaishnava-context/trackback/)
from your own site.

