+++
title = "The sarpasattra: vedic and aitihasic."
date = "2006-07-16"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/16/the-sarpasattra-vedic-and-aitihasic/"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/16/the-sarpasattra-vedic-and-aitihasic/).

The sarpasattra as per the itihAsa was the gory sacrifice of janamejaya
pArIkshita done to avenge the death of his father parIkShit by the
sarpas. The itihAsa states that the interaction between the pANDus,
yadus and the sarpa-s was a long-standing and complicated one. arjuna
first fathers a son irAvAn, through the sarpa princes ulUpI, the
daughter of kauravya, the son of dhR^itarAshTra airAvata. kR^iShNa
devakIputra defeats a sarpa king kali\~nga according to the harivaMsha
on the yamuna. Then arjuna the pANDu and kR^ishna the yadu attack
khANDavaprastha the kingdom of the takShaka the king of the nAga-s and
defeat him to seize his land, with the vedic deities from indra to rudra
fighting on the side of the sarpas. The pANDus build their new capital
there. In the great war the half-sarpa son of arjuna comes to fight on
his side and is killed, whereas takShaka tries to aid karNa in killing
arjuna. After the war the sarpa-s avenge themselves on parIkShit, called
the grandson of arjuna, and kill him. Finally, this is avenged by
janamejaya in his sarpa-sattra where he massacres the sarpas. The
sarpa-s are saved from complete extinction by deva indra who sends the
brAhmin AstIka to end the rite of janamejaya. In addition this battle,
the bhArgava utanka fights takShaka in the quest for the earrings of the
queen.

In the veda, the sarpa-sattra is mentioned in the pa\~nchaviMsha
brAhmaNa (25.15), the baudhAyana shrauta sUtra (17.18) and the
baudhAyana gR^ihya sUtra (3.10). It is said that the kings and princes
of the sarpas performed it in order to gain firm grip over over the
worlds or for obtaining poison. The sacrificer is asked to perform the
sattra if he wishes similarly to gain a grip over the worlds. The
sAmavedic brAhmaNa briefly describes the rite as having two atirAtras in
the beginning and end of it, and two agniShTomas in the middle of it.
The only unpaired day in the annual sattra is the viShuvAn day. On the
other days a 10 versed recitation is used but on the viShuvAn day the 12
versed chant with the sarpa sAmans are deployed. These are the
AraNyageyagAnaMs 2.a.1-10.

This leads us to another mysterious aspect of the sarpa-s found in the
vaidika tradition, namely the sarpa-sUkta-s attributed to the arbuda and
his mother kadru, the queen of the sarpa-s (sarpa-rAj\~nI). These sUkta
are: 1) RV 10.94 attributed to arbuda the son of kadru directed to the
soma-pounding stones to prepare soma for indra. The sarpa arbuda is the
foe-destroying snake probably related to the snake-poison arbudi weapon
of atharvan tradition. In the RV, indra slew him with a snow-shower or
an icicle. 2) RV 10.189 attributed the sarpa-rAj\~nI kadru the mother of
the serpentine tArkShya-s and the sun. It dappled cow in the sUkta might
be a metaphor for the dappled sarparAj\~nI. Who might this sarparAj\~nI
associated with the sun be? The aitareya brAhmaNa, explaining the
deployment of this sUkta during in the ritual snake-like creeping of the
R^itkvik-s to altar, states that she is the earth (also repeated in the
shatapatha brAhmaNa) because the earth is queen of what creeps. It
states that the earth was barren but when she saw this sUkta, the
dappled color entered entered and thus all plants and birds entered her.
In the famous sarpa-balI incantation from the yajuSh tradition we hear
that the sarpa-s are seen in the realms of light (the rochana; mentioned
in above sUkta) and the rays of the sun (sUryasya rashmi). The same
kadru is also offered an oblation with the incantation of kadrave
nAgamAtre svAhA \| in the sarpa-bali and the bodhAyana ritual to rudra.
Thus, from the context of the sUkta this serpentine deity appears to be
associated with the earth receiving the solar rays and becoming fertile.
Thus, the sarpa-s as R^iShi-s and officiants has a wider presence in the
veda.

Most remarkable aspect of the vedic rite done by the sarpa-s is the
consistently preserved list of officiants seen in both the sAmavedic and
baudhAyana texts. The brahmA priest is mentioned as dhR^itarAShTra
airAvata, while the brAhmanAchChamsin is takShaka, and the adhvaryu is
janamejaya. The baudhAyana texts mention uparIti tArkShya (the half
brother of the khaga, ariShTanemI tArkShya). The interesting feature is
that the vedic sarpa sattra is done by the sarpa-s in the veda and is
not the killing of the sarpa-s as in the itihAsa. It again has several
of the circum-pANDu characters of the itihAsa except the pANDus
themselves. This again highlights the big question we had asked earlier:
Why are the vedic texts silent about the pANDus? The answer to this
question is indeed central to some major historical transitions in
India.

