+++
title = "A few thoughts on"
full_title = "A few thoughts on Kūrattāḻvāṉ/Kūreśa"
upstream_url = "https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2022/01/23/a-few-thoughts-on-kuratta%e1%b8%bbva%e1%b9%89-kuresa/"
date = "2022-01-23"

+++
Source: [here](https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2022/01/23/a-few-thoughts-on-kuratta%e1%b8%bbva%e1%b9%89-kuresa/).

A few thoughts on Kūrattāḻvāṉ/Kūreśa

A few years ago, a few colleagues in Hamburg and I were reading the *Māṇikkamālai* by Periyavāccāṉ Piḷḷai, a passage in which he names Rāmānujācārya’s prime disciple Kūrattāḻvāṉ as an example for an ideal disciple *and* an ideal Ācārya. And what seemed like a straightforward sentence confused my colleagues, who gave a convoluted meaning to the sentence. And I realised that the reason for that was that they got the wrong agent for the verb, and that, in turn, was because the subject was in 3rd person – masculine – singular (Kūrattāḻvāṉ, literally Āḻvāṉ from Kūram), while its verb was conjugated in the 3rd person – honorific (something like *aruḷicceytār*). So clearly that wasn’t possible, right? Well, I would have been puzzled too as well if I hadn’t heard Velukkudi Swami explain that the honorific form of the name (Kūrattāḻvār) actually referred to the father, while the masculine form was used for the son, to distinguish the one from the other. And I remember him saying that we shouldn’t feel like showing our respect for Kūrattāḻvāṉ by adding the honorific to his name. To go back to the sentence in the *Māṇikkamālai,* just because the masculine version of the name is used does not mean that Piḷḷai would have a masculine verb ending; he had used the honorific to express the respect that a great Ācārya rightly deserved. Hence the understandable confusion of the Tamilists (who didn’t seem too convinced even after I explained, but that’s another story).

Speaking about Velukkudi Swami, he extensively celebrated the 1000th birthday of Āḻvāṉ in 2010 (he was older than Rāmānuja, whose 1000th birthday was celebrated in 2017). He gave talks about him, explained how Āḻvāṉ was an ideal Śrīvaiṣṇava, an ideal person to follow, since he had severed the three *kuṟumpu*s (‘enemies, mischiefs’?) as he was devoid of pride in his birth/descent, in his education and in his wealth. Velukkudi Swami asked people to make a *pratijñā* to follow Kurattāḻvāṉ and supplied a chart with 10+ points on how to be and act (I made the *pratijñā*, which fizzled out that very week…). That’s more or less when I came to know about this Acārya.

Many of us know the story of how he plucked out his own eyes (according to some versions of the *Āṟāyirappaṭi Guruparamparāprabhāvam*) rather than let the king blind him (he took Rāmānuja’s place when he was forced to meet a Cōḻa king thought to be a Śaiva fanatic). And how he was later reluctant to ask back for his sight from Devapperumāḷ (Varadarāja) when his Ācārya insisted. And we also know how he remembered every word of the *Bādarāyaṇavṛtti* just after going through it once, which helped Rāmānuja to compose his *Śrībhāṣya* (as some people from the Śāradā Pīṭha reclaimed the work barely some hours after lending it to him).

But another amazing event that I came across when I carefully went through MAV Swami’s *Vaiṇava ācāryakaḷiṉ Vāḻvum vākkum* is the following (Periyavāccāṉ Piḷḷai narrates it in his commentary on *Periya Tirumoḻi* 7.5.2): a proud person wanted to learn a text from Kūrattāḻvāṉ, but was embarrassed at being spotted learning from him! So Kūrattāḻvāṉ taught him in a secluded place well-hidden from public view. But one day, as Araiyar suddenly appeared there, Āḻvāṉ grabbed his disciple’s *grantha* and pretended to read it, thereby giving the impression that *he* was learning from the other person. Now that takes a special kind of pride-less-ness!

Anyway, *Tai hastam* is the day on which Kūrattāḻvāṉ was born (and that’s today), and this day marks the resuming of the *adhyayana* (for people like me, it simply means resuming the recitation of *pācuram*s from the *Nālāyra Divya Prabandham* – sometimes after years of neglect, which is my case). By the way, a funny thing that I noticed this morning: after reciting so many *pācuram*s (and not even all the *pācuram*s recommended for the *Nityānusandhānam*), I was so out of breath that I couldn’t pronounce/didn’t have the energy to pronounce the *mahāprāṇa*s in the *Śaraṇāgatigadyam* that I recited next. No wonder the Tamils struggle with aspirates. Why would anyone want to use such tough-to-pronounce sounds in their language?

PS: image credits: [https://guruparamparaitamil.wordpress.com/2016/07/20/kurathazhwan/](https://guruparamparaitamil.wordpress.com/2016/07/20/kurathazhwan/) (the page has a traditional account of Kūrattāḻvāṉ’s life in Tamil)
