+++
title = "Russia and the Slave Raids"
date = "2020-10-01"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/10/01/russia-and-the-slave-raids/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/10/01/russia-and-the-slave-raids/).

**SLAVERY** as abhorrent as it was and still is, has been practiced with
varying degrees since the ancient times. From the time of ancient
Egyptians to the Indians, the Greeks and the Romans and to the Ottomans,
from republics to full fledged empires, almost every civilization has
had slavery as a recognized and even legal concept with various laws to
define and regulate its scope. For example, while the economy of ancient
Roman empire had slaves as its backbone, such was not the case in
ancient India where it was comparatively quite restricted. The
pervasiveness of slavery was usually determined by the culture of the
land which also affected the economics of its society. And sometimes it
was the economics which was the determining factor influencing the
culture.

**Introduction**

Throughout history, the source for supply of slaves have generally been
three. First was usually the inability to pay debt or taxes and this
resulted in what we can say internal slavery. Second was the number of
people captured during military operations – prisoners of war which
until recent times was a frequent phenomenon. And third, was simply, the
trade of slaves. This happened usually when some societies took slavery
as an accepted practice of business and raids were conducted precisely
for this reason in neighbouring territories. The victims were usually of
sedentary agricultural societies. This trade eventually developed into
an elaborate network with various markets and ports.

People who took this practise to another level were the Central Asian
Steppe nomads. With varying degrees, they had conducted raids for slaves
for centuries. Many Indians had been the victims of this either due to
being captured during war or as part of loot during various invasions by
the Islamic hordes. But few countries has had the problem of external
slavery (prisoners of war or captured in slave raids) being an important
corner stone of their politics and even the focus of their military as
Russia in pre-modern times. This post is about a peculiar Russian
problem and how the trade in slaves by the Central Asian Steppe
principalities, kingdoms and even empires affected Russia.

**Geography of Russia**

The peculiar geography of Russia forms the basis of this problem. Its
southern frontier is a huge open terrain. With scanty vegetation and
rare occurrence of trees, entire expanse of the frontier has always been
an easy prey to the nomadic hordes to its south. Its vast grassland has
affected the history and therefore politics of this huge country.

The open frontier of southern Russia with no natural boundaries had
usually bore the brunt of these slave raids. This part of the land is
different for it is as used to sedentary agriculture as to the nomadic
way of life with quite a busy economic environment. From cereals, fish
and salt to fur, honey and slaves, everything. As a result, it had also
acted as a busy trade route for all kinds of intercontinental commercial
relations in the pre-19th century era.

***“If the steppe was akin to the sea, and Russian towns to ports, the
nomads were the seamen. Many of the seamen were pirates living off the
‘ports’ or looting the passing ship convoys.”***

![***“At the Southern Border” by Sergei Vasilievich Ivanov*** ***(1907).
Muscovites securing the frontier against the
marauders.***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/3_painting_southernborder.jpg?w=600)

**An Age Old Practice**

Whenever a nomad horde from the Iron Age onward dominated the steppes,
it influenced southern Russia and there was a common method to levy huge
tolls in this gigantic expanse of land on every product worth trading.
Since that time, Russians amongst other products has had slave as its
infamous exports. Whether they were Scythians, Athenians, Rhodeans,
Romans and Byzantines, or Venetians and Genoese, every power, every
entity that dominated the seas – particularly Mediterranean and the
Black Sea, therefore had slaves as very valuable product.

**Khazars and the Cumans**

When the territory between the Volga & Don steppes to the eastern Crimea
and northern Caucasus was dominated by the Turkic hordes of Khazars (7th
to 10th century), the centre for trade of slaves was its capital Itil.
The Abbasid Caliphate was a major trading partner so to speak and the
slaves brought from Russia and the Slav region by the Bulgars and later
by the Vikings were sold in huge numbers. And its successor, the
Cumans-Kipchak Confederation called Polovtsy by Russians, terrorised not
just Russia but the Kieven Rus (a loose federation that dominated the
Eastern Slavs, Finland area between the 9th and the 13th century before
the onslaught of Mongols) as well. Their terror was such that the lands
were completely devastated and captives were taken in huge amounts and
were quite expectedly sold as slaves forcing large scale migrations in
the region.

**The Golden Horde**

And then came the Mongols in mid-13th century that resulted in the
establishing of the Tatar Empire – the Golden Horde (originally the
north-western part of the Mongol Empire). The Golden Horde dominated the
steppes and reached till the Siberia at its peak and affected not just
Russia but Eastern Europe as well. It met its end around late 15th
century. With such vast expanse of land and such established networks of
trade under them, the Tatars quickly resorted to strengthening the
trade. They knew that after the military success, the only way they can
sustain the empire was through the profit in trade and commerce. They
followed the age old practice of exacting huge levies and of course, the
trade in slaves. The towns of Old Sarai and New Sarai played an
important part in this.

![***The Golden
Horde***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/large_mongol_empire_1294.jpg?w=800)

**Genoese & Venetians**

Foreign trade in this period was dominated and affected by the rivalry
of Venice and Genoa. The prime role was played by the trading post of
Caffa (Feodosia) on the south-east coast of Crimea. The post had been
established by the Genoese after they received the license to build it
from the Khan. The Byzantine politics had resulted in the removal of
Black Sea from the sphere of influence of the Venetians, the rivals of
Genoese. They were finally allowed a base at the town of Tana (Azov).
Quite like the later trading posts of various Europeans in India, which
after being given permission to establish themselves, indulged not only
in trade but also warfare with the Indians, the Caffa under Genoese also
had such chequered history with the Tatars. They were still holding the
post and controlling trade in the Black Sea region till the fall of
Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453 CE. After that it was only a
matter of time when Caffa would be under Ottomans and this is exactly
what happened. Ottomans captured Caffa in 1475 CE.

![***Slave Market of Caffa, Crimean
Khanate.***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/3_map.jpg?w=593)

A large part of the history of Russia has been a long story of
continuous warfare with the Tatars. Russia thus was a constant source of
slaves which the Tatars sold at high profit and this aspect was more
stark especially after the hegemony of the Ottomans was established.
Sultan’s agents were always there to get the best quality slaves for the
Empire and Russians or Caucasians formed the majority of those slaves.

**Societal and Cultural Norms**

The social milieu of a nomadic society also contributed to the frequency
of raids. The valour of successfully conducting a raid and winning a
‘booty’ was way more than serving in a mere regular military. This also
was the reason that despite assurances and other monetary securities
promised by the Russian rulers to various tribal chiefs asking them to
serve in the military, secure the frontier and not participate in raids,
the frequency and intensity of the raids didn’t particularly reduce.

**Profits of the trade**

The profit of the entire trade was so high that the so called religious
affinities and brotherhood though certainly an irritant, didn’t stop the
raiders and therefore the merchants from participating in it. Profit in
the slave trade used to reach a staggering 1000% ! In later 14th
century, Florence had more than 300 slave sales in 33 years. Russian
girls were most prized possessions and fetched highest prices.

The decline of the Golden Horde and its disintegration into various
Khanates in the 15th century didn’t really change the situation. Though
the Russian rulers were allying with various Khanates and sometimes
playing one for the other, the raids still continued. The number of
captives in these raids didn’t have to be large because the sheer profit
or other economic value of those captured Russians/Caucasians made up
for their lesser numbers. Slaves were sold in the slave markets or put
up for ransom to be paid by the Russians if they wanted their people
back. And if not sold in the slave market or ransomed, they were to be
the domestic servants, labourers and serfs in the steppes and its
Khanates.

The selling of these captives fetched high prices in the markets of
Central Asia like that of Bukhara, Samarkand, Khiva, Caffa or Tana
(Azov) from where the slaves went to all the directions including the
Islamic Kingdoms like the Mamluk Dynasty of Egypt, the Caliphates and
later the Ottomans.

![***Khanates after disintegration of the Golden
Horde***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/images.jpg?w=265)

**The Crimean Khanate**

The main role in this was played by the Crimean Khanate (1441 – 1783
CE). In one such slave raid in 1501, the Crimeans are said to have taken
50,000 Lithuanians! At the southern frontier, military campaigns were
less of a danger than the frequent raids as usually the motive of these
raids was not so much the plunder of material wealth though that
certainly was a part of the goal but more of Russians themselves. Only
loot that the marauders prized almost to the level of Russian slaves
were the horses.

> ***“Consider one typical raid in 1500 in which a war party of 1000
> Crimeans returned with 5000 Lithuanian captives. High price that
> slaves fetched in Ottoman and Central Asian markets as well as the
> high price of ransom made it hard for the Russian government to
> provide incentives sufficiently attractive to discourage this sort of
> raiding.”***
>
> ***–* Michael Khodarkovsky, Russia’s Steppe Frontier.**

The strength of the invading Khanate army reached 80,000 but obviously
more frequent and therefore source of bigger and constant danger was the
smaller raiding party with an average strength of 2000. This resulted in
huge loss of population in the region. One has to understand that we are
not talking about once in a decade raids. These raids conducted with the
sole goal of “harvesting of slaves” happened every year for centuries.
After West Africa, Russia was made the largest source of slaves in the
entire world!

![***Early 20th Century painting by Jozef Brandt depicting Zoporozhian
Cossacks fighting the Crimeans. (WikiMedia
Commons)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/800px-jozef_brandt_-_potyczka_kozakow_z_tatarami.jpg?w=800)

Though politics sometimes helped in discouraging such raids. Crimean
Khan Muhammad Giray in 1516 for example, paid his own son Alp to not
raid the Russians for slaves as he was keen to maintain peace with them
and Alp therefore raided the Polish-Lithuanian lands instead. But this
strategy worked only until the other party didn’t pay him higher. The
poverty amongst the tribes and complete acceptance of such raids in the
steppe culture still kept the danger high for even when alliance with
Russians made the Khans to discourage such raids, they nevertheless
continued.

**Dangers for the Population**

As a Russian particularly in the southern frontier, you could be doing
your everyday job either in the farm or salt mines or may be just going
to the market, but your fate was uncertain for the very next moment you
could be captured to be ransomed or sold in the slave market or working
as slave labour in Central Asia. And this fate wasn’t just reserved for
a mere peasant or a worker. Many a times even noblemen of big estates
could also be captured and their ransom amount was therefore quite high
as per their status. There are even instances when even the Russian
princes were abducted for the sole motive of ransoming and negotiation
was done with the Russian king as was the case with Tsar Ivan IV in 1538
and the Russian prince Semen Bel’skii.

**The Ottomans**

The Ottomans were a major consumer of slaves ever since they established
themselves. Slaves were inducted in every part of the state machinery –
as pages, as soldiers and of course for the harems. Some scholars even
suggest that the rise of Istanbul in the 16th century to the level of
becoming the largest city of Europe wouldn’t have been possible if not
for the constant incoming slaves, majority of whom were Slavs and
Russians. It wouldn’t be wrong to say that the Ottoman Empire was
actually a slave state. The Roman Empire in ancient time also had a
major part of the economy based on slaves but the extent, the
pervasiveness and integration of these slaves in the Middle East and
Near Asia under the Ottomans reached unprecedented levels. The
acceptance of slavery in every shape and form in the Islamic world was a
major contributing factor of this phenomenon.

Under this system, slaves were brought from every part of the world and
then they were trained. The ablest of them were provided with
administrative, military and even sometimes sovereign powers, but with
an obvious prerequisite – their conversion to Islam. This whole system
made the Islamic society quite peculiar. The Mamluk Dynasty of Egypt had
majority of its elite class and even the majority of rulers who were
slaves; many of them had been captured by the Tatars after their slave
raids in southern Russia. And these converted slave Russians who were
now at plum posts continued their dominance in the society even after
the fall of the Mamluk Dynasty and capture of Egypt by the Ottomans in
early 16th century.

The peculiarity of Islam & consequently Ottomans in this regard resulted
in formation of a bizarre system which made slaves an overwhelming part
of entire state machinery. They formed the bulk of the administrative
posts and the military. The mixture of both civil and military aspect in
medieval society particularly in Islam made the presence of slaves even
more ubiquitous. Majority of the ‘quality’ slaves were of Slav and
Russian/Caucasian descent and almost all of them were Christians when
captured.

The Ottoman Army was divided between Janissaries (infantry) and Spahi of
Porte (cavalry), majority of whom were and remained till the end of
their lives- slaves. The reason it is important to mention the Islamic/
Ottoman system is that they were the sponge that absorbed the majority
of the slave trade while the Ottoman Empire existed. We all know about
the notoriety of the Ottoman harems. The most chosen slave girls were
taken to the harems where they were there for the pleasure of the
Sultan. If not him then for the Ottoman officers and dignitaries. The
concubines though were never the wives. Only few reached that level and
even that was not an accepted practice.

***“..in the 120 years between Bayazid I and Sulaeiman,*** ***no Sultan*
*married any of the mother of their children.”***

Slave markets had Russians fetching some of the highest prices. If the
prisoners of war and slave markets weren’t enough for the giant appetite
of the Ottomans for slaves, then a levy was there for this specific
purpose. Sultan’s agents arrived every three or four years in its
eastern parts of the empire for slaves, most of whom were Christians.
The Ottomans had a special slave tax for this purpose. In the Ottoman
Crimea, slaves that were considered coming from their own conquered
territory like the Azov were taxed at half the rates as compared to
those which were outsiders and the port of Caffa played an important
role in this. It is estimated that in the sixteenth century almost
150,000 to 200,000 slaves were captured from Russia. The number of
Russian slaves like those from Ukraine *(Rus)* or Moscow *(Moskoflu)*
was almost half the population of Ottoman Crimea!

***“Russians seized by Tatars between sixteenth and the first half of
the seventeenth century estimated to ab******out 200,000.”***

**The Russian Government**

Moscow obviously didn’t sit quiet. In 16th century, the increasing
strength of the Russian army and the technological advancement in the
military infrastructure like the improved fortification lines and
artillery helped to some extent. As weapons, Russia now had latest
canons and arquebuses which even the Khanates wanted for themselves.

It certainly helped in reducing the danger of raids and increasing the
negotiation power of the Russians for the return of those who had been
captured. The extensive fortification line was constructed on the
southern frontier with the sole purpose of stopping the “enslavement of
the Christians”. Infact, a special tax called *polonianichnyi sbor* or
the ransom tax was introduced by Moscow in 1551 so as to make it a duty
of every Christian to play their part in freeing the Christian Russian
slaves by paying for their ransom. The tax lasted till 1679 CE.

***“Moscow’s growing concern for captives in the sixteenth century came
from its newly crystallized self-consciousness as a Russian Orthodox
State with a divine duty to save Orthodox Christians.”***

An entire section of the Russian law books like in 1649 was dedicated to
“ransoming Russian captives”. Everyone in the state whether an official
or a merchant or an envoy was encouraged by the government to pay for
the captives and free them of this tyranny. Usually a Russian envoy was
sent, for example to the Khan of Crimea with a prepared list of the
slaves/captives and negotiated for the amount to be paid for their
freedom.

![***Great Abbatis Border by Max Presnyakov (2010). The Border was
created by Russia to protect it from Crimean-Nogaye Raiders.(Wikimedia
Commons)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/1280px-d097d0b0d181d0b5d187d0bdd0b0d18f_d187d0b5d180d182d0b0.d0aed0b6d0bdd18bd0b9_d180d183d0b1d0b5d0b6.2010d0b3.d185.d0bc.90d185180-1.jpg?w=1024)

**The Other Side**

There is another aspect of the story. Russians were not always only
victims in this entire saga. One caveat is therefore necessary. They had
been the part of northern slave trade which peaked in the 10^(th) and
11^(th) centuries and had Scandinavian countries as its focal point.
During this time, countries like Norway and other Scandinavian countries
were in return themselves accepting slaves from places like Ireland and
British Isles and conducting raids in neighbouring countries. Vikings
had taken parts in such raids and formed it an established trade
practice. This huge cycle of slave trade was an established network
which had practically every country playing its role whose inhabitants
were sometimes slaves, sometimes slave traders and sometimes both!

Russian merchants had themselves conducted slave trade particularly of
the Eastern Slavs and had taken prisoners of wars from the kingdom of
Poland and Lithuania. They had used them as slaves in Russia itself or
traded them for profit. As the slaves captured thus were either
non-orthodox Christians or sometimes even pagans, the Russians had no
qualms in trading them. Muscovite raids into Finland particularly in the
region of Karelia starting from 15^(th) century onward are an apt
example of this when Russians used to plunder the area and kidnap its
women and children and then they were offered for ransom. Scandinavian
captives were definitely a source of profit for the Russians.

Ultimately there even emerged a pattern where Russians started raiding
the nearby territories to the south like the Nogai Horde in the steppes.
The Don Cossacks raided and captured some Nogays as slaves and as has
been mentioned above Russians also had no objections when the
non-Orthodox Christians like Germans and Poles were taken. After the
formation of fortification lines, Russians started conducting smaller
raids themselves for capturing Muslim and pagan slaves. There were even
cases when some people themselves were ready to become slaves in order
to have better life in the Russian towns. Of course, all they had to do
was convert to Orthodox Christianity in order to reap the rewards.

**The Eighteenth Century**

By the eighteenth century the military advancement of the Russians and
consequently the technological gap between them and the Khanates was so
huge that nomadic Khanates found it increasingly difficult to conduct
successful raids for slaves. Though the geography of Russia’s southern
frontier still proved to be an impediment for the Russians and helped in
continuance of invading war armies of the Khans and also their smaller
raids. As late as 1742, the Karakalpaks captured almost thousand Russian
children and women in Siberia. Even proposals by the Russians of
exchanging the Russian captives with the Turkic captives was offered to
the Hordes, it was customarily refused. According to them slaves were
only to be sold or ransomed and not exchanged. This menace still
lingered even after the conquest of these areas by the Russian Tsar.
Russians were freeing captives in Turkistan as late as mid nineteenth
century.

**The Economic Loss**

Some scholars suggest that this huge question of vulnerable southern
frontier of Russia also contributed to underdevelopment and
under-urbanization of Russia especially when compared to Western Europe.
The sheer wealth of the nation, human and otherwise lost in these raids
was stark and the remaining Russian manpower had to contribute a lot of
time in securing the frontier. Men of the Russian gentry had to spend at
least half of their summer every year by serving in military to protect
the vast expanse of the southern Russian frontier against these raids.
If this lost wealth was instead free to be used to set up new towns, the
financial gain from that could have been huge for Russia.

For a long time until late seventeenth century when the military
advantage of Russia increased, the difficulty in Russian operations
against the Tatars was also huge. The supply train needed in these
operations were humongous and the fact that even more fodder was
required for the draught animals pulling those supplies, further
increased the inefficacy of such campaigns. There had been many examples
when the initial success could not be utilised and Russians had to
retreat because the supplies had already been used. When ultimately
Crimea was taken by the Russians in late eighteenth century, a lot of
manpower was saved from keeping constant vigil on the southern frontier
and helped Russia to now put that freed human and even material wealth
against the Ottoman Empire.

**Conclusion**

The problem of the slave raids thus still persisted on even as late as
nineteenth century and only stopped completely as and when the Russian
Empire grew in size. One can say that the slave raids and the huge cost
it levied, both material and human on Russians were a big contributing
factor for the rise of Russian imperialism and ultimately paved the way
for Russian conquests and hegemony in the region, for there was only one
way that the southern frontier would cease to be vulnerable and that was
only when the extent of the frontier was taken to the Black Sea and the
entirety of the steppes.

**References**

1.  [Frank Friedeberg Seeley, *Russia and the Slave Trade The Slavonic
    and East European Review, 23(62), 1945,
    126-136.*](https://www.jstor.org/stable/4203665)
2.  Alessandro Stanziani, *Bondage – Labor and Rights in Eurasia from
    the Sixteenth to the Early Twentieth Centuries*
3.  Geoffrey Hosking, *Russia: People and Empire: 1552–1917*
4.  Michael Khodarkovsky, *Russia’s Steppe Frontier – The Making of a
    Colonial Empire, 1500-1800*
5.  Jukka Jari Korpela, *Slaves from the North-Finns and Karelians in
    the East European Slave Trade, 900–1600*
6.  [*Slavery on the Steppes: Finnish children in the slave markets of
    medievalCrimea*, Mike
    Dash](https://mikedashhistory.com/2015/01/15/blonde-cargoes-finnish-children-in-the-slave-markets-of-medieval-crimea/)

