+++
title = "Nature in Indian thought"
full_title = "Nature in Indian thought"
date = "2016-01-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/29/nature-in-indian-thought/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/29/nature-in-indian-thought/).

Nature in Indian thought

Is “nature” a thing out there? Will we find possible translations of it
in each language?  

Probably not. At least, this is the thesis of a recent article of mine
(a pre-print version of which is available
[here](https://www.academia.edu/8544445/Systematizing_an_absent_category_discourses_on_nature_in_Pr%C4%81bh%C4%81kara_M%C4%ABm%C4%81%E1%B9%83s%C4%81),
please email me for the final version), in which the case of Mīmāṃsā is
at the center, but Buddhist and Vedāntic approaches are also in the
background. My conclusion is that “nature” is a history-loaden concept,
most likely not translatable in a milieu which does not share the
(US-Australian-NewZealand-…)European background made of Latin
distinctions between *natura naturans* and *natura naturata* and
Romantic rediscoveries of “wilderness” (reaching until
Environmentalism).  
For instance, the Mīmāṃsā texts I analysed do not distinguish among
human beings, animals and plants as three fundamental categories. On the
one hand, there are many more sub-categories which make the distinction
less sharp. On the other, human beings are not so far from the other
animals (unlike, e.g., in Réné Descartes).

**What do readers think? How do the texts you work on discuss “nature”?
Do they categorise all animals together? And all plants? Do they
distinguish animals and plants from human beings?**

  
(cross-posted also on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))  
Looking for more posts on nature? Check the reviews of the book by “our”
Chris Framarin
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/08/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-stephen-harris/)
and
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/10/27/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-elisa-freschi/)
and
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/04/21/book-notice-asian-perspectives-on-animal-ethics-rethinking-the-non-human/)
post.
