+++
title = "On the very idea of"
full_title = "On the very idea of Buddhist ethics"
date = "2016-01-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/17/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/17/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/).

On the very idea of Buddhist ethics

I’ve recently been reading Christopher Gowans’s [Buddhist Moral
Philosophy: An
Introduction](http://www.amazon.com/Buddhist-Moral-Philosophy-An-Introduction/dp/0415890675).
It is an introductory textbook of a sort that has not previously been
attempted, and one that becomes particularly interesting in the light of
[David Chapman’s critiques of Buddhist
ethics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/is-buddhist-ethics-buddhist/).
While Gowans and Chapman would surely disagree about the value and
usefulness of Buddhist ethics, they actually show remarkable agreement
on a proposition that could still be quite controversial: namely, that
the term “Buddhist ethics” or “Buddhist moral philosophy” names above
all a
[Yavanayāna](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-what-it-is/)
phenomenon. That is: the way that Gowans and Chapman use the terms
“Buddhist ethics” and “Buddhist moral philosophy”, what they name is a
contemporary Western (and primarily academic) activity, even if it is
one conducted primarily by professed Buddhists. (“Professed Buddhists”
[include
Chapman](https://meaningness.wordpress.com/2015/09/24/buddhist-ethics-is-not-buddhist-ethics/)
[and myself](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/);
I don’t know whether they include Gowans, but I would guess they do.)

In this respect, Gowans’s textbook differs greatly from previous
introductions to Buddhist ethics, like those of [Winston
King](http://www.amazon.com/In-Hope-Nibbana-Theravada-Buddhism/dp/0875482317),
[Damien
Keown](http://www.amazon.com/Nature-Buddhist-Ethics-Damien-Keown/dp/0333913094)
and [Peter
Harvey](http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0521556406/ref=pd_lpo_sbs_dp_ss_2?pf_rd_p=1944687762&pf_rd_s=lpo-top-stripe-1&pf_rd_t=201&pf_rd_i=0333913094&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_r=0E9VSN1D7EFM1FE0EV0V).
The older textbooks refer the reader mostly to primary Buddhist sources,
especially the Pali suttas. When they introduce their readers to
Buddhist ethics, what they see themselves as introducing is a
first-order discourse, an intellectual activity that Buddhists in Asia
have been doing for millennia. Gowans, however, is introducing readers
to a second-order discourse, an intellectual activity that goes back 300
years at most and probably considerably less – and one that *includes*
the works of King, Keown and Harvey. Gowans’s approach, like Chapman’s,
makes them objects of study in their own right.

Both Gowans and Chapman are important in this respect because they mark
a sea-change in the way we *talk* about Buddhist ethics. Is Buddhist
ethics really a thing traditional Buddhists have always done, or is it a
thing that *we* Buddhist scholars are doing now? Gowans and Chapman’s
approach suggests the latter view (Gowans implicitly, Chapman
explicitly), and there is [not necessarily any shame in
that](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-a-defence/).
The question to ask is: are they right? Is Buddhist ethics,
[arguably](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/01/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/)
[like
Hinduism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/did-hinduism-exist/),
a modern Western phenomenon?

The answer, no surprise to anyone I can imagine, is that it depends on
how we define ethics. In my view, part of the problem with “Buddhist
ethics” is that it has tended to define ethics wrongly. That is, the way
contemporary Buddhist ethicists approach the idea of ethics is one that
orients us away not only from traditionally Buddhist concerns, but from
what I take to be proper human concerns.

Two areas of inquiry occupy Gowans’s work above all, areas that I think
fairly reflect the concerns that are typically considered “ethics” in
the English-speaking world (and specifically in departments of
philosophy). One is applied ethics: what are Buddhist views on
contemporary social and political issues like abortion, social
inequality and the natural environment? I have
[previously](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/09/on-justice-and-activism-in-pali-buddhism/)
[discussed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/is-buddhist-ethics-buddhist/)
why I think this focus an innovation, and my
[own](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/)
[position](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/)
on it.

But there is another area of contemporary “Buddhist ethics” that I’d
like to turn my attention to here. (Keown focuses much more on this
latter area, where Harvey focuses on the former.) This is the question
of how we *classify* Buddhist ethics, according to the key categories of
analytical ethics: is it consequentialist? Deontological (Kantian)?
Virtue ethics? A large amount of ink, and pixels, has been spilled on
this question. I have [commented on it
before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/taking-back-ethics/),
but I think there is more to say – and more that sheds light on the
problems with the project of “Buddhist ethics” today.

In my [previous
discussion](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/taking-back-ethics/)
I was okay with lumping Buddhism in under “virtue ethics”, since “virtue
ethics” functions as a residual category for those traditions that are
not [consequentialist or
deontological](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/taking-back-ethics/).
But there are further problems here. For one thing, “virtue ethics”
often tends to get reduced to Aristotle, and as Gowans himself points
out, there are very large differences between Aristotle’s thought and
most Buddhist thought – differences of the utmost importance to someone
like me who is [deeply influenced by
both](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/12/choosing-a-few-traditions/).
Aristotle insists on the continuity of self that Buddhists are at pains
to deny, as well as advocating a life centred around participation in
politics and family. In many respects I think the Buddhists are
[closer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/) to
Aristotle’s Hellenistic critics – the Stoics, Epicureans and Skeptics –
than to Aristotle himself. The category of “virtue ethics” effaces the
distinction between them, which is to my mind among the most important
distinctions in philosophy.

We can get further by asking why analytic philosophy (which “Buddhist
ethics” tends to follow) *makes* its distinctions in the way that it
does. Analytical ethics, as far as I can see, is concerned above all
with *decision procedure*: the unit of ethics is a single decision that
one individual or one organization can make, and the clearly articulated
principles that underlie that decision-making. That is why it is
concerned above all with consequentialism and deontology, or theories
like John Rawls’s that attempt to lie directly between the two: they
articulate clear principles on which one can make a decision between
alternatives. One can [program a
robot](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/06/on-the-ethics-of-robots/)
to be a consequentialist, a deontologist or a Rawlsian. Any ethical
approach that does not rely on such a clear procedure, that requires
subtler human judgements, is considered virtue ethics – which is really
to say, miscellaneous.

I think Gowans gets at many of these points, at least implicitly, in his
thoughtful chapter called “Normative ethics: anti-theoretical and other
interpretations”. My main qualm with that chapter is its title: the long
Buddhist traditions of abstract metaphysical reflection should give the
lie to any claim that Buddhism is “anti-theoretical”. What traditional
Buddhism does not have, I think, is the kind of theory that directly
informs a decision procedure, of the sort that characterizes modern
analytical ethics. It is for this reason that Keown has
[characterized](https://books.google.com/books?id=mH2HBJXnFD0C&pg=PA40&lpg=PA40&dq=keown+buddhism+morality+without+ethics&source=bl&ots=aAPz6q7_7y&sig=CNG_aWh3vurazGGHGi_2DyO2TdY&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwizkvT5o4TKAhUEHx4KHdm-Dp8Q6AEIHzAB#v=onepage&q=keown%20buddhism%20morality%20without%20ethics&f=false)
Buddhism as “morality without ethics”. Traditional Buddhism indeed does
not have ethics of the sort found in modern analytic philosophy;
attempts to give it such an ethics have themselves been modern. But I’ve
criticized Keown’s thesis at length in both my
[dissertation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/other-writings/) and my
[recent
article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/)
– because it *does* have reasoning about how we human beings should
live, in broader terms that do not focus on individual decisions and
actions. That reasoning tends, however, to fall in areas we might
consider more metaphysics and psychology than ethics.

Just for that reason, I suspect the most important recent book in
Buddhist ethics may turn out to be Maria Heim’s [The Forerunner of All
Things](http://newbooksinbuddhiststudies.com/2015/11/08/maria-heim-the-forerunner-of-all-things-buddhaghosa-on-mind-intention-and-agency-oxford-up-2013/)
– on [Buddhaghosa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhaghosa), the
thinker whose ideas in many ways came to define Theravāda Buddhism. What
Heim illustrates is how Buddhaghosa’s thought is profoundly ethical in
the sense of examining how human beings should live – in a way that
moves very far away from decision procedures. Buddhaghosa’s concern is
not even with *choice* as such, taken as a unit. Rather, it is a kind of
ethical reasoning that focuses on the habits that underlie our
decisions. I am not sure that Buddhaghosa explicitly denies free will in
the way that [Śāntideva
does](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/02/goodness-as-preventing-suffering/),
but he is arguably doing something more important: developing in detail
a way of thinking about good and bad that does not rely on a conception
of individual choice. Where analytic philosophy helps us ask how we can
program robots to be ethical, Buddhaghosa asks instead how human beings
are already programmed to be unethical, and what that means –and thus
how we can be *re*programmed to be more ethical.

In short, I suggest we modern Western ethicists or moral philosophers
don’t get very far when we ask how Buddhists have responded to our
questions. We learn much more, even about closely related matters, once
we learn how to ask *their* questions. Heim goes further than most in
showing us what that could mean.
