+++
title = "Daṇḍin and the"
full_title = "Daṇḍin and the Philosophy of Poetics"
date = "2016-01-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/16/da%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8din-and-the-philosophy-of-poetics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/16/da%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8din-and-the-philosophy-of-poetics/).

Daṇḍin and the Philosophy of Poetics

I’m taking a cue from Malcolm’s
[contention](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/01/11/spoken-sanskrit-and-dandin/)
that the tradition of poetics (*alaṅkāraśāstra*) can and should be
brought into “philosophical” conversations. And since I recently
attended a
[workshop](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTn74Qx5mPsTdYxkp6R3lhrG_pu_CUn8V)
in Jerusalem (organized by Yigal Bronner, David Shulman, and Charles
Hallisey) devoted to one of the most influential works of poetics in
Sanskrit, Daṇḍin’s *Mirror of Poetry* (*Kāvyādarśa*), I’ll share a few
thoughts about the philosophy–poetics interface.

First, it’s beyond question that Sanskrit poetics ultimately became more
or less a full-fledged *śāstra*—an intellectual discipline, with a
distinctive set of questions and problems. And it’s also beyond question
that many of the topics of this *śāstra* are properly philosophical and
fully deserve to be brought into comparative and contemporary
discussions of, for example, theories of meaning. But Daṇḍin wrote
around 700 CE, and he is largely uninterested in, or unacquainted with,
the more technical and philosophical aspects of language and figuration.
Like Bhāmaha, who likely preceded Daṇḍin by several generations, Daṇḍin
based his *Mirror of Poetry* on a traditional list of a few dozen
figures of speech, which he defines and exemplifies. As several
participants in the workshop (notably Lawrence McCrea) pointed out, “the
Kashmiris” such as Ānandavardhana, Rudraṭa, Abhinavagupta, Ruyyaka and
so on, whose contributions to poetics gave the discourse its systematic
and philosophical character, were not particularly enamored of Daṇḍin.
He was, as Abhinavagupta called him, “old” (*cirantana*) and maybe
“old-fashioned.” He didn’t propose a single organizing concept for
poetics, as Ānandavardhana did with suggestion; he didn’t reorganize
figures on the basis of some principled classification, as Rudraṭa did;
unlike Ānandavardhana and Ruyyaka, he doesn’t explicitly thematize his
interventions in the field. We might want to say: the philosophy faculty
at your local university might let in Ānandavardhana or Ruyyaka, but
they wouldn’t be so fast to let in Daṇḍin.

But reading Daṇḍin as a contemporary philosopher—or as a Kashmiri
intellectual of the 10th century—is only one way to read him. The very
things that might aggravate that kind of reader might make the text
attractive to other kinds of readers: the lack of a single conceptual
“key” that everything relates to (or alternatively, an avoidance of
reductionism); the lack of an overarching theory of meaning (or
alternatively, an openness to several competing theories of meaning);
the lack of closure in the elaboration of figures, signalled by Daṇḍin’s
constant reminders that the subvarieties he chooses to list or exemplify
by no means exhaust all of the possibilities. And the *Mirror of Poetry*
was indeed attractive to many readers, from Mongolia to Sri Lanka;
clearly they saw in it a text that does not simply theorize an existing
practice, but (to quote [Nagaraja
Rao](https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLTn74Qx5mPsTdYxkp6R3lhrG_pu_CUn8V&feature=player_detailpage&v=RYKdsw8e1Zk#t=551))
actually encourages people to compose poetry. Does this mean that poets
have gotten more out of the *Mirror* than philosophers? Maybe, but maybe
the bigger lesson is this: there are things that Daṇḍin and his readers
knew, which they didn’t know “in a philosophical way,” which they were
perhaps not even aware of knowing, but which can serve to ground and
focus our own discussions of the issues that arise from the figurative
use of language.

What are those things? To start with, language is a social practice. The
norms of language use are socially enforced: as Daṇḍin memorably says,
language is your personal wish-granting cow when you use it correctly,
but when you use it incorrectly, you become the cow. Literature
especially is a highly normed practice, with conventions, metrical
forms, languages, and canonical texts that participants are expected to
be very familiar with. This background knowledge is extremely important
for adjudicating questions of meaning.

Second, every “archetypal” figure, such as simile, has “ectypal”
variants. Sometimes these variants can be classified into well-known and
exhaustive categories (e.g., “past,” “present,” and “future,” or
“partial” and “complete,” or “compounded” and “uncompounded”), but often
the variants are characterized by one of a countless variety of
syntactic or semantic operations that add a twist (my colleagues in
Jersualem would probably say: “intensification”) to the figure: reversal
(the moon is like your face), negation (your face is not like the moon
\[because the moon is blemished\]), co-construal (the moon is like your
face and your face is like the moon), non-construal (your face is like
your face \[alone\]). Daṇḍin’s treatment often revolves around the
“intensification” of a figure by these subsidiary operations. Each
figure is therefore a complex of several elements. Hence, although there
is one sense in which the semantic functions of a verse culminate in a
self-contained meaning, there is another sense in which the “reader’s
meaning” goes beyond this syntactically and semantically self-contained
target and extends to “intertexts” (those other texts that the present
text calls to mind) and “interfigures” (those other figures that the
present figure calls to mind).

Third, the general and the specific are seamlessly integrated in the
*Mirror* in a way that few other texts, in any language, have managed to
duplicate. What is a simile? We can define it in general and abstract
terms (the expression of a relationship between a standard of comparison
and a target of comparison on the basis of one or more shared
qualities), or we can instantiate it with one of several ubiquitous
examples (your face is like a lotus). Daṇḍin is committed to doing both,
although often elements of the definition only become clear in the
example, and more generally, the top-down approach and bottom-up
approach complement each other. I am not quite sure what to make of this
complementarity, but there are seem to be implicit claims about the
relationship of categorial knowledge to concrete knowledge, of theory to
practice, and so on.
