+++
title = "McMindfulness and"
full_title = "McMindfulness and Engaged Buddhism the twin innovations"
date = "2019-12-22"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/12/22/mcmindfulness-and-engaged-buddhism-the-twin-innovations/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/12/22/mcmindfulness-and-engaged-buddhism-the-twin-innovations/).

McMindfulness and Engaged Buddhism: the twin innovations

[Ron Purser’s critique of
McMindfulness](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/in-defence-of-mcmindfulness/)
is in line with [William Edelglass’s critique of the “happiness
turn”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/does-santideva-think-bodhisattvas-are-happy/)
in Western Buddhism. Purser and Edelglass are both right to note that
something new, less traditional, *is* going on in modern mindfulness.
For there *are* parts of Buddhism that secular mindfulness leaves out,
intentionally. Purser is right about that: right mindfulness
(*sammāsati*) is only one part of the traditional Noble Eightfold Path,
and mindfulness practices often leave out the rest. And so he is also
right to ask the question:

> what is mindfulness for? Is it merely to attain better health, higher
> exam scores, focused concentration at work, or “self-compassion?” Is
> it a medical form of self-improvement? In a way, posing the question
> is tantamount to asking what constitutes “the good life,” the
> traditional basis of philosophy. (79)

Indeed it is. And that is of course a difficult question. *But* it is
important that the traditional Buddhist answers to that question are no
closer to Purser’s anti-capitalist activism (or to [Edelglass’s
concern](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/does-santideva-think-bodhisattvas-are-happy/)
to alleviate “deprivation, violence, illness, racism, and environmental
degradation”) than they are to secular mindfulness. I suspect they are
further away from it.

Purser makes a biting critique of a San Francisco “Wisdom 2.0”
conference that featured corporate mindfulness teachers: “such outmoded
traditions as Buddhism clearly need upgrading from Wisdom 1.0.” (177) It
is easy to laugh at such attempts to modernize Buddhism. But Purser
should be careful which houses he throws stones at. For he then
compliments the protesters outside this conference, objecting to San
Francisco’s tech-driven housing crisis, led by one Amanda Ream. And here
he tells us that “Ream, a member of the Buddhist Peace Fellowship, was
effectively teaching ‘Wisdom 101.'” (178) Purser’s language at least
suggests that the Buddhist Peace Fellowship –ground zero for the
Western Engaged Buddhist movement –is teaching authentic premodern
Buddhism in a way that corporate mindfulness is not. Such a claim would
be *absolutely* false, and should not be allowed to stand.

Purser tacitly admits as much when he describes Thich Nhat Hanh, born in
1926, as “one of the pioneers of socially engaged Buddhism” (191),
effectively implying that this particular brand of “Wisdom 1.0” was
pioneered in the 20th century, just as modern mindfulness was. Engaged
Buddhism is a modern movement with Western roots, much of which rejects
some of classical Buddhism’s core tenets. The BPF, in particular, [was
founded in explicit
defiance](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/07/listening-to-contemporary-disengaged-voices/)
to the instructions of its own traditional Buddhist teachers.

Engaged Buddhism and modern mindfulness together make up a large
component of the complex that is [modernized
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/01/farewell-to-yavanayana/).
Their histories are closely tied, both going back to colonial-era
reformers like [Anagarika
Dharmapala](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anagarika_Dharmapala) who
wanted to make Buddhism newly relevant to an age that valorized science,
capitalism and political activism. And so engaged Buddhism adds to
traditional Buddhism a belief in the importance of activism, with strong
roots in the Victorian era’s utilitarian and Marxist traditions; modern
mindfulness adds a belief in the importance of science, denying rebirth
and turning to psychological research.

Now, I’m no advocate of trying to [maintain a pristine premodern
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/authenticity-then-and-now/).
Engaged Buddhists have a right to try to update Buddhism to reflect
their political commitments. What they have *no* right to do is make the
false claim that their political engagement is one iota less of a modern
innovation than the corporate mindfulness movement is. Engaged Buddhism
is *every bit* as untraditional. If we are going to critique corporate
mindfulness for being untraditional, we cannot reasonably do so from the
standpoint of engaged Buddhism, and if we are going to update Buddhism
to be politically engaged, we cannot then fault corporate mindfulness
for *its* updating Buddhism.

This same critique, I must note, applies in reverse. I myself have [been
critical of engaged Buddhists’
innovations](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)
while praising other modern innovations like [naturalizing
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/).
Given the latter point, I’ve tried to be clear that engaged Buddhism’s
innovations are not themselves the problem. That activism and scientific
naturalism are modern innovations does not make either one *bad*. What
is bad is to make a false claim by [*denying* that they are modern
innovations](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/03/acknowledging-newness/),
pretending engaged Buddhism or corporate mindfulness training were
already there in the dharma to start. So once we start from a
perspective of [modernized
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/01/farewell-to-yavanayana/)
– engaged or otherwise –our critique of other forms of modernized
Buddhism must not be on the grounds *that* they are modernized.

Rather, we need to acknowledge that each modernized Buddhism is a fusion
of Buddhism with non-Buddhist elements. That is not a criticism, since
most existing traditional Buddhisms [*also* include non-Buddhist
elements](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).
The key is to note *which* non-Buddhist elements are added, and evaluate
those on their own merits. That’s not an easy thing to do –in many ways
it comes down to evaluating an entire ethical system, which in turn
requires [identifying one’s own
system](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/02/belonging-rationally-to-a-tradition/).
But that more general process of ethical evaluation, rather than
innovation or the lack thereof, needs to be our basis for critique.
[*Inconsistency* is a
problem](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/why-worry-about-contradictions/)
in any ethical system, and when we belong to multiple traditions –which
is what a modernized Buddhism effectively requires – the risk of
inconsistency is higher. But there too, the problem is with potential
inconsistencies and not with innovation as such.

Purser is right to point out that modern mindfulness is detached from
the ethical framework in which traditional mindfulness was embedded. But
I would argue that that fact makes modern mindfulness *more* compatible
with socially engaged Buddhism! Because, as my [Disengaged Buddhism
article](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)
shows, the ethical framework of traditional Buddhism is one that does
not pursue the systemic change of society and is sometimes even hostile
to it. And that is so for [reasons Purser has himself
noted](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/in-defence-of-mcmindfulness/):
it claims our real problems are craving, anger and delusion, which are
phenomena in our minds and not the world – and trying to change the
world [might well make them
worse](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/).
We may well disagree with those reasons and prefer a modern
post-Victorian ethic of activism to a classical Buddhist ethic of
monastic restraint –but if we do, then we are *lucky* that modern
mindfulness separates itself from traditional Buddhist ethics. That
separation makes modern mindfulness more compatible with engaged
Buddhism than traditional mindfulness was, just as it makes modern
mindfulness more compatible with Christianity or with military
intervention.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/mcmindfulness-and-engaged-buddhism-the-twin-innovations)
