+++
title = "Your country’s not your"
full_title = "Your country’s not your blood"
date = "2012-03-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/03/your-countrys-not-your-blood/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/03/your-countrys-not-your-blood/).

Your country’s not your blood

I have to disagree with Henry: I don’t think there’s been selection for
ethnic nepotism. I somewhat suspect that there may have been recent
selection for more accurate altruism, in some populations.

Imagine that in much of history, people lived in small groups that often
fought with their neighbors. In that sort of situation, selection for
group altruism is at least possible, since the group is full of close
relatives, while the opponents are less closely related. Both sides
are probably members of the same broad ethnic group or race, but that
doesn’t matter : only the kinship coefficients matter.+++(4)+++

Suppose that many people emerge on to the stage of history with this
impulse to fight for their side: in the past, this always meant closely
related people. Now, with the emergence of states, they find themselves
fighting in armies, which feel like their side, but are no longer
closely related – not a bunch of cousins and such. It could well be
that many individuals are actually willing to risk themselves for that
state. They’re willing to die for truth, justice and the Assyrian Way.
It’s not genetically smart, but their adaptations are wired for past
circumstances. In the same way, you might eat saccharin instead of
sugar, or date a replicant instead of an actual human female ,
especially if the replicant looks like Sean Young in Bladerunner.+++(5)+++

Over time, this misfiring of altruism should decrease. Patriotism burns
itself out. Dying for Assyria doesn’t do your close relatives any good
at all. Some people will be more prone to this, some less, and that
tendency will be heritable. Those with a tendency to volunteer (in the
service of anything other than close relatives) should dwindle away over
time. But states are older in some places than others, and some have
made greater demands than others. Imagine a region where states have
been around longer, a place in which the locals have lived through
empire after empire after empire. They should have had the patriotism
bred clean out of them. They should feel altruistic about their
families, maybe their clan – and nothing else.

Ibn Khaldun talked a lot about asabiya, a kind of social solidarity.
According to him, it arose spontaneously in tribes and other small
kinship groups, and could be intensified by a religion. Ibn Khaldun
considered how this cohesion carried groups to power, while the gradual
loss of it eventually caused the fall of the dynasty. In the conquests
he describes, conquering nomadic tribes took over and started
intermarrying with generic farmers and townies – all of whom had
probably lost all their genetic tendencies to asabiya thousands of years
earlier.

Peter Turchin has talked about asabiya’s role in the rise of empires,
and how it seems to gradually be used up, never to return.

A certain amount of asabiya is probably really helpful in a republic.
You need to have lots of people willing to restrain themselves when in
power, and at least some willing to land on Omaha Beach. The degree of
ethnic purity is not in itself key: the important things is that they
haven’t had the asabiya, the genetically foolish wide-field altruism,
bred out of them. If they have it, they can cooperate just as if they
were related.

