+++
title = "Trent Colbert standing"
full_title = "Trent Colbert standing athwart the mob"
date = "2021-10-26"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/trent-colbert-standing-athwart-the"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/trent-colbert-standing-athwart-the).

Trent Colbert: standing athwart the mob



Share this post

Trent Colbert: standing athwart the mob

razib.substack.com

Copy link

Twitter

Facebook

Email

# Trent Colbert: standing athwart the mob

### How an individual stood up to the collective and lived to tell the tale

[TABLE]

Audio playback is not supported on your browser. Please upgrade.

|     |                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                  |     |
|-----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
|    | [![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_60,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack.com%2Fimg%2Faudio-player-backward.png)](javascript:void(0)) | [![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_96,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack.com%2Fimg%2Faudio-player-play.png)](javascript:void(0)) | [![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_60,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack.com%2Fimg%2Faudio-player-forward.png)](javascript:void(0)) |    |

1x1.25x1.5x1.75x2x

[TABLE]

![**Trent
Colbert**](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Ff85f569c-71fe-4000-b507-55fc986c1b9c_499x374.jpeg)

##### This is a “bonus episode” of the *Unsupervised Learning Podcast*. Due to the time-sensitivity of the discussion, I am posting this simultaneously to [Substack](http://razib.substack.com/) and [Libsyn](https://unsupervisedlearning.libsyn.com/), so both free and [paid](https://razib.substack.com/about?utm_source=menu-dropdown) subscribers are receiving this email.

##### Your regularly scheduled weekly [subscribers-only](https://razib.substack.com/about?utm_source=menu-dropdown) podcast will still be released this Thursday.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/trent-colbert-standing-athwart-the?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

Recently Yale Law School (YLS) student Trent Colbert wrote [Why I Didn’t
Apologize For That Yale Law School Email: We must end the culture of
performative
repentance](https://www.persuasion.community/p/why-i-didnt-apologize-for-that-yale)
for *[Persuasion](https://www.persuasion.community/)*. I was broadly
familiar with the culture-war saga that Colbert was caught up in, having
read a
[piece](https://news.google.com/articles/CAIiEK8ERefPWXDWdRdOlMmaoR0qGAgEKg8IACoHCAowjtSUCjC30XQwzqe5AQ?hl=en-US&gl=US&ceid=US%3Aen)
a few weeks ago in *The Washington Post* describing how a seemingly
innocent and jocular email triggered accusations of racism at YLS (as
well as Aaron Sibarium’s
[piece](https://freebeacon.com/campus/a-yale-law-student-sent-a-lighthearted-email-inviting-classmates-to-his-trap-house-the-school-is-now-calling-him-to-account/)
in *The Washington Free Beacon*). Colbert’s piece in
*[Persuasion](https://www.persuasion.community/)* made me curious about
him, and I reached out to talk about what he had seen, and the lessons
that we as a society and individuals might take from it.

First, Colbert gives us his own perspective of what transpired at YLS to
make him a “trending topic” on social media. Perhaps to the surprise of
Millennials, the 23-year-old Zoomer seemed not entirely familiar with
the well-known podcast [Chapo Trap
House](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chapo_Trap_House). As a member of
Gen X, I have to admit it's a little unnerving to hear Millennials
viewed as geriatric elders. But Colbert grew up in a world of
super-charged cultural change and perhaps perceives the passage of time
differently than those of us who came into adulthood before smartphones.
He contended that some of the offense others perceived might be a matter
of cohort differences and even just his casual Zoomer manner. Even a few
years'difference today might mean an entirely alternative landscape of
memes and sensibilities, so a subtle and wry reference among his
age-mates could strike an individual only a few years older as
offensive, opaque and “tone-deaf.”

With that in mind, I was curious about his background, and where he got
the strength to stand up to the YLS administrative bureaucracy. We
explored his relationship to his Cherokee background, as well as growing
up in a moderately conservative household where religion was important.
Colbert takes the idea of right and wrong seriously, and he felt that
his own conscience would not allow him to agree to an apology that was
premised on lies. Importantly, he also had a supportive group of friends
at YLS and a wider circle of backers in the community.

Eventually, we moved to broader social forces, and how his individual
choices and decisions might impact others. By doing the right thing,
rather than the easy thing, Colbert hopes to show that it is possible to
defeat the kind of bureaucratic machine that was unleashed upon him and
trigger [a preference
cascade](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preference_falsification) that
changes the culture on campus. And doing the right thing has not been
entirely easy, as Colbert admits to being uncomfortable with realizing
how others at YLS viewed him purely through a racial lens, as well as
the fact that many prominent organizations accused him of being a
racist.

Overall, perhaps the take-home lesson is that it doesn’t take an
exceptional person to take on the system. Just someone who has a core
set of principles and friends and family who support them when they
might have to make decisions that lead to socially unpopular outcomes.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/trent-colbert-standing-athwart-the?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

[TABLE]

