+++
title = "bhagavad giitA,"
full_title = "bhagavad giitA, evolution of bhAgavata system and buddha"
date = "2013-01-15"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/01/15/bhagavad-giita-evolution-of-bhagavata-system-and-buddha/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/01/15/bhagavad-giita-evolution-of-bhagavata-system-and-buddha/).

bhagavad giitA, evolution of bhAgavata system and buddha



The evolution of philosophical and theological ideas in ancient India is
a matter of great interest and use to those who chalk out the movement
of thought process in any pagan society.

On one hand, we have a direct lineage from the Vedic r.s.i-s to modern
AcArya-s of various sampradAya-s. On the other hand, we have the
s’raman.ic traditions which were given definite shape by Buddha ad
mahAviira. Their ideas evolved further and have given rise to several
shoots and branches as well.

We have to keep in mind that none of the sampradAya-s have grown in a
vacuum. They have been constantly influenced by the other theologies and
philosophies. The ancient Vaidika system has been influenced by the
para-vedic worship systems involving mUrti pUjA, various local deities,
bhAgavata system etc and has given rise to the present strand of hindu
dharma over a period of several millennia.

Our current post is about the origin of bhAgavata sect’s impact on
vaidika traditions as well as its subsequent effect on the nAstika
philosophies. One common statement made by many so called ‘indologists’
is that giitA is a post-buddha innovation. Some enthusiasts go to the
extent of stating that giitA is anti-varn.As’rama system as it opens the
door of moks.a to everyone. Elst feels that the text supports the
varn.As’rama system as ‘varn.asan\~kara’ is considered as the main point
of argument by both kr.s.n.a and arjuna. Some, like Aravindan, make much
of the fact that krs.n.a had used only the word ‘san\~kara’ and not
‘varn.a san\~kara’ – thus, in their opinion, the bhagavAn was not
enamored with varn.a divisions. Trouble arises when these people begin
to use the so-called ‘anti-varn.a’ statements of the giitA as an
evidence for giitA post dating buddha. Evidence in support of this low
date of giitA is given as follows – the use of nirvAn.a in giitA and the
supposedly more egalitarian approach of the giitA.

Let us analyze the two evidences – one by one:

1.  The use of ‘nirvAn.a’ means nothing. The word is found throughout
    mahAbhArata. The ‘mainstream Indologists’ are bound by the problem
    of trying to compress the vast vaidika and itihAsa-purAn.a
    literature into a short time frame. As such, they place the
    upanis.ads in 6^(th) century BCE and thus, buddha is just a century
    away from the upanis.adic age. But the change in language is too
    vast between early upanis.ads and buddha’s pAli-prAkr.t-s. Moreover,
    these indologists tend to place mahAbhArata as post-buddha
    literature or at least a major portion of it is considered as
    post-buddha. But there is not a single mention of buddha or
    hisphilosophy anywhere in mahAbhArata text. The text seems to have
    been written down before the age of buddha. The only clear
    post-buddha references in mahAbhArata are the names of various
    tribes who invaded India after the time of buddha, cities from later
    date etc (e.g. name of Antioch) found in some of the verses. But the
    mention of tribes and cities of later period could have easily been
    the result of addition by copying scribes – they are simply found in
    the list of the countries/tribes/cities. These post-buddha items are
    found very rarely and mostly in lists. Whereas, the word ‘nirvAn.a’
    is found throughout the mahAbhArata. The word is very much a part of
    the language of the text. As’valAyana gr.hya sUtra (3-4-4) mentions
    both bhArata (24000 verses epic) and mahAbhArata (100000 verses
    ‘expanded’ epic). The sUtra literature predates buddha. Sethna has
    pointed out that the Sutra literature reflects the material culture
    of the Mature Harappan times. Also, they mention about the presence
    of a pole star – which gives the date of 3^(rd) millennium BCE as
    established by RN Iyengar (see <http://tinyurl.com/ad6yu3k>). Thus,
    the sUtra literature predates buddha and we can place the
    mahAbhArata prior to buddha. Dharma (dhamma) was very much an
    essential part of the language of buddha and he had not coined the
    term. Rather, he had simply borrowed the term from vaidikas.
    Similarly, we can conclude that ‘nirvAn.a’ was another term which
    was borrowed by buddha (we place the origin of the term ‘nirvAn.a’
    in the post-early upanis.adic period but before buddha’s arrival).





In the ghat.a jAtaka, buddha claims that he was born as ghat.a
pan.d.ita, a brother of vAsudeva. The jAtaka mentions ten brothers and a
sister – an\~janAdevii (ekAnAMs’A), vAsudeva, baladeva, candadeva
(candra), suriyadeva (sUrya), aggideva (agni), varun.adeva (varun.a),
ajjuna (arjuna), pajjuna (pradyumna), ghat.apand.ita (buddha’s previous
birth) and an\~kura (akrUra). The jAtaka also states that vAsudeva
taught a vijja (vidyA) before his death. Thus, it is clear that buddha
knew about a highly developed bhAgavata pantheon which included
vAsudeva, his vyUha-s and also ekAnAMs’A. GiitA must have been popular
by his time – which explains why he states that vAsudeva taught a vidyA.
To claim giitA as a post-buddha Vedic reaction is unwarranted. GiitA
clearly preceded buddha and it is not a vaidika but a bhAgavata-sAttvata
text with clear sectarian marks which shall be seen below.

Bhagavad giitA, unlike the brahma sUtra-s, opens the door of moks.a to
all castes and genders. GiitA is a bhAgavata text. Its sectarian
orientation can be clearly seen from statements in 7.17, 7.19-20, 11.43,
18.62, 18.66 etc. where the exclusive worship of vAsudeva as well as the
supremacy of vAsudeva are enunciated. The biija of bhAgavata dharma is
found in nArAyan.iiya section of mahAbhArata. The development of
sAttvata-bhAgavata dharma is seen in this section. The oldest upAkhyAna
of this section is that of uparicaravasu (12.322-324). The story does
not even mention the word vAsudeva. It calls vis.n.u by various names
such as nArAyan.a, vis.n.u, hari etc. vAsudeva and his vyUha-s are not
mentioned in this story. It is mentioned in the upAkhyAna (12.324) that
there was a dispute between brAhman.a-s and the deva-s regarding the
oblations to be used in yajn\~a-s. brAhman.a-s maintained that only
grains shall be offered in sacrifice whereas deva-s maintained that meat
must be offered (pAn\~carAtra system advocates use of pis.t.a pas’u in
the place of animals for yajn\~as – thus, the avoidance of animal
sacrifice seems to have been an ancient innovation of bhAgavata
tradition and it predated the advent of nAstika AcArya-s like mahAviira
and buddha). uparicaravasu, a king who followed sAttvata dharma, was
asked to mediate. Due to his partiality towards deva-s, he declared that
meat must be offered in sacrifice. But the brAhman.a-s got angry and
cursed him to fall into a deep pit. There, uparicaravasu prayed to
nArAyan.a (only to nArAyan.a – beginning of ekanti dharma). It is stated
that only purus.a hari (vis.n.u) was worshipped by the king by means of
which he succeeded in attaining liberation from the curse and attained
brahmaloka.

The succeeding chapters mention the various vyUha-s as well as vAsudeva.
Thus, we can see that sAttvata tradition begun as exclusive worship of
vis.n.u-nArAyan.a. It considered vis.n.u as the supreme deity, the
paramAtman. Later, the vAsudeva cult was absorbed into this sect and
vAsudeva was identified with vis.n.u (it is also possible that vAsudeva
cult of yAdava-s was itself an evolution of vis.n.u worship where
vAsudeva is a developed form of vis.n.u-nArAyan.a). But at this time,
rudra worship had begun to gain popularity among the masses – pAs’upata
mata was born. As a subversive method to co-opt and coalesce this path
into their own system, bhAgavata-s used a form of hari-hara sAmyavAda
but still keeping hari as the source of hara and thus, ultimately hari
alone being the supreme being (though rudra was seen as an emanation of
this supreme being). mahAbhArata (12.330.44-49) mention how
nara-nArAyan.a and rudra fought each other in the aftermath of
daks.ayajn\~a. the verses show that they were in a stalemate – the s’Ula
of rudra was wasted by nArAyan.a (it caused a mark on nArAyan.a’s chest
and turned his hair green) while the paras’u hurled by nara was broken.
nArAyan.a held the throat of rudra and his throat became blue as a
consequence. In mahAbhArata (12.330.59), brahmA says that nArAyan.a
created him as well as rudra (rudra was born from the anger of
nArAyan.a). He entreats rudra to calm down. On hearing brahmA’s request,
rudra calms down and begins to propitiate nArAyan.a. In mahAbhArata
(12.330.64), nArAyan.a tells rudra that there is no difference between
rudra and himself. Thus, a form of harihara sAmyavAda had begun here.
But typical of any vais.n.ava literature, rudra is still shown as being
born from vis.n.u and he also worships vis.n.u.

In mahAbhArata (12.337.59), the five major philosophical systems are
identified as sAn\~khya, yoga, pAn\~carAtra, veda and pAs’upata.
mahAbhArata (12.337.64-66) state that all these systems identify
nArAyan.a alone as the supreme being and the sole being worthy of
worship. It also states that there is no other being like nArAyan.a.

But ekAnAMs’A is not mentioned anywhere in the nArAyan.iiya section. She
is first mentioned as a goddess and sister of vAsudeva in harivaMs’a
where she is developed as a mighty devii on her own.

Thus, we can see three stages of bhAgavata dharma:

(a) ekAnti dharma – where exclusive worship of nArAyan.a as the
supreme being is the most important directive



(b) caturvyUha system – a system of caturvyUha mUrti-s came up with
vAsudeva, pradyumna, aniruddha and saMkars.an.a being the four vyUha-s



(c) addition of ekAnAMs’A – ekAnAMs’A , the sister of vAsudeva. She
is the bhAgavata adaption of vaidika lunar goddess, kuhU (new moon
goddess)



Ghat.a jAtaka belongs to an age which is posterior to above three
stages. Thus, by the time of buddha, the evolution of the above three
stages of bhAgavata system was complete. nArAyan.iiya section of
mahAbhArata belongs to the completion of second stage. But the upAkhyAna
of uparicara vasu is older than the second stage. Bhagavad giitA belongs
to the period of early second stage. ekAnti dharma is found in giitA.
But caturvyUha system was not well developed yet. And ekAnAMs’a was
non-existent.

On the basis of the above analysis, we conclude that giitA predated
buddha. bhAgavata tradition begun as exclusive worship of vis.n.u and
developed into a mighty philosophical system which freely borrowed from
vedAnta and molded itself into an Astika tradition. Its greatest
philosophical text, bhagavad giitA, attempted to bring about a synthesis
between sAn\~khya, yoga and vedAnta traditions with a definite sectarian
theistic leaning towards vAsudeva-vis.n.u-nArAyan.a. The text was
successful in achieving its goal and with its popularity came to be
included as one of the three pillars of vedAnta – the prasthAnatrayii
(other two being upanis.ad-s and brahma sutra-s).



