+++
title = "Expansionist Emperor –"
full_title = "Expansionist Emperor – s’rii lalitAditya muktapiida of kAs’miira"
date = "2013-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/01/19/expansionist-emperor-srii-lalitaditya-muktapiid-a-of-kasmiira/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/01/19/expansionist-emperor-srii-lalitaditya-muktapiid-a-of-kasmiira/).

Expansionist Emperor – s’rii lalitAditya muktapiid.a of kAs’miira

We read about the great Hindu dynasties of Gupta, Maurya, Chalukya and
Cola. We even read about Chandellas, the various other rajaputra
dynasties, the rAs.t.rakUt.a-s and other dynasties. But the dynasties of
kAs’miira are completely overlooked by our textbooks. Perhaps the
greatest of all Hindu emperors who carried his flag to various foreign
kingdoms was born in kAs’miira – the great lalitAditya muktapiid.a, the
conqueror of Tibetans, Dards, Turks

kalhan.a writes about this conqueror:

> “rAjA s’rii lalitAdityaH sArvabhaumastatobhavat ! prAdes’ikes’vara
> sras.t.ur vidher buddher agocaraH !”

(rAjataran\~gin.ii 4-126)

> Then, the king s’rii lalitAditya became the ruler of all lands. He was
> much beyond the range of the intellect of vidhi (fate) who creates the
> rulers of regions/provinces. (kalhan.a says that lalitAditya created
> his own destiny for he was beyond the purview of fate).

4.132 refers to his conquest of antarvedii (gan\~gA-yamunA doab).

4.134-145 refer to his conquest of yas’ovarman’s kingdom. Yas’ovarman
was the benefactor of bhavabhUti and vAkpati.

Verses 4.146-162 refer to his vijaya yAtra through the lands of
kalin\~ga, gaud.a, karn.At.a, dravid.a, kon\~kan.a, dvArakA and avanti.
(footnote 1)

From 4.163, kalhan.a describes lalitAditya’s foreign conquests. He
entered the vast pathless regions of uttarApatha.

4.165 – the kAmboja-s (of Afghanistan, tajikistan) were deprived of
their horses.

4.166 – tuhkhAra-s (turks of central asia) ran away from the battlefield
leaving their horses and escaped to the mountain peaks

4.167 – He defeated mummuni (a lord of turks?) thrice in battlefield
(triinvArAn samare jitvA)

4.168 – bhaut.t.a-s (Tibetans) also faced his strength in battle.
kalhan.a writes that their cintA was not visible on their face due to
their pale complexion (one’s face pales when in fear but the Tibetans
being already pale complexioned people, such a reaction cannot be
identified through skin color).

4.169 – the darada-s (of gilgit, swat and peshawar regions) were
conquered.

4.172 – refers to the emperor’s sojourn through taklamakan desert.

4.173-174 – his conquest over a strii-rAjya in the region

4.175 – uttara kuru-s ran away in fear.

4.185 – he built a temple for nr.simha in striirAjya. Thus, it was not
only a physical conquest but also resulted in spread of dharma.

4.367-368–the warrior emperor’s death occurred during one of his
expeditions into foreign lands. It was believed by some that he died due
to snow fall in a country called AryAn.aka (iran). While some others
believed that he entered the flames in order to save his prestige during
some san\~kat.a (san\~kat.e kvApi dahanam prAviks.aditi kecana). In our
opinion, it could be a combination of both. His army might have suffered
losses due to untimely heavy snowfall. This might have put him in a
precarious situation within the enemy territory. Rather than being
captured, he must have preferred to end his life on his own terms. Even
his death sings his glory. By the time of lalitAditya’s reign, iran was
under the control of arab muslims. lalitAditya had taken the fight into
enemy lands and even his ultimate demise seems to be a result of a freak
snow storm.

This emperor burst through the passes of the northern mountains and
humbled the tribes of tibet, central asia and afghanistan). He was a
conqueror who never lost a single battle. As kalhan.a says he was an
emperor who wrote his own destiny and what a destiny it turned out to
be. Where the cola emperors sent expeditions to south east asia and
established their over lordship there, the kAs’miira monarch did the
same from tibet in the east to central asia and iran in the west, from
xinjiang in north to the Indian subcontinent in the south.

His successors proved to be of much less mettle and his show of power
was not consolidated. But lalitAditya must be promoted as one of those
conquerors who can be an inspiration for every generation of Hindus.

——————————————————————————————

footnote 1: While lalitAditya’s expedition up to gaud.a seems to be
based on actual fact, the description of his vijaya yAtra (digvijaya)
through south india, dvArakA and avanti seem to be poetic imagination.
Or maybe kalhan.a wanted to bestow the digvijaya of entire indian
subcontinent on his hero. One evidence proving the claim that it is a
result of poetic imagination is this: kalhan.a says that karnAt.a was
ruled by rat.t.A (rAs.t.rakUt.a-s). And he calls rat.t.A as a lady, a
queen. Moreover, lalitAditya ruled during the early half of the eighth
century CE. cAlukya-s were very powerful during this time and they
dominated the region to the south of vindhya parvata. vikramAditya II is
credited to have won every battle. But we need not doubt lalitAditya’s
expedition to the north beyond the himAlaya. annals of tang refer to his
conquest of tibet. al-berUnii (in chapter 76 of his book on india)
states that kAsmiira people celebrated the anniversary of the victory of
emperor muttai (muktapiid.a) over the turks on the second of caitra.
Thus, his invasion of foreign territories beyond the borders of the
indian subcontinent is well established.

