+++
title = "SamnyAsa is not the"
full_title = "SamnyAsa is not the central point of Vaidika Dharma"
date = "2013-01-06"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/01/06/samnyasa-is-not-the-central-point-of-vaidika-dharma/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/01/06/samnyasa-is-not-the-central-point-of-vaidika-dharma/).

SamnyAsa is not the central point of Vaidika Dharma

For some reason, modern day Hindus are indulging in the tomfoolery of
considering samnyAsa as the greatest stage of dharma. They even claim
that it is the ‘most profound and exemplary invention’ (used by several
so-called Hindu Right friends of mine) of Hindu dharma. These ‘modern
Hindu scholars’ are of the opinion that samnyAsa is the central point,
the very axis, of Hindu dharma.

The truth is somewhat different. The origin of As’rama system is an
interesting study. Brahmacarya is the first and compulsory As’rama.
Olivelle feels that initially the As’rama system was one where in the
snAtaka (graduate from a Vaidika school) selected an As’rama for his
life rather than the sequential life stages that we see now. Olivelle
makes a very compulsive argument for this view. It appears to be true
that a snAtaka had the choice to select an As’rama. But ancient Vaidika
texts themselves seem to show that the selection of one As’rama need not
be for life. One could indeed become a gr.hastha and then, a samnyAsin.

Br.hadAran.yaka upanis.ad (2.4 – prathama maitreyii brAhmana) shows that
YAjn\~avalkya had entered gr.hasthAs’rama and then, entered into
samnyAsa. The chapter begins with the r.s.i declaring to Maitreyii (his
wife) about his desire to renounce. He says that he will divide the
property between Maitreyii and KAtyAyanii (his two wives) before taking
to samnyAsa. Hence, we will stick to the traditional interpretation of
the various As’ramas being sequential stages (at least since the time of
late brAhman.as and early upanis.ad period) though some snAtakas might
have taken to samnyAsa directly. Also, just because a few snAtakas
selected samnyAsAs’rama immediately after their graduation, it does not
mean that the AcAryas were in favor of such action. One must remember
that Hindu society had given lot of freedom to the individuals. Buddha
and MahAviira were allowed to preach against the Vaidika dharma. Their
ideas were opposed philosophically. Similarly, while some people might
have practiced taking to samnyAsa directly after their brahmacarya
period, it was certainly not a favored practice among the ancient
AcAryas.

That some people held that one can enter any of the three As’ramas after
becoming a snAtaka is confirmed by Gautama Dharmasutra (3.1) –
“tasyAs’ramavikalpam ekebruvate” (eke – some people). But the same text
(3.36) states that there is only one valid As’rama as only gr.hastha
stage is expressly mentioned by the Vedas (entire Vedic literature from
Samhita to Upanis.ad mentions the importance of procreation – thus,
gr.hastha As’rama is “the As’rama”). Similarly, Apastamba Dharma sutra
(2-9-21-5) also states that there was a practice where one can choose
the As’rama to be followed after becoming a snAtaka. Combining these
statements with the legend from Br.hadAran.yaka mentioned above, we may
come to a conclusion like this: a snAtaka was able to select any of the
As’ramas. But it need not be for life; a gr.hastha may indeed decide to
become a yati (ascetic) in his later life. Thus, some students jumped
the intervening As’ramas directly to samnyAsa. But it does not mean that
one cannot enter gr.hasthAs’rama and then, proceed towards samnyAsa.

All said, the ancient dharmAcAryas were very categorical in stating
their preference for gr.hasthAs’rama against others. Apastamba
(2-9-24-1) says that a person achieves amr.tatva (immortality) through
his offspring. This sentiment is as old as that of R.g Veda. RV (5-4-10)
prays “O Agnii, may I attain immortality through my children”. Apastamba
(2-9-24-8) cites PrajApati and confirms that only those who take to
procreation of children among other duties are those who are supported
by PrajApati. Those who do not follow these duties (thus, anyone who
fails to procreate – which can be done only in gr.hasthAs’rama) become
dust and get destroyed. TaittirIya upanis.ad (1-11) orders a snAtaka
thus: “..prajAtantum mA vyavacchetsIH” – “do not cut off the line of
progeny”

Thus, the most important duty of any Hindu is to enter gr.hasthAs’rama.
Gr.hasthAs’rama is the central point of Hindu dharma (certainly not
samnyAsa). Taking to samnyAsa without fulfilling one’s debt to his
ancestors (pitr. r.n.a) is not advised by the ancient AcAryas. Undue
importance to asceticism is a characteristic of S’raman.a traditions
(Bauddha and Jaina) which is also reflected in Advaita worldview later
on (e.g. as.t.Avakra giitA). Advaitins viewed the world as an illusion
and as such, they decided to give more importance to world denying
asceticism (which is an innovation and not supported by the ancient
dharmasutra texts). It is to be remembered that advaita had indeed
appropriated some bauddha ideas with its philosophy being a result of
combination of Buddhist and upanis.adic ideas (see
<http://tinyurl.com/bbobj9u>). The opinion of the dharmasutra writers is
crystal clear. They were not in favor of ascetic traditions being given
undue prominence. They were very much against any step taken by a
snAtaka to become a samnyAsin without entering the gr.hasthAs’rama.

