+++
title = "A political roundup Aug"
full_title = "A political roundup Aug 2025"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/08/19/a-political-roundup-aug-2025/"
date = "2025-08-19"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/08/19/a-political-roundup-aug-2025/).

A political roundup: Aug 2025

This is just a brief discursion to note our thoughts on some recent events with the advantage of hindsight and to tentatively look forward in terms of what might ensue. The chief event in the period we are covering was the battle with the subcontinental Army of Islam, fielded by the Terrorist State in April-May of 2025. Another event of intersecting significance in the period that followed was the Prathamonmatta assault on the Islamic state in Iran and their attempt to draw the Mahāmleccha into that war. This was followed by the Mleccharāṭ Nariṅgapuruṣa’s move to break with India, potentially pointing to a hidden arc of progression.

In the elections last year, the Lāṭarāja made it through less [comprehensively than expected](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2024/06/08/indian-elections-2024/) (at least by us). This led us to suspect that the anti-H forces would be emboldened to undermine his efforts in safeguarding the Indian state. Nevertheless, he continued as before with his mostly successful track record of keeping the military assaults of the third Abrahamism at bay in the northwest and the northeast (less successfully, that of the second Abrahamism in the northeast). However, starting a little over an year ago, we saw the mleccha machinations play out to try to tamp down the trajectory on which India was coursing. This began with the then reigning Jīrṇa-piṇḍaka’s regime backing their traditionally marūnmatta agents to bring a harder marūnmatta regime in TSB. What followed was the ongoing ethnic cleansing of the residual H from TSB. TSB was now on a trajectory to catch up with the archetypal terrorist state, its peer from the northwest. There was much clamor within the deśa that the Lāṭapati should do something to aid the suffering H of TSB, and was blamed for doing nothing. We believe there are multiple, not mutually exclusive possibilities here. 1. He felt that once Piṇḍaka was overthrown by the Nāriṅga, there might be a return to a less turbulent state. 2. He correctly reasoned that it was too costly for India to open two or more fronts because the Cīna-s, mlecchas and TSP would come to TSB’s aid. Further, it might pose logistical challenges given the situation on the ground in residual Vañga, 3. He had intelligence that the bulk of the H in TSB might not rally effectively into a resistance movement aligned with Indian interests.

This was followed by the fall of Piṇḍaka’s Ṣaṇḍa-rājya among the Mahāmleccha and the [recapture of the āsandi by Vijaya-nāma-aruṇa-vyāpārin](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2024/11/10/a-geopolitical-round-up-vijayavijaya-and-related-issues/). Initially, it seemed quite good for the H, given their natural enmity with the Ṣaṇḍa-rājya. This was signaled by the Vyāparin sending his uparāṭ Anūpa to visit the deśa along with his H strī. However, right when he was visiting, the ghāzī-s struck. Unfortunately, when it comes to the ghāzī-s, all it takes is one intelligence failure for a serious breakthrough, and that is what happened in the form of the strike on unarmed vacationers on April 22, 2025, in Kāśmīra. The Lāṭeśvara had made a reputation for being firm in his reaction to such attacks through the earlier surgical strikes launched in June 2015 (Myanmar Strike against NE mleccha-backed preta terrorists), September 2016 Uri strike (against the marūnmatta-s from TSP), and the February 2019 Balakot strikes (against the marūmatta-s in TSP). This increased the pressure on him to act decisively in response to this massive attack on civilians.

Duly retaliation this time was more dramatic – much more than any of the previous surgical strikes against the TSP terror infrastructure – aptly named Operation Sindhoor, it was initiated at 1:08 AM, May 7th 2025, after the termination of the Sindhu water treaty with TSP. As per the official notice, this operation covered nine sites relating to terror camps and infrastructure across the Islamic terrorist state. Officially, the strikes included BrahMos cruise missiles, SCALP missiles from the French-made Rafale jets, and Israeli-made SkyStriker loitering munitions. The Indian position was that these strikes were primarily aimed at eliminating over 100 “terrorists” rather than the murderous ghāzī-s wrapped in brown uniforms. However, there is some evidence that either during the original strikes or in response to the TSPian counterattack, further strikes were launched on military infrastructure. Some reports mentioned that 11 of TSP’s 13 operational airbases, including radar nodes and command-and-control facilities, were also attacked. Further, a “warning strike” was reportedly launched on the Kirana Hills site housing TSP’s nuclear facilities. It is clear that TSP launched a major counterattack using drone swarms (supplied by Türkiye: a throwback to the Rūmī Khān days), missile attacks and fighter planes (supplied by the Cīna-s and Mahāmleccha). The Indian air defense systems, which included the famed Russian S-400, gave an excellent performance defeating the TSPian response. The core hostilities, including TSP’s response, continued till May 10th 2025, when the marūnmatta military leadership sent messages to their Indian counterparts expressing willingness for a ceasefire. From the Independence Day awards ceremonies, it does seem that the Army of Islam suffered relatively heavy losses, which might have been a key factor in TSP quickly coming to the table for a ceasefire. Several of our friends and relatives felt we should have hit the marūnmatta-s much harder and brought them to their knees. However, we believe that the Indian government had made a considered decision not to escalate this further, and they likely had good reasons for that (more than the legendary softness that characterized Hindu rulers in the past).

As we are not military analysts, it is not for us to delve further into the military details of this operation; however, here is where the key political ramifications of this come in. It is our perception that, until the strikes happened, the Mahāmleccha were generally favorable towards H. We would even say that this was the sentiment with which Anūpa and his family were sent to India on a “diplomatic mission”. However, once the strikes got underway, the Mahāmleccha position changed. The widely accepted take on this is the tantrum of the Picchilaka. The Nāriṅgapuruṣa delusionally perceives himself as some kind of world monarch who makes peace between the lesser warring nations of the world. He duly deluded himself that he was somehow responsible for the ceasefire and wanted India to acknowledge the same with the attitude of a pliant vassal. In reality, this is merely a pathological expression of the Āṅglamleccha belief that, as masters of the world (nowadays the Mahāmleccha), they alone have the prerogative for expeditionary or punitive strikes on other nations (the only exception being Uparimarkata, from which they derive their identity itself). Thus, be it Russia or India, in their eyes, they do not have the “right” to carry out expeditionary strikes, as they should be quietly accepting their lower place in the world order and resort to mediation by the Āṅglamleccha-s pentad or their vassals. In any case, not wanting its thunder stolen and the sacrifice of its men to go unacknowledged, instead of accepting the unmatta Aruṇaluṅga’s grandiose claims, India simply stuck to its view of the events.

Our reconstruction of the events goes thus: We believe the Islamic terrorist state took heavy losses and realized that it was to its advantage to at least feign a ceasefire. Probably, their plan was to announce a ceasefire and follow it up with sneak attacks before the ceasefire actually gets implemented (c.f., Israel on the Islamic state in Iran). As they were doing that, they were probably warned by the Indians to actually cease and desist, and they signaled the pressure via the threat of naval action. Fearing this, the TSPian military leadership went to the ultimate backstop for all Islamic terror – the Mahāmleccha. By this time, the spy nests of mleccha-s in Bahukṣālapura, Gajalaṇḍapura and other key rājadhānī-s were already abuzz with the intelligence they had gathered of the Indian assault and defenses. Things were not looking good on many fronts:  
1. Their long-term, carefully crafted plan of a zero-sum game to tie down the subcontinent was unraveling.  
2. The success of the arms of their most hated enemy, the Rūs, against their own and that of the Galtonian peer, the Cīna-s was demonstrated by the H.  
3. The Indians had importantly signaled that they knew the secret mleccha-backed nuclear site of TSP. This was a hit not just on TSP, but a clear signal to their underwriters.  
4. The Prathamonmatta-s had likely been pushing the Picchilaka to aid them by launching attacks on Islamic Iran. The Mahāmleccha needed TSP for this and could not bear to see their client being slapped thus. The powerful Prathamonmatta-s within the Mahāmleccha apparatus probably asked their leadership to salvage TSP for their designs on Iran.

Accordingly, when TSP ran to the Mahāmleccha to broker a ceasefire on their behalf, the Picchilaka stepped in, thinking he could spin it as a great success by claiming he was the true peacemaker. We suspect the Dillīśvara told him that India would end it on its own terms while at the same time taking the right message from the Mahāmleccha intervention that they were the ultimate backstop for the marūnmatta-s. We further suspect that at this point, the Mahāmleccha signaled to the TSPian military leadership that they should actually stop, as their position was not good, but going forward, the mleccha-s would back them (Mlecchamarūnmattābhisaṃdhi).

A number of subsequent events support this reconstruction:  
1. First and foremost, the Mahāmleccha, almost immediately after the conflict, returned to their usual pro-TSP position, with their leadership spreading all manner of anti-India canards. 2. They threatened the highest tariffs on Indian products and also secondary sanctions on India for buying Russian oil – all while ignoring the same from their Galtonian peer the Cīna-s and their European vassals.  
3. They allowed the Āmir al Momīn of the terrorist state to make thinly veiled threats against India without even a peep of an objection – a clear indicator that they condone it.  
4. They provided cover for the anti-H paṭṭa rebels and terrorists.  
5. They have been activating their first responders in the desh to try to destabilize the Dillinarendra.

In conclusion, the Mlecchamarūnmattābhisaṃdhi is back in full force. As Tārā said to Vālin, if Sugrīva is beating his chest and asking for a fight again after the thrashing he got, then someone powerful must be behind him. The same is true of TSP. Given the belligerent noises it is making, we must ask who is behind it, and the answer is the Mahāmleccha. Some take their claims of the discovery of oil, copper, gold and Lanthanides seriously – the gleam of all of which attracts the resource-stealing mleccha-s like hyaenas to a carcass. Moreover, if the belligerent Uparimarakata-s get their wish of pulling the Mahāmleccha into a war with Islamic Iran, TSP becomes an important staging ground. Interestingly, when it comes to India, there is a convergence of mleccha and Cīna interests; hence, it is conceivable that they want to clear the deck first by taking out India before they enter the ring for their ultimate clash. We share the sentiment with many that TSP might try yet another misadventure. The lowest cost option for them would be to engineer another terrorist strike, perhaps on a big city aided by local marūnmatta-s, and then try to lay a trap for the retaliating H forces. However, we cannot rule out something bigger, aided by the mleccha-s and Cīna-s. The way the mleccha tariffs and sanctions would play out is less predictable due to the duṣṭa Picchilaka’s mercurial nature. Whatever the case, as we have said many times before, the H civilization is confronted by a triad of enemies like the three heads of [Triśiras Tvāṣṭra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/09/14/the-fifth-story/). The path to survival lies in getting past them, and that process could seriously test the character of the H nation.
