+++
title = "weaponizing smallpox"
full_title = "weaponizing smallpox"
date = "2016-09-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/09/19/weaponizing-smallpox/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/09/19/weaponizing-smallpox/).

weaponizing smallpox

As I have said before, it seems likely to me that the Soviet Union put
so much effort into treaty-violating biological warfare because the guys
at the top believed in it – because they had seen it work, the same
reason that they were such tank enthusiasts. One more point on the
likely use of tularemia at Stalingrad: in the summer of ’42 the Germans
had occupied regions holding 40% of the Soviet Union’s population. The
Soviets had a tularemia program: if not then \[“Not One Step Back!”\],
when would they have used it? When would Stalin have used it? Imagine
that someone intent on the destruction of the American republic and the
extermination of its people \[remember the Hunger Plan?\] had taken over
everything west of the Mississippi: would be that too early to pull out
all the stops? Reminds me of of an old Mr Boffo cartoon: you see a
monster, taller than skyscrapers, stomping his way through the city.
That’s trouble. But then you notice that he’s a hand puppet: that’s
*serious* trouble. Perhaps Stalin was waiting for *serious* trouble, for
example if the [Norse
Gods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thor_Meets_Captain_America) had
[come
in](https://web.archive.org/web/20120712170314/http://www.davidbrin.com/thor1.htm)
on the side of the Nazis.

Anyhow, the Soviets had a big smallpox program. In some ways smallpox is
almost the ultimate biological weapon – very contagious, while some
strains are highly lethal. And it’s controllable – you can easily shield
your own guys via vaccination. Of course back in the 1970s, almost
everyone was vaccinated, so it was also completely useless.

We kept vaccinating people as long as smallpox was still running around
in the Third World. But when it was eradicated in 1978, people stopped.
There seemed to be no reason – and so, as new unvaccinated generations
arose, the military efficacy of smallpox has gone up and up and up. It
got to the point where the World Health organization threw away its
stockpile of vaccine, a couple hundred million units, just to save on
the electric bill for the refrigerators.

Consider that the Soviet Union was always the strongest proponent of
worldwide eradication of smallpox, dating back to the 1950s. Successful
eradication would eventually make smallpox a superweapon: does it seem
possible that the people running the Soviet Union had this in mind as a
long term-goal ? Potentiation through ‘eradication’? Did the left hand
know what the strangling hand had in mind, and shape policies
accordingly? Of course.

D.A. Henderson, the man that led the eradication campaign, died just a
few days ago. He was aware of this possibility.

