+++
title = "Don’t exclude ethics"
full_title = "Don’t exclude ethics from philosophy"
date = "2017-06-11"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/06/11/dont-exclude-ethics-from-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/06/11/dont-exclude-ethics-from-philosophy/).

Don’t exclude ethics from philosophy

It is commonplace today for scholars of Indian philosophy to focus their
attention entirely on theoretical philosophy at the expense of the
practical. I think this tendency is a mistake. I see at least two grave
problems with it. First: In my [2015
article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/)
I argued that (at least in the case of Śāntideva) our understanding of
Buddhist ethics is incomplete if we ignore Buddhist metaphysics. I am
now beginning to think this issue goes in the other direction as well:
that we will misinterpret Buddhist metaphysics if we ignore Buddhist
ethics. I will talk about that problem next time. This time, I will
address the other problem: it can drop us into the all-too-familiar trap
of treating some Indian inquiries as “not philosophical” even when they
were engaged in by most of the great philosophers of the West.

[![Traditional Tibetan portrait of Candrakīrti, taken from Rigpa
Wiki.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Chandrakirti.jpg)](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Chandrakirti.jpg)I
notice *both* problems most clearly in the writings of [Dan
Arnold](https://divinity.uchicago.edu/daniel-arnold) on
[Candrakīrti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chandrakirti). First some
background. Candrakīrti was an Indian Buddhist philosopher with many
similarities to Śāntideva: they were close to contemporary; both are
said to have taught at [Nālandā](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nalanda),
although we don’t have any evidence that they knew of each other; both
were affiliated with the Madhyamaka school and later considered to be
part of the Prāsaṅgika subschool. They also both wrote explicitly about
ethics as well as metaphysics, making arguments not only about the
nature of reality but about how human beings should live – and as [my
2015
article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/)
notes, they both draw inferences from metaphysics to ethics as well.

The main difference is that Śāntideva’s main works (the Bodhicaryāvatāra
and Śikṣāsamuccaya) both focus on ethics – on how human beings should
live. Metaphysics, the examination of the true nature of things, appears
only in parts of each text. Candrakīrti’s reflections on ethics,
however, are mostly found in the opening chapters of his commentary on
the Catuḥśataka (Four Hundred) of Āryadeva, referred to as the
Catuḥśatakaṭīkā (CŚṬ). Here, Candrakīrti argues for restraint of grief,
bodily pleasures, lust and egotism –especially the egotism of a
political leader – on the grounds that each of these derive from a
metaphysical illusion, the illusions of permanence, happiness, purity
and self respectively. Karen Lang has translated these chapters of the
CŚṬ into English as [Four
Illusions](http://www.amazon.com/Four-Illusions-Candrakirtis-Travelers-Bodhisattva/dp/0195151135).
While this commentary integrates metaphysics and ethics closely (and
should be studied more than it is, for that reason), Candrakīrti’s other
major works, the Prasannapadā and Madhyamakāvatāra, articulate a
Madhyamaka metaphysics in a way that leave its practical implications
*mostly* undiscussed.

Arnold devotes several chapters to Candrakīrti’s work in his [Buddhists,
Brahmins and
Belief](http://www.amazon.com/Buddhists-Brahmins-Belief-Epistemology-Philosophy/dp/0231132816).
But there he only discusses the theoretical philosophy of the
Prasannapadā and Madhyamakāvatāra; he doesn’t address the
Catuḥśatakaṭīkā. But this is not because he takes the CŚṬ as
unimportant. He discusses it in his 2004 review of Lang’s work, in
*Journal of Asian Studies* 63(3). There he claims that the CŚṬ “is well
known to have particular philosophical significance”, because it is a
“watershed” in the differentiation between Madhyamaka and Yogācāra
philosophical schools. But he attaches this importance only to the
second half of the text, which defends Madhyamaka at a theoretical
level. Despite Candrakīrti’s own insistence that the Catuḥśataka was
meant to be taken as a whole, Arnold attaches far less significance to
the ethical chapters that Lang translates. These, his review claims,
“clearly reflect an approach that is more *psychological* than
philosophical. Candrakīrti is here working on the reader’s *affect*,
trying to engender a strongly felt conviction regarding the importance
of these four cardinal errors.” (827, his emphases)

Them, as they say, is fightin’ words. In them, I see everything that is
currently wrong with the study of Indian philosophy. Only the study of
abstract theories of metaphysics and epistemology and logic, kept
hermetically sealed from the concerns of human life and liberation and
suffering, is allowed to count as “philosophy”. What deals with “affect”
can be cleaved off and counted as mere “psychology”. But since when were
Plato and Aristotle – let alone the Stoics and Epicureans and Skeptics –
unconcerned with affect? Or for that matter, Hume or the utilitarians,
who take as their central concern the increase of pleasure and decrease
of pain? Whether it is Plato speaking on the nature of erotic love in
the Symposium, Aristotle on proper anger in the Ethics, or Bentham on
the maximization of pleasure, affect has been a matter of philosophical
concern for just about as long as there has been something called
philosophy – because, of course, it is a key part of *ethics*.

One reason scholars of Indian philosophy may neglect ethics is that many
of the Indian texts we classify as philosophical are not clear about
their implications for ethics – even when, [as with
Buddhaghosa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/),
the implications are there. Yet here we have a clear case of a text
making ethical claims and explicit *arguments* for those claims – and an
august scholar of Indian philosophy waving it away as “more
psychological than philosophical”. Something here has gone deeply,
deeply wrong.

I suppose Arnold may disqualify the Catuḥśatakaṭīkā as philosophy less
because it speaks *about* affect, and more because it is “working on”
affect – that it is intended to affect its readers emotionally as well
as logically. Candrakīrti also frequently relies on stories to
illustrate his claims in addition to his explicit arguments. Now the
arguments of [Pierre Hadot](http://www.iep.utm.edu/hadot/) about ancient
philosophy as a way of life, and of [Martha
Nussbaum](http://www.amazon.com/Loves-Knowledge-Essays-Philosophy-Literature/dp/0195074858)
about the close relation between philosophical form and content, should
make us skeptical of any division that says emotionally affecting or
story-driven works are “not really philosophy”. But even without
accepting Hadot’s or Nussbaum’s views, it is nevertheless clear that the
Catuḥśatakaṭīkā *does* make logical arguments as well; it even regularly
uses the standard Indian philosophical structure of introducing an
opponent’s objection (*pūrvapakṣa*) and defending a reply. This is true
in these early chapters of the Catuḥśatakaṭīkā, which make ethical
claims, as well as the later chapters which focus on metaphysics as
Candrakīrti’s other works do.

One could of course discount the significance of the Catuḥśatakaṭīkā to
Candrakīrti’s philosophy on text-critical grounds, by arguing that that
text did not have the same author as the Madhyamakāvatāra and
Prasannapadā. But Arnold nowhere does this. In his review he freely
throws around the name “Candrakīrti” to describe the author of the CŚṬ,
and gives every indication that this is the same Candrakīrti written
about in his book. In Arnold’s view Candrakīrti did *compose* the CŚṬ –
and yet somehow it doesn’t matter to our examination of his
“philosophy”.

As noted, Arnold is hardly alone in attempting to excise what I would
consider the most valuable and time-honoured philosophical questions
from the study of Indian philosophy. In doing so he is, at some level,
following in the [footsteps of B.K.
Matilal](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/06/matilal-vs-radhakrishnan/),
who attempted to banish questions of “theology and mystical experience”
from the study of Indian philosophy – as part of what [Ethan Mills
called the Matilal
Strategy](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/03/the-matilal-strategy/),
of trying to make Indian philosophy more acceptable to English-language
analytic philosophers. But even if one agrees with that goal, it must be
noted that reflection on ethics *does* remain a significant component of
analytic philosophy – even if one sometimes viewed as less prestigious
than epistemology or philosophy of language. It should also be
remembered that Matilal *himself* had [a great many things to say about
Indian
ethics](https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/ethics-and-epics-philosophy-culture-and-religion/).
So I don’t think there can be any justification at all for Arnold’s
bizarre attempt to remove Candrakīrti’s ethics from consideration of his
philosophy.

Moreover, as noted, I think Arnold’s disregard of Candrakīrti’s ethics
has grave consequences for his understanding of Candrakīrti’s
metaphysics. But more on that next time.

[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.](http://wp.me/pxfBj-12p)
