+++
title = "The significance of"
full_title = "The significance of ethics to Candrakīrti’s metaphysics"
date = "2017-06-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/06/25/the-significance-of-ethics-to-candrakirtis-metaphysics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/06/25/the-significance-of-ethics-to-candrakirtis-metaphysics/).

The significance of ethics to Candrakīrti’s metaphysics

As I noted [last time](http://wp.me/p486Wp-L2), I think the disregard of
ethics by Indian-philosophy scholars like Dan Arnold is a problem in
itself: it’s a misconception of what philosophy is, and one that
harmfully shrinks the field of the study of Indian philosophy. But I
think this neglect would still be a problem even for people who *do*
decide to restrict their study of Indian philosophy to the theoretical
realms of metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of language. For it
seems to me that at least in Arnold’s case, the neglect of ethics leads
to a misinterpretation of the metaphysics.

Arnold’s misinterpretation is focused above all around the relationship
between the famous Buddhist [“two
truths”]((https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/twotruths-india/)):
conventional truth (*saṃvṛti*) and ultimate truth (*paramārtha*).
Consider Arnold’s description (again in his [review of Karen
Lang](http://www.jstor.org.ezproxy.bu.edu/stable/4133502?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents))
of the second chapter of [Candrakīrti’s
Catuḥśatakaṭīkā](http://www.amazon.com/Four-Illusions-Candrakirtis-Travelers-Bodhisattva/dp/0195151135).
“Candrakīrti develops (contra Vasubandhu) a characteristically
Mādhyamika point to the effect that the *conventional* reality of
pleasure is not denied, only its being the ‘inherent nature’ of life.”
From this description, Candrakīrti’s chapter sounds like it is all about
acknowledging pleasure and making room for it. You would not be able to
tell that the *point* of this chapter, very explicitly stated at its
beginning, is “rejecting the illusion of regarding the painful as being
pleasant” – or that in this chapter, pretty much everything that we
would normally consider pleasant turns out to be painful.

That point is an ethical point. But it seems to me that it feeds into
Arnold’s interpretation of Candrakīrti’s theoretical philosophy. For
when Arnold describes Candrakīrti’s theoretical philosophy in [his
book](http://www.amazon.com/Buddhists-Brahmins-Belief-Epistemology-Philosophy/dp/0231132816),
he makes it sound as if Candrakīrti is rejecting the very idea of
ultimate truth in favour of conventional truth – valuing the
conventional in a way that his Pramāṇavādin opponents do not. But I
would argue that Candrakīrti devalues the conventional as much as they
do; he just happens to disagree with them about what the ultimate *is*.
And I think Candrakīrti’s ethics help us see that point.

On Arnold’s account, Candrakīrti would seem to be advocating more or
less the same view as
[Jayarāśi](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/12/skepticism-in-two-directions/),
the Lokāyata skeptic, and I cannot imagine Candrakīrti being anything
but horrified by that conclusion. Yes, Jayarāśi and Candrakīrti do use
[similarly skeptical
means](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/12/skepticism-in-two-directions/)
– but to diametrically opposite ends, ends which seem to play very
little role in Arnold’s discussion.

So Arnold says Candrakīrti “defers” to the conventional (saṃvṛti), even
to “ordinary intuitions”; “there is a sense in which Candrakīrti’s
deference to the conventional *is itself the argument.*” (65, emphasis
in original) When Arnold spells out this claim further, it is more
cautious and avoids the language of “deference”: he says that for
Candrakīrti

> there is nothing “more real” than the world as conventionally
> described – or, more precisely, that there can be no explanation that
> does not itself exemplify the same conditions that characterize our
> conventions.

While the “more precise” characterization of Candrakīrti is not wrong,
it is misleading, and doubly so when it is described as “deference”.
What Candrakīrti is doing is not saving the conventional world but
*disparaging explanation* itself. Arnold himself (page 183) acknowledges
Candrakīrti’s claim that the ultimate (*paramārtha*) “cannot be taught,
nor can it be known” (*nopadiśyeta na câpi jñayeta*, Prasannapadā
493.10-11). It is beyond learning and language, but qua ultimate truth
it *is* more real than conventional truth – to the extent that anything
can be said about it at all.

So I think it is absolutely false when Arnold claims that “for
Candrakīrti, the only ultimate truth is that there *is* no ultimate
truth – that the ‘ultimate truth,’ in other words, is the abstract state
of affairs of there being no set of ‘ultimately existent’
(*paramārthasat*) ontological primitives like the *dharmas* of
Abhidharma.” (184) Here, immediately after acknowledging Candrakīrti’s
claim that the ultimate “cannot be taught, nor can it be known”, Arnold
turns around to express the ultimate truth as a clause of a *sentence*,
“that there is no ultimate truth” – exactly the sort of thing that *can*
be taught and known!

John Dunne had offered a more convincing account of Candrakīrti’s
thought in his “Thoughtless buddha, passionate buddha”
([JAAR](https://academic.oup.com/jaar) 54.3), an account that Arnold
mentions but never actually refutes, just batting it aside to offer his
own interpretation. Arnold’s interpretation, bizarrely, relies on
adopting what he calls a “type-theoretical approach” even though
“nothing like this approach is taken by Mādhyamikas” and it is “not
being in the sprit \[*sic*\] of Madhyamaka…” (185)

It seems to me far more plausible when Dunne tries – and I think
succeeds – to take an interpretive approach that *is* in the spirit of
Madhyamaka, and has the distinct advantage of being in line with what
Mādhyamikas actually *say*. Dunne (541-2) rightly points out
Candrakīrti’s etymology of the term *saṃvṛti* (Tibetan *kun rdzob*, what
we are rendering “conventional”) in the Madhyamakāvatara and its
commentary:

> Since confusion (*moha* / *gti mug*) obstructs one’s realization of
> essence, it is called “*saṃvṛti*“. The Sage said that a *saṃvṛtisat*
> thing is a fabricated (thing) that appears to be real due to
> *saṃvṛti*; a fabricated thing that appears to be fabricated is
> *saṃvṛti*. “Confusion” is that which confuses beings about seeing
> things as they really are; that confusion is ignorance. It makes one
> superimpose a non-existent essence onto things, and by nature, it
> obscures one’s experience of (actual) essence; hence, it is “saṃvṛti”.
> (MA 6:28, MAB 54b)

Etymologically, Candrakīrti uses the literal meaning of *saṃvṛti* as
“covering” to explain it – as something which *obstructs* understanding
of how things really are. (For that reason Dunne even translates
*saṃvṛti*, with considerable justification, as “the spurious”.) It is no
closer to the way things really are than the ultimate truth is; indeed
it seems likely to be further away.

Now Arnold is correct that Candrakīrti criticizes the view of Dignāga,
Dharmakīrti and the Ābhidharmikas according to which [atomized parts are
ultimately
real](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/).
Against Dignāga, Candrakīrti would deny that any given *thing* or set of
things is ultimately real. But that is a very different thing from
“deferring” to the conventional. The conventional is the source of our
*problems*. For Candrakīrti just as much as for Dignāga, we must get
away from the conventional and to the ultimate; it’s just that what
constitutes the ultimate for Candrakīrti is something very different,
something unsayable. Likewise Candrakīrti *does* say, and Arnold is
right to point out, that “worldly conventions are not to be totally
annihilated…” (Madhyamakāvatāra, quoted in Arnold 165-6) This is true.
But this is not because they’re *truer* than anything ultimate; it’s
merely because you need them as expedient means to deal with people who
haven’t realized they’re ultimately false.

Over and over, Arnold attributes to Candrakīrti a metaphysical approach
deeply at odds with most of what Candrakīrti actually *says*. How could
such a distinguished scholar, who has clearly read the Prasannapadā and
Madhyamakāvatāra at such great length, get Candrakīrti so wrong? I
suspect that Arnold would have been able to offer a far more plausible
interpretation of Candrakīrti if he had paid attention to Candrakīrti’s
ethical claims – which *are* present in the works Arnold studies as well
as in the [Catuḥśatakaṭīkā](http://wp.me/pxfBj-12p). (For example, at
Prasannapadā 155b-156a, Candrakīrti says *first* to reject karmically
bad actions, then to reject theories that identify the self with the
aggregates, and then reject all attachment – *by* understanding that all
things are empty of inherent nature.) For Candrakīrti’s ethics is
*built* on the idea that our everyday conventional understandings are
gravely in error – our everyday *metaphysical* understandings, our
understandings of the nature of things. The source of our *suffering* is
in the conventional understanding of things as permanent, pleasurable,
pure and self. If we are to end suffering – which is the whole point –
then we must get away from that convention.

[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.](http://wp.me/pxfBj-12C)
