+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-05-13"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/13/laxmi-narayana-yaga-vaibhaveshti/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/13/laxmi-narayana-yaga-vaibhaveshti/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## laxmI nArAyaNa yaGYna, iShTi &vaibhaveShTi

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/vishnu-most-excellent.jpg?w=389)

Five kinds of viShNu yaGYna-s find mention in the pA\~ncharAtra. There
are the viShNu, mahAviShNu, nArAyaNa, mahAnArAyaNa and the laxmI
nArAyaNa yaGYna-s.

The basic viShNu yaGYna can be done by setting up one homa kuNDa and can
be scaled up to 12 kuNDa-s. Ahuti-s with the aShTAkShari can range from
1000 to 100,000.

The mahAviShNu is similar to above with the essential difference being
the number of oblations with aShTAkShari as also in the deployment of
additional mantra-s other than aShTAkShari, namely the puruSha sUkta and
the viShNu gAyAtri.

In the nArAyaNa yaGYna, the number of oblations is increased even more
starting from 80 lakh oblations with the aShTAkShari and going up to
eight crores. The number of kuNDa-s and the R^itvik-s get up-scaled as
per requirement and is praised as the best for loka kalyANa. This is to
be carried out over a period of seven or nine days.

The mahAnArAyaNa is classified into adhama, madhyama and uttama based on
the number of kuNDa-s as 104, 108 & 144 respectively. A further
classification is made based on the mantra-s deployed to perform this
yAga. The one that is done by only aShTAkShari is adhama while adding
the vaiShNava sUkta-s, mahAnArAyaNaM, pa\~nchopaniShat and the viShNu
gAyatri is termed as madhyama. An uttama mahAnArAyaNa yAga would
comprise along with the above deployments, installing a biMba of
nArAyaNa in the yAgashAla and performing the required karma in the
bhagavat sannidhi. After the yAga, the images of bhagavAn are either
given to the AchArya or installed in a temple for nityArAdhana.

The best among the pa\~ncha yaGYna-s mentioned above, is said to be the
laxmI nArAyaNa yAga. A minimum of 250 homa kuNDa-s and a maximum of a
thousand are suggested for the purpose along with minimum of 5000 and a
maximum of 10,000 R^itvik-s. Like in the mahAnArAyaNa, images of
bhagavAn are to be installed in the yAgashAla. Predictably along with
the mantra-s mentioned in the mahAnArAyaNa the shrI sUkta and mantra-s
of shrI are also deployed. The yAga is to be performed for a minimum of
12 days and can be continued up to a month. Every day ArAdhana is to be
performed to shrI & nArAyaNa with kuMkuma and tulasI beginning with 2
lakh count or upto a koTi. The grandeur of this yAga, it is said,
ensures that the durbhikSha in the loka is warded off for up to a
hundred years as also causing timely rains.

Based on specific needs or occasions, a number of other yAga-s can be
part of one of these grand yAga-s. A yajamAna seeking a specific phala
or a doSha nivAraNa can request the AchArya for a grant or a redemption
and the AchArya might perform any of the number of yAga-s for the
purpose. Examples would be vAsudeveShTi, sudarshaneShTi, nR^isiMheShTi,
vainateyeShTi etc. A yajamAna who is concerned about his pitR^i-s who
did not have pa\~ncha saMskAra in the past or otherwise fallen, may
request the AchArya to redeem them. The compassionate pA\~ncharAtrika
AchArya would then perform the vaibhaveShTi to plead to nArAyaNa to
grant them sAnnidhyaM. The iShTi to to be done either prior to the main
yAga or on the second or third or on any day convenient to the yajamAna.

On the chosen day, the yajamAna gets up early and after snAna does
UrdhvapuNDra dhAraNa and approaches the AchArya with vastra etc,
requesting to impart vaiShNavatva to his ancestors. The AchArya sets up
a ShaTkoNa sthaNDila for the same and invites 10 well versed
vaiShNava-s. Then he does the vibhava kuMbha sthApana followed by a
chakrAbja maNDala pUja invoking shrI devI & shrI hari followed by
Ahuti-s to the ten matsyAdi avatAra-s. The yajamAna is imagined as
aniruddha, his father as pradyumna, grand father as saMkarShaNa and the
great grand father as vAsudeva. Now reciting the aShTAkShari, the
piNDa-s that are made indicating the ancestors are sprinkled with the
jala from the vibhava kuMbha and the remaining pUja done. To peform
pa\~ncha saMskAra to the piNDa-s abhimantrana is done uttering the
sudarshana and pA\~nchajanya mantra-s, after which darbha-s dipped in
Ajya are used to mark an UrdhvapuNDra. Then the ten vaiShNava-s invited,
are worshipped appropriately as the 10 vibhava-s.

A tarpaNa with tila and kShIra is then given on the chakrAbja maNDala
followed by sumptuous bhojana to the 10 vaiShNava-s and others. The
procedure is said to grant vaiShNavatva to a hundred 100 ancestors and
to a 100 descendants.

**laxmI nArAyaNeShTi:** – Added on May 14th:

Another iShTi of interest would be the laxmI nArAyaNeShTi. This is not
be to be confused with laxmI nArAyaNa yaGYna mentioned above. This iShTi
is performed by the AchArya if there is a specific request by the
yajamAna for the purpose of saubhAgya, bhoga, dhana prApti etc.

This iShTi is to be performed two or three days before the last day of
the main yaGYna (i.e. one of the five above). yajamAna is to wake up
early, complete snAnAdi and approach the AchArya, perform a sAShTA\~Nga
namaskAra and present him a phala tAmbula and make the request to
perform the laxmInArAyaNeShTi. The AchArya after uttering praNava pUrva
tathAstu, readies himself to perform the yAga. The AchArya after
reaching the yAga shAla, is to pick up an appropriate spot and start the
procedure in the midst of vedaghoSha, bherI, sha\~Nkha dhvani and
ma\~ngala vAdya. A puNyAhavAchana is performed and the yAga dravya-s are
sprinkled with the jala. As the dIkSha for the main yaGYna would be
ongoing, one should not perform the rakShAsUtra bandhana or dIkShA
svIkAra again.

A kuNDa will be set up in the form of trikoNa and is to serve as the
mahAlaxmI sthaNDila. A dhAnya pITha is arranged on the side and a laxmI
nArAyaNa kumbha endowed with suvarNa, kUrcha, phala, pallava, puShAdi
and marked with UrdhvapuNDra, nUtana vastra and ratna-s is to be
established. A laxmI nArAyaNa pratima made with gold measuring a niShka,
complete with sha\~Nkha, chakra, gada and padmAdi is cleaned with
pa\~ncha gavya and a pratiShTha is done. This mUrti of laxmI nArAyaNa is
to be placed in the kumbha. Then the AchArya does abhimantrana of the
kuMbha by uttering the shrI and puruSha sUkta-s and ArAdhana performed
with arghyAdi and a naivedya of gokShIra, pAyasa and phala is offered.
Now in the trikoNAtmaka mahAlaxmI kuNDa, one brings agni either from the
gArhapatyAgni or agni generated by a sUryakAnta maNi ( a magnifying
glass is used in contemporary practice). The agni pratiShTha is done and
a 1000 or 108 oblations are made uttering the shrI gAyatri and the
viShNu gAyatri with Ajya and charu which is followed by a parivAra homa
and pUrNAhuti. In the midst of ma\~ngala vAdya-s the saMpAtAjya is
gathered and placed in the laxmI nArAyaNa kuMbha. Now the AchArya
touches the kuMbha and performs japa of aShTAkShari and shrI ShaDakShari
for 10,000 or 1000 or yadAshakti. Now the yajamAna is taken by the
AchArya to the devatA sannidhi and pleads to shrI and hari to fulfill
the yajamAna’s desires as follows:

svAmin sarvajagannAtha laxmInAtha kR^ipAmaya  
dInAvana mahAdeva bhaktAbhIShTa phalaprada  
asya bhaktasya sadbhAgya bhoga vaibhava saMchayaM  
kR^ipayA dehi loke.asmin adya prabhR^iti keshava

While the vAdya-s are active, the AchArya sprinkles the water from the
laxmI nArAyaNa kuMbha on the yajamAna while the accompanying
brAhmaNa-s/vaiShNava-s utter the shAnti sUkta and various svasti
vachana-s. The pAyasa remaining from the homa is given to the yajamAna
who should then consume the same with shraddha (a meticulous and a firm
conviction rather than faith). The golden laxmI nArAyaNa image placed in
the kuMbha is given to the AchArya who in turn gives it to the yajamAna
for nitya ArAdhana. The yajamAna is to properly reward the AchArya and
conduct brAhmaNa bhojana, the performance of which completes the
procedure thereby granting akhaNDa aishvarya.

This entry was posted on May 13, 2021 at 6:38 pm and is filed under
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/),
[vaiShNava](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/13/laxmi-narayana-yaga-vaibhaveshti/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/13/laxmi-narayana-yaga-vaibhaveshti/trackback/)
from your own site.

