+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-05-20"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/20/notes-from-tantra-tattva-and-further-comments/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/20/notes-from-tantra-tattva-and-further-comments/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## Notes from tantra-tattva and furthercomments

On Application of mantra-s: As translated in Principles of tantra by
Avalon.

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/image.png?w=561)

To this can be added, attaining victory in wars as mentioned in the
yuddha jayArNava as also upadrava shAnti i.e. warding off calamities.
Point 8 in the above i.e. evil influence might be either dR^iShTi doSha
or unpleasant situations caused by graha-s.

Another usage is acquisition of information which might not be known
otherwise and as can be expected, there can be a wide range of
applications possible. The information can be as precise as knowing a
rival’s bid/quote (or knowing the exact number of eatables cooked in the
house!)\*\* or as broad/generic as an yes or no, depending both on the
vidyA deployed and the individual deploying it. In this class of
information acquisition, can also be included vital information for a
military campaign or in [knowing the whereabouts of a lost/desired item
or
individual.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/02/23/shri-shyamol-ram-the-vamacharin/)
An oft repeated usage by mantrins is in knowing the mantra-s performed
by others and in knowing which mantra-s were deployed by a rival
mantrin.

\*\*- Is based on anecdotes and I personally take it with a grain of
salt.

This entry was posted on May 20, 2021 at 6:57 am and is filed under
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/20/notes-from-tantra-tattva-and-further-comments/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/05/20/notes-from-tantra-tattva-and-further-comments/trackback/)
from your own site.

