+++
title = "What is to be done?"
full_title = "What is to be done?"
date = "2020-03-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/03/12/what-is-to-be-done/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/03/12/what-is-to-be-done/).

What is to be done?

We need enough lockdown and social distancing to drive the R0 below 1.0
– that doesn’t require much more effort than the intensity required to
‘flatten the curve’ and it has an enormous payoff – new cases fade away
instead of growing ! Like I said, there is no substitute for victory.

But we don’t want that lockdown to persist forever – it’s incredibly
expensive. I estimate that China has lost \> hundreds of billions of
dollars in their current freeze. We will too: and judging from the
course of events in Italy, we’ll have to impose pretty severe lockdown
if we want to get transmission under control. Maybe it won’t have to
be as severe as in China or Italy – the US has some favorable factors,
mainly lower population density and more private cars ( as opposed to
public transportation).

All this must be paired with a crash program to develop effective
therapies and/or means of prevention. If someone has an idea for a new
drug, or a new method of treatment, he should rethink it and ask if it
could be accomplished in half the time with twice the money, or for that
matter with ten times the money. We should fund every plausible
approach, a bit like the Manhattan project. Some would be surprising:
for example, there is
[evidence](https://www.livescience.com/cold-flu-same-time.html) that
already having one viral disease ( say influenza) can reduce your
chances of catching another – true at both the population and individual
level, perhaps because your interferon is revved up. Old-fashioned
approaches ( like [serum
therapy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antiserum) ) might be revived.
We can scan the existing pharmacopoeia for something useful: we can mine
HMO data to see if some common drug is already having a positive effect.

The US has the world’s strongest biomedical research community. We can
do this – and we won’t be alone.

When we succeed, the lockdown will soon end. With a treatment or some
form of prevention, we won’t have to worry about the ongoing cases in
other parts of the world – and we could then help the rest of the world,
which is no bad thing.

Cost is no object: there is no way to spend money on biomedical research
that is in any way comparable with the cost of lockdown.

One advantage: we can cut some corners, because coronavirus is so
dangerous. We thought vaccination against smallpox too hazardous ( a
disease extinct in the wild, and a vaccine that killed 1 in a million of
those vaccinated and made about 1 in 100,000 seriously ill). In today’s
situation, facing coronavirus, that level of side effect could perhaps
be tolerated, at least until we came up with something better.

Careful analysis and simulation can minimize the cost. China has cut the
R0 down to 0.3, but that’s overkill: at this point a relaxation that
allowed some business to operate and pushed the R0 up to 0.8 would be
fine. The rate of new cases would not increase from the current low
level. If we relax a bit too much, R0 might creep a bit above 1.0, but
with lots of testing and monitoring we could fix that before it caused
much trouble.

