+++
title = "The Issue that Time"
full_title = "The Issue that Time Forgot"
date = "2012-09-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/06/the-issue-that-time-forgot-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/06/the-issue-that-time-forgot-2/).

The Issue that Time Forgot

Human population genetics in the 1960s was obsessed with the question of
genetic load. Much of the motivation was concern about health
consequences of radiation and nuclear weapons. We now know that
radiation does bad things to organisms but that the mutation rate in
mammals is nearly insensitive to the effects of ionizing radiation. No
one knew that then. Popular concern about the issue was also pumped up
by monster movies, which were everywhere on late night television. Does
anyone remember Godzilla?

A related and more basic problem at the time was the maintenance of
diversity in populations. As more and more technologies for examining
diversity came along, from blood groups to electrophoretic variants of
proteins to restriction fragment polymorphisms and so on, more and more
variation in our DNA popped out, to everyoneâ€™s surprise. What kept it
around? An insightful and readable introduction the time was written by
James Crow in 2008[1](#fa). (You will look long and hard, by the way,
for a Crow paper that is not both insightful and readable.) This
fundamental problem has also been forgotten, buried under the wave of
neutralism.

The key paper about load was published in 1958[2](#fb). Morton, Crow,
and Muller showed that, under some simplifying assumptions, the
regression of mortality (and on other traits like IQ) on the inbreeding
coefficient could reveal the nature of our burden of mutations. In
particular the negative logarithm of the rate, for example the infant
mortality rate, should be linear in the inbreeding coefficient:

-ln(q) = A + Bf

where q is the mortality rate and f the inbreeding coefficient. Their
important insight was the if our load is mostly deleterious recessives
then the rate should increase rapidly with inbreeding. If, on the other
hand, our load reflects a lot of balanced polymorphisms then the load
should not increase very much with inbreeding. In particular the load
ratio, B/A, ought to be something like 10 if there are a lot of
deleterious recessives while something like 2 if there are a lot of
balanced polymorphisms. A clear explanation of the the theory and the
results availabe by the early 1970s can be found in the classic Cavalli
and Bodmer text[3](#fc).

The bottom line was that load ratios from human populations did not give
a clear signal either way. A typical B/A ratio was something like 4. The
interest in and optimism about load theory in 1960 had fizzled by 1970.

Today all those issues are back on the table in a big way. What is our
burden of mutation? How many of our aches and pains and premature deaths
are costs of balanced polymorphism? Unfortunately the whole toolkit of
50 years ago has been mostly forgotten by the current generation of
human population geneticists. A shame.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Footnotes:

[1.](#ffa) Crow, J.F., 2008. Mid-century controversies in population
genetics. Annual review of genetics 42, 1-16.

[2.](#ffb) Morton, N.E., Crow, J.F., Muller, H.J., 1956. An estimate of
the mutational damage in man from data on consanguineous marriages.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci USA 42, 855-863.

[3.](#ffc) Cavalli-Sforza, L.L., Bodmer, W.F., 1971. The Genetics of
Human Populations. W. H. Freeman.

