+++
title = "Insidekick"
full_title = "Insidekick"
date = "2012-09-27"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/27/insidekick/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/27/insidekick/).

Insidekick

During pregnancy, fetal cells enter the mother (and vice versa). They
linger in the mother for decades at minimum – probably for life. The
first thought has been that this might be the cause of higher levels of
autoimmune diseases in women, and that might be so. But there are more
interesting possibilities.

There is evidence that fetal cells may be beneficial. Experimental work
in mice shows that a sub-population of fetal cells (pregnancy-associated
progenitor cells, or PAPCs) have stem-cell-like properties. They show
up at injury sites, and there are some indications that they contribute
to tissue repair. For example, after heart damage in mother mice,
fetal cells engraft in the heart and differentiate into cardiomyocytes.
They cross the blood-brain barrier and apparently differentiate into
neurons.

We now know that fetal cells also enter the brain in humans, but we do
not yet know if they act as neurons there. But that’s the way to bet.

The question is, what acts by these fetal cells would be favored by
natural selection? Aiding Mom’s heath and survival would obviously be
favored: that would allow her to care for the child that threw off
those fetal cells, which would increase the kid’s fitness. This would
be true even after menopause, in humans. Which raises the question:
what can those fetal cells do that Mom can’t do for herself? Well, for
one thing, they’re younger, have longer telomeres, have fewer somatic
mutations. Maybe they’re good at repair. If they’re contributing to
immune defense, well, they bring in different HLA alleles.

Of courser, they have their own genetic interests, which sometimes
differ from those of the mother. The kid would benefit if Mom somewhat
changed her ways in the direction of investing more in that child
(acting as if it was twice as important as other full sibs) and if she
had her later children with the same father: such children are twice as
closely related to the shedder than stepsibs. That may not be the
optimal course for the mother’s genetic interests, especially if the
father is something of a loser – but the increased relatedness of full
sibs would usually trump that, from the fetal cell line’s point of view.

Of courser the fetal cells of those later children have their own
interests and will push in different directions. If these fetal cells
can recognize the degree of kinship in future pregnancies, life gets
complicated.

Since some women have only had male children, their fetal cells are easy
to recognize (they have a Y chromosome) and I suppose we could figure
out a way to zap them, possibly returning their mother’s brain to its
original unmanipulated state. Except for Toxo and advertisers and
whatnot. Feminists take note: if you have ever been pregnant, you’re
not the same person anymore. With any luck, we will soon see a new
version of Morgellons syndrome, with genetic formication.

One fun possibility is that some of these cells are passed on,
generation after generation – from mother to a female fetus , and so on
indefinitely, rather like mitochondria. It is easy to show that such
cells would have to have a positive effect on female fitness. We know
plenty of similar examples of symbiotic bacteria in insects – here,
we’re talking about a symbiotic (technically, mutualistic) cell line
that started out human. Such a symbiotic cell line would co-inherit
with a particular type of mitochondrial DNA: if it conferred extra
fitness, that mtDNA haplotype would expand rapidly.











