+++
title = "Position in Jain"
full_title = "Position in Jain Studies, University of California, Irvine (USA)"
date = "2018-10-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/10/10/position-in-jain-studies-university-of-california-irvine-usa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/10/10/position-in-jain-studies-university-of-california-irvine-usa/).

Position in Jain Studies, University of California, Irvine (USA)

I recently received the following ad for a position in Jain Studies.
Please see the ad below for details. The application will be available
starting Oct. 11. For inquiries, please contactGloria Simpson,
Department Manager, UCI Philosophy Department (her contact information
[can be found
here](https://www.humanities.uci.edu/philosophy/people/staff.php)).

**Position: Open Rank, Shri Parshvanath Presidential Chair in Jain
Studies**

University of California, Irvine

Open Rank

Location: Irvine, CA, United States

The University of California, Irvine, Department of Philosophy and the
Program in Religious Studies announces an open rank search for the Shri
Parshvanath Presidential Chair in Jain Studies. We seek a scholar whose
research and teaching are focused on Jainism and with a wide range of
knowledge in Jain religion, its ethics and philosophy, history, and
culture, as well as familiarity with the languages of Jain primary
sources. We are especially interested in scholars who can critically
evaluate the relevance of Jain principles in potential research and
teaching areas including peace and conflict studies, human rights,
social justice, bioethics, fundamental problems in philosophy, diversity
and cultural sensitivity, ecology and environment, and the relation of
Jain religion to other religious and philosophical traditions.

The successful candidate’s responsibilities will include maintaining an
outstanding research program and teaching undergraduate and graduate
courses, including the advising of graduate students. The successful
candidate will be expected to guide the research of doctoral students,
to be committed to a continuing research program, to provide leadership
in the field, and to provide service to the university and profession.
Additionally the preferred candidate should possess the willingness and
ability to interact with the Jain diaspora community at large and
contribute to diversity and cultural sensitivity.

Completed applications containing a curriculum vitae, sample of
research, statement of teaching, and three letters of recommendation
should be uploaded electronically via UC Irvine’s online application
system, RECRUIT, located at:

https://recruit.ap.uci.edu/apply/JPF05000

A separate statement that addresses past and/or potential contributions
to diversity, equity and inclusion must also be included in the
application materials.

To receive fullest consideration, applications should be received by
November 30, although the position will be open until filled.

*The University of California, Irvine is an Equal
Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer advancing inclusive excellence.
All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, national origin, disability, age, protected veteran status, or
other protected categories covered by the UC nondiscrimination policy.*
