+++
title = "Coffee Break Conference,"
full_title = "Coffee Break Conference, Oxford 2018 Call for papers"
date = "2018-10-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/10/16/coffee-break-conference-oxford-2018-call-for-papers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/10/16/coffee-break-conference-oxford-2018-call-for-papers/).

Coffee Break Conference, Oxford 2018 Call for papers

We invite proposals for papers for the 9th Coffee Break Conference,
which will be hosted at Wolfson College, University of Oxford, 4-6
December 2018.

The theme of the conference this year is “Science and Technology in
Premodern Asia.” We welcome proposals of papers on the topics of (1)
Mathematics & Astronomy and (2) Technology & Applied Science, both in
premodern Asia. The papers can be based upon all research methods;
cross-cultural or cross-disciplinary approaches are especially welcome.
Doctoral students are also invited to submit proposals.

Before the conference, papers and handouts will be pre-circulated among
all the participants. Each speaker will be allotted 20 minutes for the
paper and another 20 minutes for discussion.

We will be able to cover the 3-night accommodation in Oxford for every
participant. We may also have funding to partly cover travel expenses
(in principle, only within Europe), but we expect participants to pay
for most of their other expenses. There are no registration fees for the
conference.

We are delighted to announce that our keynote speaker for the conference
will be Prof. Christopher Minkowski, Boden Professor of Sanskrit at the
University of Oxford.

If you would like to give a paper on the theme of Mathematics &
Astronomy, please send a title and abstract (max. 300 words) to Matt
Kimberley, Matt.Kimberley@bl.uk, by 31 October.

For papers on the theme of Technology & Applied Science, please send a
title and abstract (max. 300 words) to Dr. Jonathan Duquette,
jonathan.duquette@orinst.ox.ac.uk, **by 31 October**.

Further information about the conference will soon be available.

For any other question, please contact Yiming Shen
(yiming.shen@wolfson.ox.ac.uk) or Dr. Jonathan Duquette
(jonathan.duquette@orinst.ox.ac.uk).
