+++
title = "Promiscuous Weapons the"
full_title = "Promiscuous Weapons the tale of organisms and nations"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/12/29/promiscuous-weapons-the-tale-of-organisms-and-nations/"
date = "2025-12-29"
+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/12/29/promiscuous-weapons-the-tale-of-organisms-and-nations/).

Promiscuous Weapons: the tale of organisms and nations

asmābhiḥ kalpitaṁ śastraṃ vijayāśā-parāyaṇam \|  
tad eva śatravo yuñjanty asmattaḥ sutarām punaḥ \|\|  
The weapon devised by us, devoted to the wish of victory –  
that very weapon \[our\] enemies now employ more thoroughly than we do.

About seven years before our catastrophic clash with the English in the First War of Independence, Tennyson reflected the Zeitgeist that was laying the ground for the arrival of Darwin and Wallace’s evolutionary theory. Evidently, encapsulating the anxiety arising from the discoveries of dinosaurs (*Megalosaurus*, *Iguanodon* and *Hylaeosaurus*), giant aquatic lizards (*Mosasaurus* – the lizard of Maastricht) and other big diapsids (plesiosaurs, ichthyosaurs), he used the telling phrase “dragons of the prime”:  
“*A monster then, a dream, a discord. Dragons of the prime, That tare each other in their slime, Were mellow music match’d with him*.”  
He seems to vocalize the realization that came with the discovery of these reptiles from Deep Time, that man (“a monster”) might compare with them, actually might be worse – they were just mellow music relative to him – and meet extinction like them. This came against the backdrop of his “proto-Darwinian” realization in the same poem, voiced in the famous phrase: “*…Nature, red in tooth and claw With ravine…*”

While Tennyson’s original intention was to move away from the regime of this phrase into one of a “large hope”, it aged really well. Just nine years after his poem was published, Darwin published his famous work “*On the Origin of Species*”, the poetic essence of which was fittingly captured by this phrase. Now, with hindsight of well over a century and a half, as we grasp the molecular and ecological foundations of the evolutionary theory, Tennyson’s phrase rings ever truer. Our work has shown that at every level of biological organization, the most intense evolutionary innovation happens in the context of weaponry used by organisms in conflicts. This then tends to serve as the fount of innovation in other spheres of biological action. The way this innovation occurs is through evolutionary arms races between the organisms locked in conflict. Consequently, they either reach a balance – a stable attractor – or they become extinct. This happens at both the microscopic and macroscopic levels. The macroscopic level is that of morphological adaptations – claws, beaks, teeth, spines, and the like. The microscopic level is that of molecular weaponry – protein spears and armor, toxins and antibiotics.

However, there is an interesting distinction in the way weaponry spreads between organisms at the macroscopic and microscopic levels. The weaponry evolved at the macroscopic level is not an easily transferable technology. Thus, a cat’s canines and claws generally cannot be acquired as is by another mammal. They have to have the right circumstances to either convergently evolve the same or acquire them from an ancestor that had them. As one goes lower down the size spectrum, the tendency for transferability increases. Take the phenomenon of kleptocnidy: the nematocysts or stinging cells of cnidarians (*Hydra*, jellyfish, sea anemones and the like) are a formidable defensive strategy that has kept these animals alive since almost the beginning of animal existence itself. However, a wide range of organisms have evolved mechanisms to steal nematocysts from cnidarians and use them for their own defense: 1. Nudibranchs (marine snails which have lost their shells) have evolved an intricate mechanism to transport these cells from their prey cnidarians via their gut into sacs on their skin, where they concentrate the nematocysts ready for deployment. 2. Ctenophores like *Haeckelia*; these early-branching animals steal nematocysts from jellyfish and deploy them to capture prey. 3. Flatworms like *Microstomum*; these steal nematocysts from Hydra and deploy them on their skin as a defensive mechanism. Thus, in these cases, the inventor is “outwitted” by a pilferer who ends up gaining most from the invention. When it comes to molecular weaponry, the picture gets even more promiscuous. As microorganisms rampantly exchange their DNA, they end up sharing the gene systems coding for molecular weaponry with each other. Thus, the weaponry almost never remains solely with the inventor. Instead, it gets spread around the microbial world and beyond, making it hard to tell where it was first invented in most cases. Indeed, many of our own immune system components have been acquired this way from microbial immune systems. As a corollary, the first inventor rarely ends up being the best user of a system of molecular weaponry.

We thought we might illustrate some of this to a layperson by drawing analogies to human weaponry. We chose the history of the machine gun for this, as it is a modern invention with a well-documented history. This resulted in us doing a dive into its invention and spread, of which we offer the briefest summary here. While it brings out some of the parallels to biological weaponry, it is quite the story of its own, illustrating distinct points, like how a technology sometimes takes a while to truly reach its full potential. Hence, we decided to just place it here followed by a small commentary on biological analogies at the end:

• The American, Gatling, invents a primitive (hand-cranked) version of the machine gun and sells it to many countries. The Union side uses it during the American Civil War, but does not realize its utility.  
• A little later, the Americans underperform with it in their wars against the First American tribal armies. The British buy it from Gatling and then adopt it for their wars against African tribal armies. They were the first to show the gun’s true military potential, mowing down charging Zulus and others.  
• Another American inventor, Maxim (who competed with Edison on the electric bulb), working for the British, invents the modern (automatic) version of the machine gun before the Americans even realized the full potential of Gatling’s weapon. The Brits again show its potential in putting down African tribal armies. However, neither the Brits nor the Americans really show its potential against modern armies.  
• In the meantime, the French invent their own machine gun (de Reffye’s Mitrailleuse/Canon à Balles) and use it against the Germans (Prussians). Despite slaughtering the German infantry in one battle with it, they screw up tactically, and the Germans neutralize it with their long-range cannons. The Germans capture all their units but, seeing it as a losing weapon, sell it back to the French after the war.  
• An Austrian nobleman, Baron von Ujezd, invents a new gas-operated air-cooled version of the machine gun as opposed to Maxim’s water-cooled version. The American-French company Hotchkiss buys the patent for this.  
• The Danes follow suit and invent their own machine gun, the Madsen. It is the first light machine gun that can be used by a single soldier.  
• The Germans procure the Maxim early on due to the Kaiser intuitively seeing its potential and start its domestic production, but remain unsure about its tactical utility.  
• The first to figure out how revolutionary these guns truly were, were the Rus and the Japanese. The Rus bought the Maxim version from the British and the Madsen from the Danes. The Japanese bought the Hotchkiss from the French. They fielded these in their epic confrontation of 1904-1905 CE, which was in many ways a dress rehearsal for WW1. Both sides were able to inflict heavy losses on the other with these guns, but in the end, the offensive use of these weapons by the Nipponese was one of the factors that swung the war in their favor.  
• The Germans, studying all this, soon took it seriously to become the best machine gun force in the world, superior to their British and French enemies. Their prowess with the weapon was seen early in the war as they massacred thousands of French troops in key encounters. Yet, despite their upper hand in this department, they lost the war.

Coming to the biological analogies, the machine gun was transferred widely across nations before its full potential was realized – this is indeed paralleled in the transfer of gene systems encoding antibiotics, toxins and antiviral immunity across the tree of life. Somewhere along these transfers, the weaponry might finally reach its real potential. Thus, one organism might invent the skeleton for a new antibiotic, but it may not be particularly effective in that base form. Then it might be transferred to another organism, which might add a relatively minor modification to it, making it highly effective. Thus, the original inventor might not be the one extracting its fullest potential.

Like with human armament, we see rampant convergent inventions of weaponry in biology, but there are some constraints in this regard. Once a lineage gets a head start in a given ecosystem, it tends to dominate it, preventing other convergent captures of the niche. This emerges from the arms race principle: the first to move into an open niche is in competition with other contenders for that niche, as well as its prey in that niche. Thus, a carnivore evolving to capture a certain prey will spark the emergence of adaptations in the prey that make it more resistant to capture and, at the same time, adaptations that help it outdo other contending predators. Hence, the winner rapidly settles on a stable attractor that cannot be invaded by new contenders. Thus, convergent evolution for a given predatory niche tends not to occur in the same ecosystem but in a separated ecosystem with which it has no connection. However, if these ecosystems get connected by the vicissitudes of tectonics or other geographical changes, then the two convergent adaptations for the niche are brought into a clash with each other, with usually only one surviving in the end. A good example of this is the story of the canids and the hyenas. While today, hyenas are primarily predators in the bone-crusher niche, at one point they occupied a variety of niches – civet-like, mongoose-like, jackal-like, pursuit predators and bone-crushers. They seem to have, however, lost most of these to other groups, such as their cousins, the true mongooses, the canids and the cats, that had convergently evolved these adaptations elsewhere. However, there is much less of a constraint in the multiple emergence of molecular weaponry operating in the same niche as opposed to, say, predatory adaptations. Thus, in this regard, the human arms situation resembles the landscape of molecular weaponry more than macroscopic morphological armaments.
