+++
title = "No money? No problem…"
full_title = "No money? No problem…"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/06/01/no-money-no-problem/"
date = "2016-06-01"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/06/01/no-money-no-problem/).

No money? No problem…

In 2008, Mark Boyle decided to try and live without money for a full year. He enjoyed it so much that that year turned into three and he became known as the moneyless man.

I was recommended *The Moneyless Manifesto*, one of his books, but was reluctant to dive in as I suspected it might be rather radical. It’s not that radical puts me off, quite the opposite in fact – my problem (a problem as defined by close family and friends) is I tend to agree wholeheartedly with what the author is saying and veer even further in that direction than before.

As it turns out, Mark, and his book, are not really so much about giving up money as embracing the wonderful new way of living which having no, or little, money necessarily brings. It is not about giving things up and living a dour, grim existence but about participating rather than consuming, and having lots of fun; think 60s summer of love not post-war Britain.

As Mark shows, money is the great separating and disconnecting factor in our lives. Money allows us to unwittingly participate in ecological and humanitarian disasters every time we eat a banana or wear a pair of trainers. It insulates us from the consequences of our way of life. It turns almost every relationship into a series of transactions. He tells a story of a father who, when his son turned 21, presented him with an itemised bill for every expense he had occurred on his behalf, starting with the obstetrician at his birth. The son paid and never contacted his father again. Accounts squared, relationship over. In India not so long ago the idea of a traveller who arrived in your area having to pay for his supper was shocking; families would be keen to have the privilege of feeding and looking after a guest, it was both a duty and an honour. Now, there are eateries everywhere catering to every budget; only the wandering mendicants eat for free. Similarly, Mark asks us to imagine what it would be like if after supper at a friend’s place you were presented with a bill.

By eschewing money, therefore, you reconnect with both other humans and with nature. Mark’s ideal is what he calls a gift economy. I do something for you, for free and with no expectation of return. In the future if I’m in need of something, you might well help me out. It’s not a contract, and there’s no bartering. We all freely give where, when and what we can and want to. And it’s premised on plenty not on scarcity. If I have a glut of apples one week, I give them away to neighbours because I know I’ll get more later from them or from other sources. There is no need to hoard, no need to grab what you can when you can. And the nature bit: well, if you have no money, you are instantly thrown upon your own resources to meet even your most basic needs, and have to learn how to work directly with nature to feed, clothe, shelter and enjoy yourself. You also never waste anything, because either you or someone you personally know has had to work for or sacrifice something to get it and thus you appreciate it. If you have had to walk to a well, collect a bucket of water and lug it back, you conserve every drop. If you have had to turn a tap, you don’t.

Would such a gift economy – and he says it would have to be 100% localised – work? I’m sure there would always be freeloaders, but if enough people were generously giving that wouldn’t matter. It is certainly a truism of human nature that when someone else voluntarily offers us something more than we expected, we tend to feel extremely grateful and want to reciprocate.

Mark includes many many ideas for how to live life without money, or with very little of it. From Freecycle to alfalfa-root toothbrushes, there is a wealth of suggestions in this book, some more palatable than others. There are a few omissions – moneyless birth options are not discussed, nor is death (in England a simple funeral with no frills can cost about £5,000) – but in truth, for the general reader the book is probably more useful for the transitional strategies it details, and for the ideas it contains.

Mark talks for instance about our healthcare model being completely unsustainable. It privileges just one species – and only a select few of those species – and does all it can to keep them alive (often in spite of their own wishes) while other people, animals and whole ecologies are sacrificed. Think of the wasteful, polluting and destructive industries required – because it’s all about economies of scale – to create a pacemaker or a dialysis machine. He also touches on the notion that perhaps soft-skinned, hairless humans are not designed to live in cold countries (where they need so much insulation in the form of clothing and shelter); just as mangoes will never be native to Scotland, perhaps humans aren’t either. This chimes with an idea I recently came across thanks to a Bangalore-based naturopath, Dr Achyutan Eshwar, that from an evolutionary standpoint we should live in countries that produce lots of fruit and vegetables – our ideal main diet – all year round. Which as I come to the end of a three-week England trip rich in rhubarb, bramley apples and asparagus but little else that isn’t imported, sounds about right.
