+++
title = "Artha Semantics versus"
full_title = "Artha Semantics versus Pragmatics"
date = "2016-04-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/04/09/artha-semantics-versus-pragmatics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/04/09/artha-semantics-versus-pragmatics/).

Artha: Semantics versus Pragmatics

Let’s say Devadatta is going to a party and brings a bottle of wine.
When he gets there, he finds that Yajñadatta has already arrived—and
that Yajñadatta has brought a bottle of the exact same wine that
Devadatta picked up.

If their host were a grammarian, he would probably say, “Great! Now we
have two bottles.” If he were a Mīmāṃsaka, he would probably say, “We
already have one of those.”

I was reading Śabara this morning and thinking, once again, about the
seemingly idiosyncratic way that Mīmāṃsakas use the word *artha*. It’s
well known that the dictionary definitions of *artha* include “meaning,”
“purpose,” “a thing,” and “a good thing,” and we can see how these
definitions might fit with each other. Mīmāṃsā is concerned with the
meaning of sentences in the Vedas, but in a different way than we might
expect, especially if we are used to thinking of meaning in exclusively
semantic terms.

In semantic terms, there might be a many-to-one relationship between
signs and meanings. There is generally no constraint on different signs,
including different tokens of the same sign, conveying the same meaning.
But in this case, the verb we are interested in is “conveying.” The word
“duck” might convey the meaning of a duck. But consider the sentence:
“That is a red duck duck.” Both instances of the word *convey* their
meaning—this is a debateable proposition but let’s assume it for the
argument’s sake—but only one of them *contributes* its meaning to the
sentence. In this case, the “extra” word is also poorly integrated into
the syntax of the sentence. But we can think of a similar cases (“That
is a red duck. That is a red duck.”) that don’t have clear syntactic
problems but nevertheless illustrate the contrast between conveying and
contributing a meaning. We can characterize this contrast in a couple of
ways, but context is a place to start: a sign conveys a meaning
independently of any context apart from the rules that characterize the
semantic system itself, while it contributes a meaning only in a
particular context that is external to this rule-system. While semantics
looks at the conveyance of meaning, pragmatics is more concerned with
the contribution of meaning.

When Mīmāṃsakas are discussing whether a given word or sentence is
“meaningful” (*arthavat*) or “meaningless” (*anarthaka*), or whether its
meaning is what is intended by it (*vivakṣitārtha*), they are usually
talking about the pragmatic dimensions of meaning, that is, whether the
word or sentence in question makes a contribution. One place is the
*mantra* section (1.2.4). The objector says that *mantra*s play a role
in the ritual only by being pronounced. What they mean is
inconsequential: they are “that of which the meaning is not intended”
(*avivakṣitārtha*). This is not the same as saying that *mantra*s are
meaningless. In fact, it is crucial to the objector’s argument that
*mantra*s do indeed convey a meaning. The problem is that there are
passages wherein a *mantra* is followed by a directive (*vidhi*) and
both elements *convey* similar meanings (the example, for those who are
interested, is “he takes the halter of the horse with the words ‘they
grasped the halter of truth’”). The problem is essentially that only one
of the elements can properly *contribute* its meaning. If the *mantra*
does, then the directive can’t, and that is a big problem for
Mīmāṃsakas. This problem is ultimately resolved by considering the
directive to exclude (*parisaṃkhyā*) possibilities that would obtain if
only the *mantra* were available—at least until the very idea of
exclusionary directives is attacked in the sixteenth century. But the
point I want to make here is simply that it often helps to think of
meaning in more pragmatic than semantic terms, according to which “what
is meant” includes not only the meaning that is conveyed but the meaning
that is contributed (or not) to an existing context.
