+++
title = "Gandhi’s Synthesis of"
full_title = "Gandhi’s Synthesis of Liberal and Communitarian Values (a guest post by Sanjay Lal)"
date = "2016-04-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/04/01/gandhis-synthesis-of-liberal-and-communitarian-values-a-guest-post-by-sanjay-lal/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/04/01/gandhis-synthesis-of-liberal-and-communitarian-values-a-guest-post-by-sanjay-lal/).

Gandhi’s Synthesis of Liberal and Communitarian Values (a guest post by Sanjay Lal)

**This is a guest-post by Sanjay
[Lal](https://clayton.academia.edu/SanjayLal) (Clayton State
University).** For further info on guest-posts on the Indian Philosophy
Blog, check
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/call-for-guest-posts/) page.

————————

I would like to share some of what I’m working on with the readers of
the Indian Philosophy Blog. Recently made available on the web-site of
*The* *Journal of the Indian Council of Philosophical Research* (and
uploaded on
[academia](https://www.academia.edu/23707869/Gandhis_Synthesis_of_Liberal_and_Communitarian_Values_Its_Basis_and_Insights).edu)
is my article “Gandhi’s synthesis of liberal and communitarian values:
Its basis and insights”
(<http://link.springer.com/journal/40961/onlineFirst/page/1>). In this
piece, which I expect to appear in the journal’s June print issue (vol.
33 issue 2), I argue that an underlying harmony can be found in Gandhi’s
philosophy among seemingly contradictory liberal and communitarian
values (e.g. the right of conscience, and honoring one’s inherited
social place) given his overall views on Self-realization. Ultimately, I
aim to show that if we interpret Gandhi’s thoughts on the Self in a way
that is in line with the Advaita Vedānta tradition (an interpretation
textually justified) we can better understand his basis for thinking
seemingly disparate liberal and communitarian concepts make up a
coherent whole. Additionally, I argue that Gandhi’s synthesis of such
concepts has relevance for present day conflicts which consume the “real
world” (such as those relating to secular and religious understandings
of the right kind of society). It is my belief that Gandhi shows there
exist little noticed resources within classical Hindu philosophy which
are useful for a world coping with sectarian conflicts and that are much
more profound than the standard pluralistic interpretations of Hinduism
suggest.

My article places a special focus on Gandhi’s thoughts regarding both
religious conversions and caste distinctions. I note that his views on
these matters show significant agreement with and sensitivity toward
central liberal as well as communitarian concerns. To summarize my main
argument:

-   1\. For Gandhi, realization of the Self is the aim of all legitimate
    communities (and indeed it is what all of us seek however conscious
    we may be of this goal).
-   2\. To realize the Self we must first becoming worthy of exercising
    the individual rights and freedoms important to political liberals.
    These rights and freedoms can be properly understood only when they
    are anchored to a system of religious thought.
-   3\. To become so worthy we must first learn the partial truths
    specific communities (e.g. the religious ones we are born into)
    emphasize; keeping in my mind that such truths can be seen as more
    or less viable given the specific places in which they have strived.
-   4\. Thus, the primary role of the state for Gandhi should not be to
    indiscriminately preserve and promote liberal rights and freedoms
    but to develop citizens who can first become worthy of such rights
    and freedoms—a project that requires the state to advance the
    well-being and flourishing of particular communities (including
    religious ones but in a way that does not favor any one group and
    which facilitates mutually beneficial interaction among diverse
    communities).

My argument implies at least two interrelated areas of additional
research:

-   1\. Does it make sense to think of the realization of the Self (as
    understood in the Advaita Vedānta tradition) as a universal goal
    shared by all legitimate communities? (Indeed one can even ask if
    the values of diverse religious groups—as well as secular proponents
    of liberalism—are indeed commensurate in the way Gandhi assumes.)
-   2\. Is such a view in line with the Advaita Vedānta school itself?

In regard to the first question, we can also wonder whether
understanding Self-realization as the universal goal of diverse
religious communities does justice to how these communities see
themselves. Perhaps a comparative study of the philosophically minded
exponents of different religious communities (e.g. Śaṅkara, Augustine,
Rumi, etc.) that are at the center of so much present day polarization
does indeed lend itself to such an interpretation. Of course, it would
also be necessary to show that such exponents both accurately represent
their respective traditions and that the ideas they put forth for living
in a diverse world are philosophically acceptable. **I welcome any
comments readers of this blog may have.**

****
