+++
title = "An aesthetic of extremes"
full_title = "An aesthetic of extremes"
date = "2016-03-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/03/27/an-aesthetic-of-extremes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/03/27/an-aesthetic-of-extremes/).

An aesthetic of extremes

\[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.\]

Vikram Chandra’s [Geek
Sublime](http://www.amazon.com/Geek-Sublime-The-Beauty-Code/dp/1555976859)might
be the most popular book in a Western language ever to deal with Indian
aesthetic theory. The book’s official subject is the aesthetics of
computer science. Though I am getting a degree in computer science
myself, I found myself more interested in Chandra’s lucid comments about
the medieval Indian philosophers Ānandavardhana and Abhinavagupta and
their theory of *rasa*, the emotional “tastes” that an artistic audience
can savour.

What is important about Chandra’s work is that he \_applies\_ the
\_rasa\_ theory. He draws from the best English-language works I know of
on Ānandavardhana and Abhinavagupta: the writings of Daniel Ingalls,
Jeffrey Masson and M.V. Patwardhan, especially [their
translation](http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674202788)of
Ānandavardhana’s \_Dhvanyāloka\_ with Abhinavagupta’s \_locana\_
commentary. But Chandra does what Ingalls, Masson and Patwardhan do not:
he asks how the theories of Ānandavardhana and Abhinavagupta could apply
to *us*. \<!–more–>

That “us” is one that Chandra rightly puts into question. When an “us”
is spoken of in contemporary works of philosophical application it is
often glossed with “a modern Western audience”. Chandra’s audience is
certainly modern, as he is, but he, and his audience, are not only
Western. He grew up in India and divides his time between India and the
US. And in the *rasa* theorists he found a way of expressing how his
aesthetic preferences differ from those he was taught in the West – a
way that I found spoke to me as well.

To me the most striking passage in the book is on pages 147-9, where
Chandra applies the classical *rasa* thinkers to an art medium they
never knew: film. Chandra points out: “Indian movies mix emotions and
formal devices in a manner quite foreign to Western filmgoers; Indian
tragedies accommodate comedic scenes, and soldiers in gritty war movies
can break into song.” He juxtaposes this with Ānandavardhana’s claim
that there is “no obstruction to a single *rasa* \[emotional ‘taste’\]
by its being mixed with others…” and Abhinavagupta’s comment that the
predominant *rasa* of a story can be strengthened by the presence of
different ones. Abhinavagupta draws an example from that quintessential
Indian artistic work, the
[Mahābhārata](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahabharata). There a wife
sees her dead husband’s severed arm and recalls its caresses on her; her
erotic and romantic memories bring the grief into sharper focus by
contrast. And Chandra says: “This is why the Aristotelian unities of
British and American films seemed so alien to me when I watched them as
a child.”

I don’t know enough about Indian films or English-language film theory
to know whether Chandra’s application in that context is right. Yet what
he says in this passage nevertheless struck a chord with me. It suggests
that what I had previously described as an [unphilosophical
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/02/coming-to-like-modern-india/),
about my own autobiography and relation to India, may have its
philosophical significance after all. Returning from my Indian wedding,
I had
[written](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/02/coming-to-like-modern-india/)
about how modern India had come to appeal to me, above all through its
love for bright colours. Which I described at the time as an aesthetic,
but with no connection to any sort of philosophical aesthetics.

After reading Chandra I can’t help but see a connection between the
aesthetics of the medieval Indian theorists and the ones I see on the
modern Indian street. (I say all this with some caution because I do not
know these theorists at all well, and Chandra himself does not claim to
be an expert on them.) Above all, what I am seeing here is a *rejection
of moderation* in aesthetics, something that I think might be implicit
in Chandra’s mention of Aristotle. Aristotle famously described virtue
as a mean between vices, comparing it to an archer hitting the target,
and I have [tended to agree with
him](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/justice-as-a-mean/). But
while I am overall satisfied with this characterization in ethics, I am
not satisfied with it in aesthetics.

In her [Śiva: The Erotic
Ascetic](http://www.amazon.com/Siva-Erotic-Ascetic-Galaxy-Books/dp/0195202503),
Ingalls’s student [Wendy
Doniger](https://divinity.uchicago.edu/wendy-doniger)characterized
Indian mythology as a “pendulum of extremes”, explicitly avoiding
moderation. I think there is something to be said for this
characterization of Indian aesthetics in general, as *immoderate*. I’ve
elsewhere mentioned the Indian [approach to
smell](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/12/kitsch/): India just
smells *so much more strongly* than the West does, for bad *and for
good*. Walking around India one can’t help but notice how little control
is exercised over odours of the sewer and pollution – but *also* how
much more often one smells sandalwood and other fragrant perfumes, not
to mention street food. I think my grad-school colleague James McHugh
was right to identify smell in Indian culture with [sandalwood and
carrion](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/sandalwood-and-carrion-9780199916320?cc=us&lang=en&).

This point in turn leads back into an aesthetic point I had [myself
made](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/12/kitsch/)with its primary
reference to the West: the critics of
[kitsch](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/12/kitsch/)are wrong to
tell us we should avoid making a fantasy world more beautiful or
pleasurable than the real one. Rather, we should remain aware that such
a world *isn’t* the real one, remain all too aware of the badness of the
world: enjoy Thomas Kinkade as long as you also appreciate Hieronymus
Bosch. I’d rather look at either Bosch or Dalì on one hand, or Indian
poster art on the other, than at what has always struck me as the muted
blandness of a Monet. This has been my aesthetic sensibility for a long
time, and Chandra makes me realize that it might well be an *Indian* one
– and may even have philosophical roots in thinkers like Abhinavagupta
and Ānandavardhana.
