+++
title = "Mīmāṃsā and Uṣūl alfiqh"
full_title = "Mīmāṃsā and Uṣūl alfiqh On comparison"
date = "2016-03-31"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/03/31/mima%e1%b9%83sa-and-u%e1%b9%a3ul-al-fiqh-on-comparison/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/03/31/mima%e1%b9%83sa-and-u%e1%b9%a3ul-al-fiqh-on-comparison/).

Mīmāṃsā and Uṣūl al-fiqh: On comparison

About a year ago, I teamed up with my colleague Omar Farahat to do a
roundtable discussion on the topic of the normativity of language in
Mīmāṃsā and Uṣūl al-fiqh. The occasion was the annual graduate student
conference of Columbia’s department of Middle Eastern, South Asian, and
African Studies ([MESAAS](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mesaas/)), and we
were lucky enough to have the philosopher [Akeel
Bilgrami](http://philosophy.columbia.edu/directories/faculty/akeel-bilgrami)
participate. I plan to write a few posts on the topic, and this first
one will deal primarily with the question of methodology, which is
necessarily a bit general and abstract, but important nonetheless.

Uṣūl al-fiqh is the Islamic tradition of jurisprudence. It deals, among
other things, with the philosophical underpinnings of Islamic law
(*fiqh*), and hence investigates its “sources of normativity.” Mīmāṃsā,
as most of our readers will know, is the Indian tradition of
interpreting the Vedas. It, too, deals with the questions of how and why
certain statements in the Veda come to have a normative force. In
bringing these traditions into conversation with each other, we are most
interested in *how* they account for the normative status of certain
claims, whether they are moral, ritual, legal, or cultural.

The terms of this comparison are thus two non-Western, non-modern
traditions. I call this kind of comparison “decentered,” in contrast to
the “centered” comparison that is usually practiced in philosophy,
whether explicitly or implicitly. In centered comparison, there is
usually one framework that is taken for granted. It may not be entirely
valid, but it is familiar; it forms part of the world that we, the
people doing the comparison, inhabit. It is almost always Western,
whatever this word means, and often modern as well. To take an example:
in the case of normative claims, I would expect every participant in the
discussion to know more or less about the Meno problem that Plato
formulated, how a Kantian versus Humean characterization of normative
claims looks, and I would expect to be able to refer to Wittgenstein,
too. And if participants are a bit weak on any of these topics, they can
easily refresh themselves by reading a book, or an online encyclopedia,
or whatever. In centered comparison, the other framework is really
“other”: it is presented in languages that our colleagues don’t really
read, embedded in cultures that we don’t belong to, and imbricated in
belief systems that we don’t subscribe to. It is not a full-fledged
participant in a wider philosophical conversation. I don’t want to
overdo this point, especially because a similar postcolonialist critique
has recently been hijacked by nationalists and cultural chauvinists, but
it is clear enough in the case of Mīmāṃsā and Uṣūl al-fiqh. Both exist
under the shadow of the European center and appear by contrast to have
certain philosophical deficiencies. In contrast to the self-consciously
universalism of European traditions, they are clearly embedded in
particular life-worlds (Islam or Śrauta Hinduism). And in contrast to
the idea that normative claims should be explained and justified based
on reason alone—an Enlightenment idea that is rooted in Plato—these
traditions seem to require an up-front commitment to certain beliefs
that neither traditions themselves nor “reason alone” can justify (the
revealed status of the Qur’an, or the eternal status of the Vedas). And
besides this, unlike European traditions, these traditions are
comparatively inaccessible to people who don’t at least have specialized
training in the languages.

In “decentered” comparison, we try to move these traditions out from the
shadow of Europe. Instead of attempting to sift the philosophical from
the unphilosophical on the basis of an implicit idea of what philosophy
is or should be, we operate in three steps. First, we try to understand
the fundamental questions, concepts, and techniques of the tradition, as
well as the ideas and arguments we’re interested in. Then we seek out,
and try to account for, similarities and differences in the other
traditions of our decentered comparison. It is only at the last stage
that we think about possible critiques, but importantly these critiques
should not only come from a modern, “central,” perspective but from the
perspective of other terms in the comparison. This is something that I
would expect people trained in Indian philosophy to be good at—coming up
with criticism from a perspective internal to a tradition—because of the
important role that inter-sectarian debate has had in the history of
Indian philosophy. And it might be that at the end of this process, the
central frameworks that had appeared so inevitable may actually seem, in
certain respects, inadequate and dogmatic.

I’ll just give two examples, which I plan to expand upon in further
posts. One is that both Uṣūl al-fiqh and Mīmāṃsā take the linguistic
form of a normative claim very seriously, and present it as a
“statement,” that is, as a stable linguistic entity with a particular
structure, rather than as an “utterance,” that is, a statement in
historical time delivered from a speaker to a listener. A statement
needs to be interpreted according to definite hermeneutical principles.
And the conditions of its normativity need to be located within the
structure of the statement, rather than in features of the situation in
which it was supposedly uttered. This contrasts radically with the
analysis of normative claims as speech acts by J. L. Austin. Another
example, which Omar Farahat has written about, is the “blind following”
critique that we might instinctively apply to Uṣūl al-fiqh and Mīmāṃsā.
Namely, either the normative claims of the Qur’an, or the Vedas, are
based on rational principles external to these texts, in which case we
don’t need the texts at all, or they are based on something else—let’s
call it “authority”—that it inaccessible or impervious to reason, in
which case we can only ever follow these claims blindly. But this
critique presupposes a model in which a command is given by one person
to another. From within these two traditions, a command is once again a
statement rather than an utterance. Whatever normative force it has is
not derived from the authority of a speaker (at least for some schools
of Islamic jurisprudence), but from its linguistic form and its
potential for meaning.

Explicitly comparative work in Indian philosophy usually includes a
Western comparandum, although the status of this comparandum varies
widely: sometimes it is seen as an ideal that “other” philosophy
approximates in its best moments, sometimes it is seen as setting out
the basic problems that “other” philosophy sometimes provides useful
ways of thinking about, or providing a rigorous methodology and
formalism with which to approach “other” philosophy, and sometimes it is
more or less an equal partner with “other” philosophy in an ongoing
philosophical dialogue. Off the top of my head, I can think of [Empty
Words: Buddhism and the Limits of Cross-Cultural
Philosophy](https://books.google.com/books/about/Empty_Words.html?id=BeQeQTDcTEsC)
and [His Hiding Place is
Darkness](https://books.google.com/books?id=hSBVAQAAQBAJ). I know of
very little comparative work that exemplifies the “decentered” method
outline above. Does anyone else?
