+++
title = "Again on the existence"
full_title = "Again on the existence of a separate Yogasūtra"
date = "2016-03-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/03/28/again-on-the-existence-of-a-separate-yogasutra/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/03/28/again-on-the-existence-of-a-separate-yogasutra/).

Again on the existence of a separate Yogasūtra

As most readers know, Philipp
[Maas](https://univie.academia.edu/PhilippMaas) (elaborating on a short
article by Johannes Bronkhorst) has claimed that it is highly probable
that an independent Yogasūtra never existed and that we should therefore
only speak of the Pātañjalayogaśāstra, a work including what is known as
Yogasūtra and what is known as Yogabhāṣya. He notices that the Yogasūtra
is not independently transmitted, that all quotes until the 11th c.
refer to either the YS or the YBh in the same way, as if they were the
same work. For more details, see section 2 of his article in Franco 2013
(available
[here](https://www.academia.edu/3520571/A_Concise_Historiography_of_Classical_Yoga_Philosophy))
and his article in Bronkhorst 2010 (available
[here](https://www.academia.edu/212613/On_the_Written_Transmission_of_the_P%C4%81ta%C3%B1jalayoga%C5%9B%C4%81stra)).

Federico [Squarcini](http://www.unive.it/data/people/7607409/pubb_anno)
recently disputed this claim on the basis of the fact that it is too
much dependent on the manuscript transmission, which is not so
meaningful, given that all manuscripts are centuries later than the
YS–YBh:

> La maggior parte di quelli datati fra essi (manoscritti dello YS–YBh)
> è del XIX secolo. \[…\] non si conoscono manoscritti degli *Yogasūtra*
> più antichi del XVI secolo d.C (Squarcini 2015, cxii).

Squarcini also mentions as an evidence in favour of the distinction of
the two texts, text-passages such as the following of the YBh:

> *iti patañjaliḥ etat svarūpam ity uktam* (YBh ad YS 3.44)

Here, the author or the YBh seems to quote from the YS as a work by
someone different from himself, called Patañjali.

If you read Squarcini, Bronkhorst and Maas, **which arguments convince
you more?**

On Maas 2013 and Maas’ view on the single author of YS and YBh, see
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/01/03/is-there-really-a-single-author-of-the-yogasutra-and-yogabha%e1%b9%a3ya/).

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
