+++
title = "Thoughts of Sri"
full_title = "Thoughts of Sri Chandrashekharendra Saraswati ji on Atharvan veda"
date = "2014-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/09/20/thoughts-of-sri-chandrashekharendra-saraswati-ji-on-atharvan-veda/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/09/20/thoughts-of-sri-chandrashekharendra-saraswati-ji-on-atharvan-veda/).

Thoughts of Sri Chandrashekharendra Saraswati ji on Atharvan veda

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/wpid-hh_chandrashekarendra_saraswathi_mahaswamiji_13.jpg?w=700 "hh_chandrashekarendra_saraswathi_mahaswamiji_(13).jpg")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/wpid-hh_chandrashekarendra_saraswathi_mahaswamiji_13.jpg)

“***Atharvan***” means a purohita, a priest. There was a sage with this
name. That which was revealed by the seer Athrvan is the Atharvaveda. It
contains mantras with which one wards off misfortunes and disasters and
brings about the destruction of one’s enemies. The ***Atharvaveda*** is
a mixture of prose and poetry. The mantras of other Vedas also serve the
same purpose as those of the ***Atharvaveda***. But what is special
about the latter is that it has references to deities not mentioned in
the others and has mantras addressed to fierce spirits. What has come to
be known as “***mantrikam***” (magical rites) has its source in this
Veda. But it is to be noted that the ***Atharvaveda*** also contains
mantras that speak of lofty truths. It has the ***Prithvi-sukta***, the
hymn to earth, which glorifies this planet with all its creatures. The
***Atharvaveda*** is noteworthy for the fact that the ***brahma***, the
supervisor of sacrifices, is its representative. The ***Atharvaveda***,
that is its ***Samhita***, is rarely chanted in the North and is not
heard at all in the South. But we must remember that of the ten
important ***Upanishads*** three belong to this Veda – ***Prasna,
Mundaka and Mandukya.*** It is believed that those who seek liberation
need nothing to realise their goal other than ***Madukya Upanishad***.
We learn from stone inscriptions that the ***Atharvaveda*** had a
following until some centuries ago. Information about Vedic schools is
provided by such inscriptions found near ***Perani***, not far from
***Tindivanam***, at ***Ennayiram*** and a place near ***Walajabad***,
in the neighbourhood of ***Kancipuram***. Even during the reign of the
later Colas the ***Atharvaveda*** was learned in the Tamil country.
There are eighteen divisions among the Brahmins of Orissa. One of them
is made up of “***Atharvanikas***“, that is ***Atharvavedins***. Evev
today  
***Atharvavedins*** are to be met, though their number is small, in
parts of ***Gujarat*** like ***Saurashtra*** and in ***Kosala***( in U.
P).  
( This fragment is taken from the famous book of Sri Chandrashekharendra
Saraswati ji ” The Hindu Dharma ” )

Animesh’s blog

