+++
title = "Luzon, Sulawesi, Flores"
full_title = "Luzon, Sulawesi, Flores"
date = "2018-05-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/05/05/luzon-sulwawesi-flores/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/05/05/luzon-sulwawesi-flores/).

Luzon, Sulawesi, Flores

A few years back I was
[discussing](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/10/23/denisovans-in-wallacea/)
Denisovans in Wallacea: here’s the map again.
[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/wallacea.jpg?w=640&h=413)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/wallacea.jpg)

Cooper and Stringer were suggesting that Denisovans had colonized some
or most islands in Wallacea, and that explains Denisovan ancestry in
populations there today (Philippine Negritos and Melanesians). I thought
it a bit unlikely because it meant that Denisovans had to have had
seagoing technology, but in a very narrow range: good enough to reach
Wallacea (and the Philippines), but not good enough to reach Sahul
(Australia/New Guinea). I was wrong: it now looks to be true. Since that
article people have found good evidence of early settlement in the
[Philippines](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-018-0072-8) , also
in Sulawesi, as well as Flores. Some of those are older than Denisovans,
likely erectus.

Look at the glacial-max map of the Philippines and environs, when sea
level was 120 meters lower than today:
[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/phillipines.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/phillipines.jpg)  
You can’t walk to the Philippines, but the water gaps are not very wide,
on the order of 10 kilometers. I don’t much believe in breeding colonies
being founded by tsunamis – note that only a few placental mammals ever
succeeded in crossing, as pointed out by a commenter – but I can imagine
someone paddling a log across those narrow gaps. The required crossing
for Sulawesi is also narrow.

Elephants are pretty good swimmers and can cross that kind of gap, and
various kinds of elephants colonized the Philippines, Sulawesi, and
Flores. There’s a known example of an elephant that swam ashore after
being washed overboard 48 km off the South Carolina coast in 1856.

But why didn’t early humans make it to Australia back then? Two
thoughts: that would have required multiple sea crossings, some
considerably wider that the ones leading to the Philippines or Sulawesi.
Maybe that was enough to prevent it. Second, some of the islands in the
proposed paths were small. Even if some population managed to settle
one, it may have been too small to succeed for long. There was an island
between Tasmania and the mainland that was inhabited for a few thousand
years after rising waters cut the connection with the Australian
mainland, with a population around 400. And then it wasn’t inhabited
anymore: something happened.

