+++
title = "Rise and Fall"
full_title = "Rise and Fall"
date = "2018-01-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/18/rise-and-fall/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/18/rise-and-fall/).

Rise and Fall

Every society selects for something: generally it looks as if the
direction of selection pressure is more or less an accident. Although
nations and empires in the past *could* have decided to select men for
bravery or intelligence, there’s not much sign that anyone actually did
this. I mean, they would have known how, if they’d wanted to, just as
they knew how to select for destriers, coursers, and palfreys. It was
still possible to know such things in the Middle Ages, because Harvard
did not yet exist.

A rising empire needs quality human capital, which implies that at
minimum that budding imperial society must not have been strongly
dysgenic. At least not in the beginning. But winning changes many
things, possibly including selective pressures. Imagine an empire with
substantial urbanization, one in which talented guys routinely ended up
living in cities – cities that were demographic sinks. That might change
things. Or try to imagine an empire in which survival challenges were
greatly reduced, at least for elites, so that people had nothing to keep
their minds off their minds and up worshiping Magna Mater. Imagine that
an empire conquered a rival with interesting local pathogens and brought
some of them home. Or one that used up a lot of its manpower conquering
less-talented subjects and then importing masses of those losers into
the imperial heartland.

If any of those scenarios occurred, they might eventually result in
imperial decline – decline due to decreased biological capital.

Right now this is speculation. If we knew enough about the GWAS hits for
intelligence, and had enough ancient DNA, we might be able to observe
that rise and fall, just as we see dysgenic trends in contemporary
populations. But that won’t happen for a long time. Say, a year.

