+++
title = "Who’s on first?"
full_title = "Who’s on first?"
date = "2016-06-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/19/whos-on-first/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/19/whos-on-first/).

Who’s on first?

There’s a new
[paper](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/06/15/058966) out on the
people of the Americas, by Pontus Skoglund and David Reich. The main
picture is solidifying:

The main Amerindian migration consists of a population that is
approximately 40% ancient Siberian and 60% Han-like. Calculations that
assumed a simple split between the ancestors of the Han and Amerindians
are wrong and probably placed too far back (\~23,000 years BP). They
don’t mention it, but the uniparental lineages suggest that ANE guys ran
off with some sobbin’ proto-Han women, much like the formation story for
the Indo-Europeans.

There was some substructure: the two main streams are the Amerindians of
South and Central America and northern Amerindians like Cree and
Algonquins. Interestingly, the only Clovis skeleton we have is
genetically closer to the southerners.

The paleo-Eskimos (Dorset culture) come from a later, separate migration
(\~4500 years ago), similar to Koryak and Chukchi, but were completely
replaced by the Thule culture (current Eskimos) \~1000 years ago.

The Na-Dene (Navajo for example) also came late: they might be from the
same stream that led to the Dorset, but they might stem from another
migration. Better samples from more populations should soon resolve
this. Since Na-Dene languages can be related to Ket using standard
methods, it can’t have been all that long ago – more like 4 or 5
thousand, rather than 8 or 9.

According to this paper, the Andamanese-like admixure is found only east
of the Andes in South America, apparently concentrated in the Tupi
language family. Not in the Eskimos, not in central America, not in
Canada, not in the one Clovis skeleton we have, which has affinities to
the Central/South America branch. Not in Tierra del Fuego, not in Baja
California.

I think this strong pattern significantly increases the probability of
the scenario in which a vaguely Andamanese-like population gets to the
Americas first, maybe 18k years ago, came by sea and settled Brazil,
which was decent hunter-gatherer territory (savannahs and open
woodland), not ice/polar desert/taiga like North America. Then was
replaced, with a little admixture, by a classic Amerindian population. I
would guess that the authors think so too: they’re treating this
scenario with more respect than in the earlier paper. They mention the
odd-looking early skeletons in Brazil.

We need ancient DNA to seal the deal, but that may come.

Why didn’t these Andamanese-like guys drive extinctions? Cause the
megafaunal extinctions are a good deal later. I’m guessing that they
were originally fishermen and beachcombers, not hard-case hunters of big
mammals like the Amerindians in Beringia. Modern humans didn’t cause
instant extinctions in Africa (only some things) but the animals there
had a long time to adapt to people, while sleeping sickness eventually
created people-free zones. . South America wasn’t like that – why didn’t
these Andamanese wipe out the big game? Well, from what we know they
weren’t very good at dealing with Amerindians – and related populations
in Southeast Asia, the Philippines, and Indonesia also lost out to
Han-like invaders.

Yet even the Australian aborigines seemed to have wiped out the
Australian megafauna pretty rapidly… In our scenario, why didn’t the
pseudo-Andamanese?

Something limited their ecological dominance.

