+++
title = "In a handbasket"
full_title = "In a handbasket"
date = "2016-06-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/17/in-a-handbasket/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/17/in-a-handbasket/).

In a handbasket

It strikes me that in many ways, life was gradually getting harder in
the Old World, especially in the cradles of civilization. We know that
every now and then a new infectious disease was added to the mix:
smallpox probably shows up in the classical world around 180 AD, bubonic
plague in 641, syphilis in 1494, cholera around 1830, HIV in the 1970s.
Those we know – but many other infectious diseases must have arrived at
some time since the beginning of the Holocene – certainly those like
measles whose critical community size was too large for it to have
existed among hunter-gatherers. Ancient DNA & molecular phylogeny should
elucidate this negative trend. Bet you a dollar that typhus didn’t exist
in the old days.

What, if anything, countered this gradually increasing disease burden? I
would say selection – medicine was useless until quite recently. But
selection is slow. Now and then an infectious disease seem to have
disappeared (English sweat) or become milder (scarlet fever) but that
was a coincidental outcome of some kind of ecological change – people
didn’t plan it.

In the same way, farming should have gotten harder in some ways: the
burden of weeds, blights, and insects should have increased with time.
There, though, selection acted faster than it did in humans: crops have
high effective population size and short generations. Of course, so do
weeds… I know that chickpea, one of the original founder crops of the
Middle East, disappeared for about 3,000 years because of a fungus –
until a version that grew in the (dryer) summer showed up. Rye and oats
started out as weeds and developed such effective mimicry that they
*became* crops…

Then there’s environmental degradation – deforestation, erosion, soil
salinization, exhaustion of ores useful to available techniques. Worse
in fairly dry areas, worse with irrigation as opposed to rain-fed
agriculture.

Technical innovations pushed in the other direction – decent horse
harnesses, three-field cultivation, water mills, Champa rice – but it
could be a long time between innovations. In particular Classical civ
seems to have been low on such innovations.

