+++
title = "First Farmers"
full_title = "First Farmers"
date = "2016-06-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/25/first-farmers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/25/first-farmers/).

First Farmers

There’s a new
[paper](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/06/16/059311) (by Iosif
Lazaridis and others) out on the genetics of the world’s first farmers
in the Middle East. There are a number of interesting points.

They find that early farming populations are about half descended from
the somewhat mysterious “Basal Eurasians”, who apparently split off from
other Eurasians before they separated from each other. Those Basal
Eurasians appear to have little or no Neanderthal admixture, but they
are no closer to sub-Saharan Africans than other Eurasians. Which they
means that they probably left sub-Saharan Africa a long time ago – but
where then did they go? Somewhere without any Neanderthals? North Africa
might work: we have no evidence that there were ever any Neanderthals
there. But if the Basal Eurasians didn’t mix with Neanderthals, they
likely mixed with someone else. Someone lived in North Africa before
modern humans: we might see a trace of that in populations with Basal
Eurasian ancestry. With luck and some ancient DNA from North Africa (or
possibly South Arabia?), we might find the answer.

Genetic differentiation was much stronger back in those days. Fst
between Natufians and the hunter-gatherers in the Zagros mountains (
western Iran) was comparable to that between Germans and Chinese today.
You can bet that their languages were highly differentiated as well.

The first farmers seem to be descended from the hunter-gatherers that
immediately preceded them. All the groups that picked up farming
expanded outward: early Anatolian farmers into Europe (LBk and Cardial
cultures), Levantine farmers into Africa (so Hamito-Semitic must have
originated in the Middle East). it looks as if ur-Georgians mixed with
eastern hunter-gatherers that were closely related to ANE (75%) to form
the proto-Indo-Europeans, which means that pre-PIE was spoken by those
eastern hunter-gatherers, and the similarities between Kartvelian
languages like Georgian and Indo-European may boil down to pillow talk
and lullabies.

By the Bronze age Natufians and Zagros mountaineers and Anatolian
farmers were mixing a lot – but before agriculture, such mixing must
have been very rare for a long time, in order to generate that big Fst.
There was probably more trade with the advent of agriculture ( more
mixing) , and later, technical developments like ships and wheeled
vehicles probably favored mixing. Farmers can have specialists, who may
make use of exotic materials ( like tin or lapis lazuli) than are
imported over long trade routes. Eventually there were empires, some of
which seem to have shuffled ethnic groups around the chess board simply
because they could. Probably the horrible Ice Age climate played a role
in keeping populations isolated before the Holocene.

But back before the Holocene, it seems that, more often than not
hunter-gatherers either didn’t mix or exterminated each other. It looks
as if there were two waves of replacement ( with little admixture) in
Europe *after* modern humans replaced Neanderthals and *before*
Anatolian farmers largely replaced the last population of European
hunter-gatherers!  
We see a couple of cases in which new populations are found almost
entirely with males from one population and females from another: early
Indo-Europeans and Amerindians.

