+++
title = "Prof RD Ranade’s"
full_title = "Prof RD Ranade’s Philosophy of Rational Mysticism and morphic spiritual experiences Guest Post by Charuta Kulkarni"
date = "2021-08-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/08/23/prof-r-d-ranades-philosophy-of-rational-mysticism-of-and-morphic-spiritual-experiences-guest-post-by-charuta-kulkarni/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/08/23/prof-r-d-ranades-philosophy-of-rational-mysticism-of-and-morphic-spiritual-experiences-guest-post-by-charuta-kulkarni/).

Prof. R.D. Ranade’s Philosophy of Rational Mysticism and morphic spiritual experiences. Guest Post by Charuta Kulkarni

Prof. R. D. Ranade, was a Mystic Philosopher, devoutly called ‘Gurudev’
by his disciples and followers. Born on July 3, 1886, at Jamkhandi
village in Karnataka State of South India, Ramachandra Dattatray Ranade
had theistic beliefs since childhood. In the year 1901, he was initiated
by his *Sadguru* (Spiritual teacher) Sri. Bhausaheb Maharaj Umadikar of
the Nimbargi sect in Karnataka. The peculiarity of this sect is that the
*Sadguru*, a self-realized person in all aspects, grants a
*Sabeej-Mantra* (the divine name) to his disciples to meditate upon. The
word ‘*Sabeej*’ literally meaning a budding seed, is very indicative of
the genesis of mystical experiences.

One can make out from Prof. Ranade’s writing that, his was not merely an
armchair philosophy but verily a life-lived practice. In the preface of
*A Constructive Survey of Upanishadic Philosophy,* he writes, **‘it
would be a problem for the Philosophy of the Immediate Future to place
Mysticism on a truly philosophical basis.**’ Thus, the term ‘Rational
Mysticism’ was brought into the stream of contemporary thought by him,
which is not **a contradiction in terms but a truism**.\[1\].

In his scheme of thought, a complete self-realization with a sublime
vision of the **spirit** is the raison d’être of man’s life. In the
mystical knowledge of the Self, all the pramāṇas coalesce into one
pramāṇa of ‘experience.’ That is why Rational Mysticism is the
‘experience acceptable to the reason’ as Prof. Ranade calls it. He
emphasized two things namely, the loving contemplation on the name of
God imparted to the disciple by the *Sadguru,* without letting a single
breath go in vain and the divine grace. The grace of the Sadguru
transpires from God, as Saints and Mystics of the divine community tell
us. This fructifies into the Self-illumination of every God-aspirant.
The book *A Constructive Survey of Upanishadic Philosophy* witnesses
glorious mystical experiences of upanishadic seers from the last 6000
years. *Kathopaniśad* advises that “In every inhale and exhale one
should remember God.”

***ūrdhvaṃ prāṇam unnayati apānaṃ pratyag asyati /***  
***madhye** **vāmanam** **āsīnaṃ** **viśve** **devā** **upāsate***
***//*** ***(Kaṭhopaniṣad, 5.3.2)***

Meaning- Between the upgoing breath and the downcoming breath there is a
beautiful or dwarfish God, whom all the Gods adore**.’**

What are exactly spiritual experiences?  
William James and his popular book *Variety of Religious Experiences*,
wielded great influence on Prof. Ranade and he reconciled the phenomenal
and noumenal elements of human experience, showing Man simultaneously to
be a denizen of two worlds-one human and one divine. He had particularly
selected devotional songs of Indian Saints in his book series of
*Pathway to God* in Marathi, Hindi and Kannada literature respectively,
which upholds his philosophical outcome. In the last one, he generously
talks about yogic, biological, neurological, and psychological processes
behind the experiences of morphic, phonic, photic, chromatic or
colorist, motor, tactile, flavourist, odourist nature and those of
conversation as well; which occur separately or collectively depending
upon the temperament of God aspirant.

In a Presidential Address delivered at the 13th session of the Indian
Philosophical Congress held at Nagpur in Dec. 1937, Prof. Ranade
emphasized ‘how the recent discoveries in modern Physics, Biology,
Neurology and so forth tend to prove that the spirit is the only
reality, and how western thought can be brought in harmony with the
conclusions of the great Indian sages and Philosophers.'\[2\] I have
considered a passage from this brief extract where Prof. Ranade
explained that the mystical experiences of some Indian saints have a
biological basis too, based on Hans Driesch’s experiments in embryology.

Ranade_EF corrected

*“Roux had disbelieved in the autonomy of life based on his experiment
consisting in the destruction of one of the two cleavage-cells of a
frog’s egg immediately after the first cleavage had been completed,
because, he said, in such cases, the remaining cell develops only the
left or the right side of the embryo. Driesch approaches this problem by
a different method, based on his experiments on the sea-urchin’s egg,
where the remaining cleavage-cell develops not half of the embryo but a
complete embryo of half the size…From his experiments, Driesch concluded
that life is an autonomous principle, which he calls the “entelechy.”
Disarrange a part of a sea-urchin’s egg, and it will tight itself…take
only a fragment and it will develop a complete embryo…Driesch suggests
that in the case of the higher animals, and especially in man, it may be
called a “psychoid.”* (Ranade, 2013)

Ranade_EF corrected

Prof. Ranade’s other remarkable contribution to Philosophy is of the
word that he coined as **‘Spiriton’** from this principle. This
‘Spiriton’ corresponds to the term ‘Biṇdulé’ (bin-duh lay) used
frequently by Maharashtrian saints.

**Morphic Experiences:**

In line with what Prof. Ranade says in *Pathway to God in Marathi
Literature*, the Maharashtrian Saint ‘Tukārāma was a photic as well as
an audible mystic like all other great mystics in the world’\[3\]. In
one of the devotional poems Saint Tukārāma writes that, ***Tilāituké hé
Bindulé, téné tribhuvana koṇdātalé\|*** Meaning, one tiny spiritual atom
encompasses the entire universe. Prof. Ranade advocated that, to be able
to identify ‘*Biṇdulé*’ visually is a kind of morphic experience, that
marks the commencement of one’s spiritual life. It is believed to be the
cause of the creation of the universe.

Ranade elaborates further as, this vision of ‘*Biṇdulé*’ is closely
associated with the mental state of the Seer. The spiritual object will
be steady and continuous if the seer is committed devotionally. Yogic
scholars and practitioners significantly talk on *Prānāyāma* and
*Trāṭaka* as ways to focus a mind on a certain object. Prof. Ranade
states that ‘you must look at either tip or top of the nose
*(nāsikāgradṛṣṭi)* to visualize the Bindu, but immediately he asserts
that one need not necessarily fix his vision upon either of this, yet
*Biṇdulé* and spiritual forms are experienced. The vision must be
directed to the spiritual object but not physiologically. In his words,
‘any kind of poise of the brain and the eyes, in which you can
concentrate your attention, is Mudra.’\[4\] Keeping the vision fixed at
the nose tip intends to draw the mind away from sensory perception,
although mystical experiences are *sui generis* and cannot be given by
Āsanas alone.  
Further to this Prof. Ranade highlights that only keeping one’s position
steady and stationary is advisable while sitting for meditation. In the
beginning, a God aspirant or sādhaka may need to fix his vision at the
nose tip but progressively as the form of the vision gets steady in
front of his eyes, he can side with these physiological ends. In
*Pathway to God in Kannada Literature* he further adds to it that the
*Biṇdulé* will be seen wherever he casts his sight.  
A seer gets a microscopic vision of Spiritons when he looks at his nose
tip and the same Spiritons are enlarged like a telescopic view when seen
in an open sky. Prof. Ranade affirms that the ‘black spot’ or *‘Biṇdulé*
is visible on dark background as well. Physicists consider ‘darkness’ as
the ‘excess of light’. This reminds us of Plato, saying that**,** light
is the shadow of God.

There are various kinds of experiences that Prof. Ranade talks about;
some which will be discussed in subsequent posts.

\[1\] Ranade, R. D. (2003, Fourth Edition) *A Constructive Survey of
Upanishadic Philosophy,* Preface.  
\[2\] Ranade, R. D. (2013) *Philosophical and other essays*, Pg. 113.  
\[3\] Ranade, R. D. (2015, Second Edition) *Pathway to God in Marathi
Literature*, Pg.393.  
\[4\] Ranade, R. D. (2003). *Pathway to God in Kannada Literature,* Pg.
107.

\[Minor edits in the Sanskrit by EF\]
