+++
title = "The Buddhist oxygen mask"
full_title = "The Buddhist oxygen mask"
date = "2021-08-15"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/08/15/the-buddhist-oxygen-mask/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/08/15/the-buddhist-oxygen-mask/).

The Buddhist oxygen mask

> If you are travelling with a child or someone who requires assistance,
> secure your oxygen mask on first, and then assist the other person.

Anyone who has flown on a commercial airline has heard this instruction;
anyone who flies frequently has heard it so often that it becomes
background noise, though relatively few of us have ever had the chance
to put it into practice. If the plane cabin depressurizes and the oxygen
masks drop, one has only seconds before running out of oxygen oneself;
if one tries to put the oxygen mask on a child first, hypoxia may
inhibit one’s ability to put the mask on the child correctly, to say
nothing of the risk to oneself. One can best save both people by
attending to oneself first – running against any parent’s natural
instinct to protect his own child.

![](https://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/oxygen-mask-1024x528.png)

I’m
[not](https://www.smartrecovery.org/oxygen-mask-rule-for-family-friends/)
[the](https://www.donnaschilder.com/articles/life-coaching-articles/put-your-oxygen-mask-on-first/)
[first](https://www.humanunlimited.com/blogs/blog/20030915-the-profound-life-lesson-of-oxygen-masks)
to see this advice as a metaphor for other forms of ethical conduct in
relationships: “the oxygen-mask principle”. Often we can take care of
others most effectively by taking care of ourselves. What I also see,
though, is that this principle is deeply Buddhist.

The Dhammapāda, one of the oldest and most beloved Buddhist texts, gives
us something very similar to the oxygen-mask principle in its twelfth
chapter: “One should first establish oneself in what is proper; then
only should one instruct others. Thus the wise man will not be
reproached.” (v. 158) Take care of yourself *first*.

The Dhammapāda is not a Mahāyāna text, and the closing verse of that
chapter does present a striking contrast to much Mahāyāna advice: “Let
one not neglect one’s own welfare (*attha*) for the sake of another,
however great. Clearly understanding one’s own welfare, let one be
intent upon the good.” (v. 166) One cannot imagine Śāntideva
enthusiastic about that advice, with his exhortations of giving
everything, including one’s accumulated goodness, to others. That all is
consistent with the basic World Religions 101 explanation that Theravāda
Buddhism is about seeking one’s own liberation, and Mahāyāna about
seeking others’.

And yet Śāntideva’s own advice is not *so* far from that of the
Dhammapāda. As [Richard Mahoney
noted](https://indica-et-buddhica.org/authors/siksasamuccaya-progresse-bodhisattva-concept-201706292102.pdf),
Śāntideva’s Śikṣā Samuccaya is structured around the 4×3 grid identified
in its fourth root verse (*kārikā*). That is, it is about three kinds of
things – one’s person (*ātmabhāva*), possessions or “enjoyments”
(*bhoga*s) and goodness or good karma (*puṇya*) – and doing four kinds
of things with each of these. One gives them or gives them up
(*utsarga*) – but one also protects, purifies and enhances them. The
eventual goal is to take one’s self or one’s body, one’s possessions,
and one’s good karma, and give them to others in order to benefit them –
but *first*, one needs to protect, purify and enhance all of them. The
first chapter focuses on giving, but the remaining eighteen chapters
focus on these latter processes: ways that one protects oneself and
makes oneself better, in order that one might eventually be of use to
benefit others. These chapters discuss topics from meditations on
patient endurance to medicines for sickness. The focus on these more
self-oriented aspects of the bodhisattva’s career is so strong that
other scholars of the Śikṣā (Cecil Bendall and Barbra Clayton) describe
it only in terms of them, leaving the giving part out entirely.

All of this suggests to me that, though I don’t think he agrees entirely
with the Dhammapāda’s perspective, Śāntideva too endorses the
oxygen-mask principle. One must protect oneself, or one cannot protect
others. This point might be made clearest in chapter VIII of the
Bodhicaryāvatāra, which contain Śāntideva’s famous arguments for and
meditations on altruism. Yet Śāntideva opens even that chapter with
advice to seclude oneself in the forest, noting that “one should flee
far from a fool” (VIII.15). The contrast of these passages with the
later praise of altruism is striking, but important: if one lets oneself
get too influenced by fools and their way of thinking, one will lose
one’s own progress in a way that means one cannot benefit others.

So, I think, the Dhammapāda and Śāntideva agree on the oxygen-mask
principle – and I think they are right to do so. Its lesson is driven
home painfully and memorably in [*Grace and
Grit*](https://www.shambhala.com/grace-and-grit-658.html), Ken Wilber’s
memoir of his wife Treya’s cancer treatment and eventual death. (I just
found out that it is apparently now [a
movie](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt3910630/), though one I haven’t seen
and can’t vouch for.) Knowing the extreme suffering that Treya is going
through, he gives her everything: they live in a house with multiple
spare rooms and he lets her have *all* of them, doing his work in the
living room – which she then proceeds to occupy and make noise in. When
he protests, she refuses to move – and all his bottled-up resentment
comes out so hard that he hits her. He would have been better able to
take care of her if he had set some boundaries to take care of himself.
He was so eager to put the oxygen mask on the one who depended on him
that he failed to secure his own mask first, in a way that was bad for
both. (As for me, I read *Grace and Grit* and thought I had learned that
lesson long before I went through a [far too similar
experience](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/),
but looking back on how things went for me and my wife, I don’t think I
actually did. Another unfortunate reminder of how understanding
something in theory is very different from applying it in practice.)

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/08/the-buddhist-oxygen-mask)
