+++
title = "The Sigālovāda’s vicious"
full_title = "The Sigālovāda’s vicious mean"
date = "2021-08-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/08/01/the-sigalovadas-vicious-mean/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/08/01/the-sigalovadas-vicious-mean/).

The Sigālovāda’s vicious mean

The [Sigālovāda
Sutta](accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/dn/dn.31.0.nara.html) might be my
least favourite sutta in the Pali Canon.

There is relatively little that the Pali texts say on “ethics” in a
modern Western sense of interpersonal action-guiding; much of the
specific instructions on action are found in *vinaya*, legal texts for
the conduct of monks. The Sigālovāda is relatively unusual in providing
guidance for action to lay householders. For that reason, a number of
secondary writers on Buddhist ethics regard it as as a valuable guide
for Buddhist ethical conduct.

I do not.

I recognize that the Sigālovāda is in the scriptures and therefore
should not just be wished away: for those of us who [have
faith](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/why-i-am-a-buddhist/) in
a tradition, it is important to wrestle with what we find most
unappealing, because that can be [what we learn the most
from](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/).
Yet that faith should not be blind; we should not simply swallow the
tradition’s words whole irrespective of what we have learned in other
areas of life. To act in that latter way is to be a fundamentalist, in a
way that I think does justice to both the self-identified and the
pejorative senses of that word. I think it is important to keep some
distance from the scriptures that portray an
[unscientific](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/from-supernatural-to-unscientific/)
worldview (this is where
[Bultmann](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/11/bultmann-for-buddhists/)
is helpful), and likewise from those that recommend inferior treatment
for women or for [queer or trans
people](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/09/trans-inclusiveness-as-an-innovation-to-buddhism/).
In my view, the Sigālovāda is in a similar category of works not to be
taken as direct advice without heavy reinterpretation.

I say this because the Sigālovāda’s recommended lifestyle seems to me
like a [vicious
mean](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/virtuous-and-vicious-means/).
The Sigālovāda’s householder is not a monk, and therefore deprives
himself of the deep and intense opportunities for self-cultivation that
are available to a monk. That much seems reasonable: most of us see
value in pursuits of life that are not monastic, and so there’s appeal
in pursuing a [kammatic
Buddhism](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/)
that recognizes the non-monastic life as valuable.

The problem with the Sigālovāda is that it strips *that* life, the
household life, of a great deal of *its* value! I look at the life
described there and I think: what does this life have to recommend
itself *over* being a monk? Some of the sutta’s prohibitions are
understandable: on gambling, for example. And while I don’t follow its
prohibition on alcohol, that prohibition is found in plenty of other
places. But the Sigālovāda also tells one not to sleep even until
sunrise, let alone afterwards. And most alarmingly, it also includes a
prohibition on “frequenting theatrical shows”.

> There are, young householder, these six evil consequences in
> frequenting theatrical shows. He is ever thinking: where is there
> dancing? where is there singing? where is there music? where is there
> recitation? where is there playing with cymbals? where is there
> pot-blowing?

The reasoning here is understandable: if you take pleasure in singing
and dancing and music, you will want to do more of it, and that will
preoccupy your thoughts in a way that can lead to craving. That is
perhaps in the nature of any pleasure: whatever enjoyable thing one
does, the pleasure typically leads one to want more of it. So, given
that [suffering comes from
craving](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/),
there is some reason to treat pleasures and enjoyments as suspect.

I understand and even sympathize with that chain of reasoning. *But*, if
one is going to follow it through to its conclusion, it seems to me that
one needs to renounce and become a monk. If one really is going to avoid
worldly pleasures – not even drinking and gambling, but simple music and
theatre – on the grounds that they lead to more craving, then what
benefits in the household life are even *left*? (The Sigālovāda itself
does not cast particular suspicion on the satisfactions of having
children, but there are other places in the Canon that do: most notably,
when the Buddha had a son, he named him Rāhula, “fetter”.) It seems to
me that one should fish or cut bait, so to speak. If one is really ready
to treat all pleasures as suspect, one should become a monk; if one is
not willing to go all that way, one needs a life that makes room for
pleasures like dancing and theatre.

H.L. Seneviratne, in his excellent [The Work of
Kings](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/W/bo3616339.html),
notes how monks in colonial Sri Lanka elevated the Sigālovāda Sutta to a
higher status in the canon than it had previously had. They performed a
similar elevation on the Five Precepts, one that is visible in our
modern tendency to include the Five Precepts in most introductions to
Buddhism even though they are encountered less frequently in the suttas
than the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path. These
elevations occurred for a very specific reason: these monks were
Victorian men who had absorbed the ideals of their Victorian English
colonial occupiers. And the austere moral discipline of the Sigālovāda,
with its sustained attacks on “idleness”, fit the work-obsessed
Victorian worldview like a glove. One could even argue that the
Sigālovāda’s attacks on the theatre allowed the monks to one-up
Victorian prudery, taking it one step further than the English
Victorians themselves would go. The brilliance of the Sigālovāda in this
context was that it did not go the *next* step beyond that, and advocate
traditional Buddhist monasticism! *That* would not do, for monks, in
addition to reeking of popery, are not *productive*, not *industrious*.
As Thomas Tweed noted (and as I discuss at more length in my [Disengaged
Buddhism
article](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)),
the Victorians considered the world’s Buddhist places to be “asleep”,
lacking “energy”, for their citizens did not allowing the emerging
global capitalism to make sufficient use of their labour power. By
*Victorian* standards, the Sigālovāda’s mean was the virtuous one:
between the indolence of the idle gambler on one hand, and the indolence
of the unproductive monk on the other.

Fortunately, however, we are now over a century away from the Victorian
era. We are able to ask: what was all that hard work *for?* We can [note
with
Hägglund](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/01/a-dream-of-democratic-socialism/)
that selling our labour power is in the realm of necessity rather than
the realm of freedom; industriousness is a means, not an end. So what
*are* the ends? The removal of suffering is a worthy end in and of
itself, and if it is the *only* end that we seek, then the right option
is monasticism. But if we do seek other ends – [as I think is a good
idea](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/)
– then those other ends should include aesthetic pleasures like those of
music and theatre.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/08/the-sigalovadas-vicious-mean)
