+++
title = "A god for the real"
full_title = "A god for the real world"
date = "2020-10-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/10/04/a-god-for-the-real-world/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/10/04/a-god-for-the-real-world/).

A god for the real world

I [don’t believe in
God](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/07/disbelieving-in-god-without-being-an-atheist/).
But if I did, that God might need to be Krishna.

I have come to believe that the [problem of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/could-we-please-stop-talking-about-the-problem-of-evil/)
is effectively insurmountable. That is, the vast suffering in the world
clearly implies that there *cannot* be an omnipotent and omnibenevolent
God, as the God of the Abrahamic traditions is generally supposed to be.

But what about a god who *isn’t* omnipotent or omnibenevolent?

If we deny one of those two attributes, then the problem of suffering
goes away. It is really only a *problem* for those who believe in an
omnipotent and omnibenevolent God, which is why Indians [spent so little
time
asking](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/)
the question “Why do good people suffer?”, [even though they had an
answer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/karma-answering-a-question-not-worth-asking/)
to it.

So when Elisa Freschi [asked
me](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/07/disbelieving-in-god-without-being-an-atheist/#comment-40467)
about later Vaiṣṇava Mīmāṃsakas who believed in a god attained through
worship, irrespective of qualities of omnipotence or omnibenevolence, I
said sure, such a god *could* exist, in a way that the Abrahamic God
could not. I just didn’t have particular reason to believe in one.

As I grapple a bit more with
[nondualism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/perennial-nondualism/),
though, the possibility of a God comes up again. The ultimate One of
nondualism can look a lot like many conceptions of god. And that leads
me to start thinking about concepts of God that I *could* accept.

Here I see a lot of power in the figure of Krishna, for a simple reason:
not only is Krishna not omnibenevolent, it’s not even clear that Krishna
is *good.* Krishna just *is.* In all the main stories told about him, he
is at least morally questionable – whether he’s stealing butter as a kid
or being an adulterous adult. (I greatly appreciated stories of Krishna
when I was a child myself; he seemed far more “relatable”, as the kids
say now, than did [“little Lord Jesus / No crying he
makes”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Away_in_a_Manger).) The Bhagavad
Gītā portrays Krishna as a font of ethical wisdom –but it is embedded
in the larger Mahābhārata in which Krishna later quite flagrantly urges
the [violation of that same
advice](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/06/trusting-in-man-trusting-in-god/).

![A watercolour depicting Krishna’s universal
form.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/krishna-universal.jpg)

What the Gītā *also* depicts, though, is Krishna’s *awesomeness* – in
the older sense of “awesome”, not the one popularized by my generation
in which it simply means “really good”. Krishna is not omnibenevolent,
but he does seem omnipotent or something close to it; he may not be
*good*, but he still inspires *awe*. Possibly the most famous part of
that text is its eleventh chapter, in which Krishna reveals his true
form to Arjuna: a terrifying yet beautiful vision in which he is covered
in dazzling adornments but devours everyone in his “blazing deathlike
faces and awful teeth”. And *this*, it seems to me, is a good
representation of the true nature of the world: terrifyingly indifferent
to the aspirations and sufferings of human subjects, yet amazing and
beautiful and awe-inspiring all the same. A [cruel, crazy, beautiful
world](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drGAz1wfdv4).

Crucially, such a god does not seem to [merit our
*trust*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/06/trusting-in-man-trusting-in-god/).
It is not clear that what he does is all for the best. Krishna is the
divine agent who brings about the events of the Mahābhārata – a famously
apocalyptic war, pitting family against family and often involving
brutal, wholesale, vengeful slaughter. The most notorious such
slaughter, [Aśvatthāma’s
massacre](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashwatthama) of his foes in
their sleep, comes out of Aśvatthāma’s rage at his father being slain
through deception: a deception [recommended by none other than
Krishna](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/06/kant-on-yudhi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adhiras-elephant/).
And what is it all for? Krishna needs to makes the great destruction of
the Mahābhārata happen in order to clear away the old historical age and
bring about a new one. But the new age is the
[kaliyuga](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kali_Yuga#:~:text=In%20Hinduism%2C%20Kali%20Yuga%20(Sanskrit,Treta%20Yuga%2C%20and%20Dvapara%20Yuga.),
an era even *worse* than the one before. Congratulations?

A next question might be: does Krishna merit *worship*? That, perhaps,
depends on what we mean by “worship”. Krishna, as far as I can tell, is
a being who merits awe but not trust. This should not be an unfamiliar
combination of feelings –we can feel it before the music of Wagner, or
the Egyptian pyramids built on the backs of slaves. That absence of
trust does seem like it could get in the way of
[*saksit*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/the-saksit-of-notre-dame/);
it’s harder for a feeling of awe and reverence to motivate you to be a
better person, when it is directed at an object that is itself morally
questionable. Still, I think there *is* something valuable to the
experience of awe even when it is directed at such a questionable
object. At the very least the experience can teach us some humility,
reminding us of something out there greater than ourselves. Burke and
Kant would call such an object
[*sublime*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sublime_(philosophy)). Perhaps
“sublime” is the best word for us to think about Krishna. If so, then
perhaps even more importantly, it is a way to think about nature and the
universe themselves: the grand, majestic, awesome, even delightful
infinity to which we human beings are an afterthought.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/10/a-god-for-the-real-world)
