+++
title = "Indian"
full_title = "Indian Philosophy/Theology and Multilingualism"
date = "2020-10-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/10/26/indian-philosophy-theology-and-multilingualism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/10/26/indian-philosophy-theology-and-multilingualism/).

Indian Philosophy/Theology and Multilingualism

**I am Manasicha Akepiyapornchai, a Ph.D. candidate in Asian Studies,
Cornell University, NY, USA. I am excited to have a conversation with
you this month, and I am very grateful for Elisa and other members who
gave me this opportunity! Let me start by introducing myself and my
research.**

I have been in Asian Studies at Cornell for almost seven years
for my master’s, and I am finishing up my Ph.D. in hopefully a year from
now. My research focuses on the intellectual history of Indian
Philosophy and Theology of the schools of Vedānta, in particular. I am
also interested in Mīmāṃsā and Buddhist philosophy as they serve as the
intellectual interlocutors of these schools and provide critical
backgrounds. I pay attention to language choice and multilingualism in
the composition and how the use of languages and linguistic movements
shape and transform philosophy or theology in premodern India.

Specifically, my dissertation investigates the intellectual
history of self-surrender, the primary soteriological doctrine of the
South-Indian based Śrīvaiṣṇava tradition, which has Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta as its philosophical counterpart, through its multilingual
scriptures and theological treatises. This tradition is devoted to God
in the form of Viṣṇu-Nārāyaṇa and believes that a person can be
liberated from the cycle of births only by surrendering to God, which is
in accordance with one’s subordinate nature. Since the beginning of the
tradition (around the tenth century CE), the Śrīvaiṣṇavas used Tamil and
Sanskrit to hand down scriptures and expound theology. The Sanskrit
scripture comprises the Vedas, the Upaṇisads, and other scriptures that
are part of the broader Vedic orthodoxy. On the other hand, the Tamil
scripture is believed to be composed by the first generation of the
Śrīvaiṣṇavas, the Āḻvārs, South Indian devotional poets. While the
Sanskrit scripture is shared by other intellectual and religious
communities, the Tamil scripture is mainly revered within the
Śrīvaiṣṇava tradition.

The doctrine of self-surrender is rooted in the confluence of
the traditional scriptures in Sanskrit and Tamil. Interestingly, the
early Śrīvaiṣṇava authors were directly engaged with only the Sanskrit
scripture and composed exclusively Sanskrit texts. As the tradition
socially expanded to accommodate more people from lower castes and those
from different cities around the twelfth century CE, we see the early
medieval authors’ attempt to bring two scriptural heritages together to
accommodate the multiple communities. They initiated the use of a hybrid
Tamil-Sanskrit or Maṇipravāḷa in their commentaries on the Tamil
scripture and then independent treatises on the doctrine of
self-surrender. During the twelfth to fifteenth century CE, the doctrine
of self-surrender became central in the philosophical and theological
treatises as well as ritual manuals in both Sanskrit and Maṇipravāḷa.

My dissertation deals with both Sanskrit and Maṇipravāḷa
treatises on the doctrine of self-surrender across three generations of
Śrīvaiṣṇava authors from the twelfth to fifteenth century CE, after the
introduction of Maṇipravāḷa in the Śrīvaiṣṇava composition. In each
chapter of my dissertation, I pair a Sanskrit treatise with one in
Maṇipravāḷa from the same period to show the parallel yet differing
doctrinal development in the two linguistic domains. Each chapter also
indicates how the two linguistic media direct the doctrine in different
directions. These three generations’ treatises on the doctrine in the
three main chapters of my dissertation chart the turning points in the
doctrinal development within the Sanskrit-Maṇipravāḷa interaction,
namely systematization, heterogeneity, and harmonization. They also show
that the turning points are conditioned by the expansion and contraction
of the linguistic boundaries. The development of the doctrine during
these three generations intersects the discursive linguistic movements,
resulting in the theological multiplicity.

My project also aims to complicate the recent scholarship on South Asian
multilingualism that focuses on a macro-binary paradigm between Sanskrit
and a vernacular like Prākrit (e.g., Pollock 2006 and Ollett 2017).
Rather than charting the linguistic evolution at the macro-level, I want
to capture the nuances and complexity within locally territorialized
linguistic movements with the attention to a hybrid language such as
Maṇipravāḷa.

**I am so looking forward to comments and discussion and I hope to share
my methodology in the next post!**
