+++
title = "Doubling Down"
full_title = "Doubling Down"
date = "2019-07-28"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/07/28/doubling-down/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/07/28/doubling-down/).

Doubling Down

Angela Saini has an interesting review in Nature of Skin Deep, a
ridiculous book about how racial differences have no role in sports
achievement. Of course, that’s just nonsense, obviously so: some Kenyan
and Ethiopian populations are way better at distance races,while people
of west African descent always win the Olympic 100-meter. And so on.

Now you’d think that if if you were trying to defend blank slatism, you
wouldn’t want to spend much of your time on your weakest possible point,
any more than a PR-wise Stalinist would go on and on about how wise and
good Katyn Forest was: how the Chekists killed those Polish POWs in
self-defense, after a heroic struggle, etc. Arguing for zero physical
differences between populations is that weak: everyone can *see* them,
for Christ’s sake. And a lot of people are very interested in, and
knowledgeable about, sports.

Yet, in Saini’s review, she does just that. She’s pushing ***obvious***
falsehoods – not just ones that can only be noticed by the elite that
know how to do long division.

For example: “Some have speculated that Kenyans might have, on average,
longer, thinner legs than other people,”



[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/kenyan_runners.jpg?w=640&h=430)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/07/kenyan_runners.jpg)

I wonder how anyone ever got that idea? In order to go full Saini, you
have to ignore your lying eyes, apparently forever.

Now there’s a certain logic to this: if you admit that Kenyans have a
different build than the Yoruba, one that works better in the marathon,
or that Pygmies are short, or that Tibetans thrive at altitudes that
would wreck you, you’re admitting that regional selection can make
people noticeably different. And if they differ in those traits, they
can differ in any trait. He who has said A must say Z (mathematical
induction): so you fight at A. You try to stop them on the beaches.

So facts themselves are the enemy: “Arguing with racists on points of
fact is a game with no winners. ” Facts are all against you – they all
must die !

So is this triumphalism, or peak crazy? Time will tell.















