+++
title = "PRS and asabiya"
full_title = "PRS and asabiya"
date = "2018-10-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/10/03/prs-and-asabiya/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/10/03/prs-and-asabiya/).

PRS and asabiya

There are all sorts of interesting possibilities generated by polygenic
risk scores that I have not yet seen discussed anywhere.

There are existing tests that you can’t fake ( without explicit
cheating). You could pretend to be dumber than you actually are on an
IQ test, but it would quite difficult to score higher than you can.
Personality tests – well, you can always lie. I’ve even heard that
people lie on their resume!

As long as you administer the test yourself, there’s no way for an
applicant to cheat on a polygenic risk score. It only gives you
statistical information, not incredibly strong prediction at the
individual level, but it can’ be faked. sooo.

If you hired a CFO with a 4-std score on honesty, he’d be somewhat
less likely to cook the books. Although a given company might not want
that – might want the opposite.

You could pick boomer captains that were considerably less likely than
most people to go insane. That could be a good thing.

You could hire a whole organization with \> 1-std asabiya PRS. You’d
use other indicators of asabiya, and you probably would consider other
factors as well – but you’d get less internal conflict, have fewer
self-dealers, etc. And you know what unusually high-asabiya orgs talk
about at the water cooler – the same thing they talk about every night.







