+++
title = "ब्रह्मद्विषाम् प्रसारः"
full_title = "ब्रह्मद्विषाम् प्रसारः dasyus abound – Indian Sanskrit Universities"
date = "2018-10-22"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/10/22/%e0%a4%ac%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%b9%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%ae%e0%a4%a6%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b5%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b7%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%82-%e0%a4%aa%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%83-dasyu-s-abound-i/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/10/22/%e0%a4%ac%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%b9%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%ae%e0%a4%a6%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b5%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b7%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%82-%e0%a4%aa%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%83-dasyu-s-abound-i/).

ब्रह्मद्विषां प्रसारः dasyu-s abound – Indian Sanskrit Universities

It is no secret that brahmadviT-s have been increasing in power since
the days of bhIma the intelligent mAhar and nehru the idiot uncle. They
have penetrated key positions in:

-   the legislature (bahujan lady, dravidian lemurism),
-   judiciary (To quote the prAchArya MT – “The degree to which the
    justices of the supreme court of India have been possessed by the
    rAkShasa-chetas can only be appreciated by reading their words. Yet
    not may H in the general masses seem to be aware how they dangerous
    they are for the very survival of H”
    \[[TW](https://twitter.com/blog_supplement/status/1054181354940887040)\]
    )
-   law enforcement (eg. “Thiruvananthapuram Range IG of Police Manoj
    Abraham IPS is the officer-in-charge there \[shabarimala\]. He is
    infamous for his anti-Hindu posture and the implementation of that
    attitude wherever he worked in the past.”)
-   administrative machinery (IAS, IFS selection explicitly biased
    against hindus and towards abrahma-s)
-   media (burkha dutt etc. etc.).

Add to this the university system in India – and I am not just speaking
of general “Social sciences”, but even increasingly Indian sanskrit
universities and departments – which in the past were havens for people
fairly competent in the subjects they taught. The pervasiveness of this
latter transition (from recent anecdotes) was quite shocking to me – I
had only expected the regular trouble arising from indolence, usual
academic jealousy, ego clashes and mild corruption.

As an example, in Karnataka Sanskrit University, a very undeserving
person, Padma Shekhar – with some alleged past scholarship of prAkRta,
jainology and “women’s studies”, but quite incompetent in Sanskrit – was
appointed Vice Chancellor (partly because of belonging to “reserved
category”) and has since been wreaking havoc against Sanskrit and honest
staff – motivated not just by her lobha$$$, but also by genuine
jAti-biases and antipathy towards sanskrit. See [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rtO4tITBLEk&t=0s&list=PLhPjckGlZ7rSIvJt98esiOkr2sbdYEdOb&index=2)
(which is seemingly just the tip of the iceberg) for an example.

Another example (albeit outside Sanskrit departments) is the case of a
scholar (a fine poet approaching the best classical standards) whose
remarkable thesis at the intersection of poetics and psychology is stuck
in the hands of a lowlife (charged with plagiarism and sexual misconduct
with kannada magazines having covered this for several weeks) only
because of his hatred towards brAhmaNa-s.The lowlife is in a position
of power and it seems even the Vice Chancellor fears him.

So, as Arya-s and dhArmikas, we’re generally living in the same regime
category as in the jihAdi-rAj times – and our best cultural scholarship
and education will necessarily happen outside the दस्यु-versities.

