+++
title = "Tackling"
full_title = "Tackling christian=westernconflationists"
date = "2018-10-21"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/10/21/tackling-christianwestern-conflationists/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/10/21/tackling-christianwestern-conflationists/).

Tackling christian=western-conflationists

Below follows excerpts (the original page being gone for good) from an
online 2015 argument with an Indian (probably Keralite)Christian named
Levas (whose assertions are italicized and quoted)-

@Levas N *“The language you use here – the English and the education
which enabled you to comment on here on YouTube were originated in the
Western culture and developed by a Christian mass and was introduced in
India by Christian missionaries as part of their Christian work. “* –>
Bullshit

\* Western culture is not christian culture. It is christianized
culture, which has slowly been dechristianizing and returning to its
pagan roots since the renaissance, spurred by disciples of pagans like
the great Plethon.

\* The Anglo-saxon language is thoroughly Indo-European pagan in origin
(IN fact, the saxons are named after Freyr’s weapon.). Even the
liturgical language of the primary branch of the zombie cult, latin, is
appropriated by the church.

\* Education is not at all Christian gift to mankind. Every culture had
it and has it.

“*Western contributions and for that matter all of them have the
Christian elements in them whether you like it or not.* ” -> As I said,
western contributions are not “christian” contributions. There is
nothing “Christian” about gravity or germ theory. “Christian” elements –
huh? I challenge you to point them out, or (again) be damned as an
idiot.

“*If you have a brain as big as a peanut and any intellectual honesty
you will acknowledge that you are a follower and a beneficiary – nothing
better.* ” –> LOL. My brain is not as big as a peanut, it is bigger.
Perhaps yours is only that big, which causes you to speak thus. Be that
as it may, I have no trouble acknowledging my debt to learned sages –
dislike for Christianity has nothing to do with it.

“*Just turn off your TV or radio if you cannot live with it.* ” –> Just
turn off internet if you cannot stand my anti-christian comments. Go
piss on some flaming bush in the desert, and stop giving me unwelcome
advice. Your entire efforts to hide Christianity’s role in pushing the
whole of Europe into the dark ages, the genocidal invasions of North and
South America are futile. We all know better than that.

“*Can you give up all that the Christians developed and contributed and
live with your own thing including the old ‘great ‘medicine you had?*”
–> Stupid guy, if a christian farts, that does not (necessarily) make
the fart a christian fart (I mean it literally – I am not talking about
you here :-) ). There is nothing Christian or Hindu about a smelly fart
(or you bring in the concepts of “original sin”, “false gods” etc.. and
prove me wrong). Same holds true for aspirin. I love and use whatever
modern things I find useful, even if it comes from Christian lunatics,
while rejecting Christianity. Other pagans such as the Japanese and
Chinese do the same. That is because I am not an egotistical idiot, but
a smart animal. That is not to say that your claims about the
progenitors of modern medicine being Christian are correct. You and your
religious community are such losers that even as you people censure and
retard science (especially biology), you try to fool the rest of the
world into thinking that you or your stupid genocidal ideology
“discovered” modern medicine.

And I don’t know what you keep yapping about my “poverty”. I don’t know
what wealth you have that makes you so presumptuous, but I’m interested
if you’ll declare your net assets. I am somehow sure that you are in
fact poorer in every possible way compared to me. But if I am wrong,
maybe I can convince you to give up your money because your Jesus said:
“And again I say to you: It is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven.”

