+++
title = "WYSIWYG"
full_title = "WYSIWYG"
date = "2018-06-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/06/03/wysiwyg/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/06/03/wysiwyg/).

WYSIWYG

GWAS studies are rapidly establishing the role that common gene variants
play in individual variation in complex traits. Height, educational
attainment, IQ, various health risks. They can also be used to
investigate average trait differences between groups. There are
technical complications in doing that – GWAS might have found a SNP
that is only linked to the causal SNP, and that linkage may be different
in another, fairly distant population. A very \[genetically\] distant
population might have a significant number of entirely different
variants influencing the trait. In other words, Bushmen may be so
genetically different on some trait that you can’t use a GWAS score to
show that they’re different. So different that they might be the same.

But I’ll bet that the great majority of the time, people that look short
– especially if they look short in a wide range of environments –
actually are genetically inclined to be short. I think we will find
that populations that show high intellectual performance in a wide range
of environments actually are genetically inclined to be smart, and those
that show low performance in a wide range of environments mostly won’t
be.

What you see is what you get. David Reich may say that nobody knows,
but it’s the way to bet.









