+++
title = "Contextdependent"
full_title = "Contextdependent"
date = "2019-03-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/03/02/context-dependent/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/03/02/context-dependent/).

Context-dependent

Someone on the internet was saying that “genetically engineering babies
for intelligence etc. probably wouldn’t work. All of our associations
are inextricably and unknowably culture-bound (both wrt to time &
place)” If I have this right, just because certain genetic variants
were associated with higher intelligence in a given place and time (say
Budapest, 1900), that doesn’t mean that those associations would hold
the day after tomorrow. An equivalent statement: just because John Von
Neumann was smart, that doesn’t mean that his clone, conceived in 2019,
would be a sharp cookie on maturity. Perhaps the current shortage of
*Gemütlichkeit,* or missing out on the stimulating effect of the Bela
Kun regime, would derail the clone’s proper development.

One can imagine ways in which something like this could come about.
Suppose that some existing population averaged high scores on mental
rotation, but that, 20 years from now, everyone has a little doodad that
plugs directly into your brain and makes you far better at spatial
visualization (in N dimensions!) than anyone alive today. Those alleles
would go from advantageous today to useless tomorrow. Or, if there’s an
outbreak of the zombie virus, everybody becomes a zombie. Zombies are
known to be deficient in spatial visualization.

So the claim is logically possible. Do I think there’s much chance that
it’s true: that increasing the number of plus variants ( as determined
by GWAS) by genetic engineering or genetically informed selection would
fail, because you can never step into the same environment twice? The
same reason that hybrid corn strains only work in the field where they
were developed?

No. I think it’s total bullshit.







