+++
title = "Get Smart"
full_title = "Get Smart"
date = "2012-03-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/09/get-smart/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/09/get-smart/).

Get Smart

We are now at the point where we can realistically expect to see
interventions that significantly increase human intelligence.

Some approaches build on our real but limited understanding of how the
brain works. For example, by adding an extra copy of the NR2B gene, the
Doogie mouse developed better memory. Today there are about 30
genetically modified mouse strains with improved memory, most making use
of various tweaks of the same enzyme path influenced by the NR2B gene.

But I am not going to talk about those here. My favored methods lean
very heavily on natural selection. The beauty of these approaches is
that you don’t have to understand the mechanism. Dog breeders have
successfully developed dogs with special behaviors without having any
understanding of the neurochemistry of those behaviors. Medieval
farmers  
developed Guernsey cows without knowing a thing about how milk is
produced. In a sense, of course, even the understand-everything approach
leans heavily on natural selection, since it tries to comprehend an
already-existing complex phenomenon, rather than invent it from scratch.

I should probably address one concern before I go further. Some people
might worry that since natural selection optimizes traits, increasing
human intelligence would naturally upset some balance, mess up some
precise tradeoff, and so such attempts are foredoomed. Forgeddaboutit.
The tradeoffs are optimized, all right, but for past environments, not
the present. We have a lot more elbow room nowadays; you could say that
the trade space is roomier. Certain costs of intelligence that were once
crucial are no longer. If a more active brain used up 10% more
calories, that’s a sacrifice that most Americans would be willing to
make. If higher intelligence requires a larger brain, well, we have
C-sections.

I see five feasible approaches: selection, spell-checking the genome,
QTLs for intelligence, cloning, and hybrid vigor.

The first approach, old-fashioned selection, is powerful, conceptually
simple, but slow. It’s already happened. The gradual increase of human
intelligence over the past couple of million years, the existing
differences between the races, and the increased intelligence of
genetically isolated merchant castes such as the Parsees and Ashkenazi
Jews are all products of natural selection. A government with consistent
and lasting policies could select for intelligence and achieve striking
results in a few centuries, maybe less. But no state ever has, and no
existing government seems interested.

Natural selection for intelligence may furnish us with some examples of
alleles that noticeably boost intelligence (such as the Ashkenazi
sphingolipid mutation). If so, those alleles could used in other,
faster approaches.

The second approach, spell-checking the genome, might be also called
taking out the trash. The idea is simply to fix most or all of the
broken genes. There are a lot of them. The effects of genetic errors
do not merely take the form of serious diseases like PKU, which causes
severe retardation in untreated individuals with two copies of the
defective gene. Carriers of PKU, those with only one copy of the
defective gene, also suffer ill effects, mainly a slight depression of
IQ. Everyone carries single copies of damaged genes that would be
lethal in double dose – in fact, geneticists estimate that the average
individual carries as many as five lethal genes. As a carrier, you may
produce half the normal level of some enzyme, which usually does not
cause severe trouble in itself but does decrease efficiency. The average
individual, indeed every individual, is thought to carry many more than
five less serious genetic errors, perhaps as many as 100, as these less
serious errors are only slowly eliminated by natural selection. In other
words, every person has many hidden genetic flaws that reduce
performance and efficiency in many ways. The total  
impact of these errors is thought to be quite large, and must surely be
very significant for human intelligence, which is probably the most
complex of all adaptations.

If we could edit the genome, we could fix them all. Probably no one
would object to fixing any particular genetic error, and that must mean
that there could be no objections to fixing all of them. After all, he
who has said A must also say Z! The difference between humans whose DNA
has been spell-checked and normals is likely to be large. They would
almost certainly be smarter and healthier, and this kind of change is, I
think, guaranteed to work and be safe. We know that the unbroken form of
any given gene is safe, since almost everyone else already has it. You
could compare these spell-checked humans to a Lexus – every little thing
is done just right. There is no innovation at all in this kind of
genetic intervention, almost no risk, and the resulting advantages are
likely to be very significant.

The third approach is to find and take advantage of the genes that are
responsible for the fraction of IQ variation that is not due to
mutational pressure, not just caused by typos.  
These take the form of multiple alleles of a particular gene, one
associated with slightly higher intelligence and the other(s) with
slightly lower intelligence. Each variant is fairly common and not
thought to be a genetic error. If we could identify these polymorphic
genes affecting IQ, and were able to edit the human genome, we could
choose the variants associated with increased IQ. If we made such
changes in most of the genes with significant effects on IQ, we could
produce individuals with high IQs, quite possibly higher than any ever
observed. Since no single gene seems to account for much of the
variation – at least in the populations we have studied so far – this
would require fairly heavy editing of the genome, perhaps comparable
with that required for spell-checking.

Rare, regional IQ-boosting variants may also be valuable, just as the
genes of wild relatives of domesticated crops can be useful, or the
genes of regional landraces.

We know that it is possible for healthy individuals to have a
higher-than-average numbers of alleles favoring intelligence, but we do
not know the consequences of having the high-IQ version of every
possible gene. There has never been any such person. So, guided by
experience, we might feel safe in imitating the QTL constellation of a
healthy, successful, and stable individual with high IQ, but as for
going all the way.. It’s a bit scary. The kid might go into convulsions,
or explode in a flash of green light. Better to be cautious.

The knowledge that a particular high-IQ QTL setting works could be very
useful, and the only real test is whether it has worked before. Thus,
knowledge of the genotypes of highly intelligent and creative
individuals would be valuable. Robbing the graves of the great might
become very lucrative. Before we’re done with this, we may have armed
guards protecting Feynman’s tomb. And of course someone is going to
steal (and sequence) Einstein’s brain (1).

This leads us to the fourth approach, old-fashioned cloning. The clone
of a very intelligent person will also be very intelligent. Many people
say that this is not necessarily true, and, strictly speaking, they’re
right – we could accidentally drop the kid on his head – but the IQs of
identical twins are, on average, very similar. There are not a huge
number of high-achieving twins, let alone twin pairs, perhaps in part
because twinhood itself is slightly disadvantageous, but consider the
odds of a pair of identical twins both being sought-after string
theorists or astrophysicists (not mere rocket scientists). It happens.
Another strength of cloning is that it duplicates complex non-additive
interactions between genes, which we don’t know enough to design on
purpose. Cloning by itself will not produce individuals that are smarter
than anyone has ever been before; still, a society in which John Von
Neumann was the norm would be … interesting. This approach is relatively
low-tech, since we are able to clone some mammalian species already, nor
does it require any genetic editing.

Fifth, we might able to harness hybrid vigor. Sometimes hybrids of two
populations are considerably more vigorous and productive than members
of either parent population. The best-known example is hybrid corn,
which is genetics’s biggest practical success. This can mean being
smarter, as well. For example, mules are stronger, hardier, have more
endurance and are more intelligent than either of their parental
species.

Hybrid vigor is unpredictable, in that some pairs of parental
populations produce improved offspring and some don’t. Two populations
whose exhibit hybrid vigor are said to ‘nick’. It may be that some human
populations ‘nick’. If so, we would have a practical zero-tech way of
producing enhanced humans. Of course, with our usual luck, one or both
of the two nicking parental populations would be rare, obnoxious and
only available by paying inordinate sums to some third-world dictator.
Worse yet, within a generation or two, prominent enhanced members of our
society would be spouting eloquent bullshit about why we have to
intervene in some pointless geopolitical dispute involving either or
both of their gormless parental populations.

Mixtures of these approaches are possible. Take someone highly
intelligent, spell-check his genome, and then clone him. It should
work.

Having no design innovations, humans enhanced via any of my five
preferred approaches would be fully back-compatible. Unions with
ordinary humans would be fully  
fertile. The children of spell-checked people and normals would have
about half the usual amount of genetic load and would still be mighty
impressive.

A country or tribe that did this first, on a large scale, would be
competitively superior to everyone else. This might be the case even if
they had been constitutionally competitively inferior before. In fact I
see a bunch of losers as the most likely to take such a radical step –
not to invent it, but to take it. After someone did it, the rest of
the world would have to take some kind of drastic catch-up measure or
sleep with the Neanderthals. Frankly, I don’t see why they wouldn’t
just go ahead and do some spell-checking themselves. But they could
also, say, make a pre-emptive thermonuclear strike, unleash a tailored
virus, fire up the time machine and nip the whole thing in the
pre-bud, go cyborg (Mechs versus Shapers), or escape temporarily
through space colonization.

1. Westminster Abbey would be a prime target. Shakespeare would be
more  
valuable than Einstein – he could write scripts. Of course, there’s a
curse.

‘ Good friend, for Iesus’ sake forbear  
To dig the dust beneath these stones.  
Blest be he who leaves me there,  
And curst be he who moves my bones.’

