+++
title = "If I were a science"
full_title = "If I were a science fiction writer"
date = "2012-03-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/20/if-i-were-a-science-fiction-writer/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/20/if-i-were-a-science-fiction-writer/).

If I were a science fiction writer

I sent this to Jerry Pournelle some time ago: here’s a current version

Let us assume that we really could make drugs that increased
intelligence. I’m pretty sure it’s actually possible, and the approach
that makes it easy is looking at the results of natural selection,
rather than trying to understand everything about human biochemistry
from the ground up. Some of the causative mutations in Ashkenazi
genetic diseases such as Tay-Sachs and Gaucher are good candidates. If I
were a science fiction writer, I’d wonder where an application of this
would lead. I can think of a number of possibilities – for some of them,
the book or short story has already been written.

Possibilities:

A. The drugs could be too expensive for universal use.

A1. I doubt if they would be in the millionaire-only club – I don’t
think any other drug is, really, not when there are a lot of customers
to spread the fixed costs over.

A2. But it would be easy for them to be too expensive for general use in
non-first-world countries. Them that has, gets. Even if too expensive
for general use in a poor country, the kakistocrats could probably
afford them, making revolution harder. Dictators would, as a perk, get
smarts as well as power. The gap between us and, say, Guinea Bissau
would become awesome.

A3. There might be a medium-sized but significant time lapse between
elite use and general use. Would our government disintegrate in the
interim?.

A4. A cabal keeps the drugs secret and strives for world domination.
Sounds like fun. See E.

B. There might be side effects.

B1. You die after a while. See *[Flowers for
Algernon](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0156030306/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=0156030306&linkId=8baf99d917b46503486dc91e5137241e)*.

B2. You are physically messed up but don’t die, something likekids with
torsion dystonia. I doubt this though, because the Ashkenazi mutations
are very recent and have not been refined by natural selection. Most
people with that torsion dystonia mutation never get sick. Since that is
the case, it is probably easy to improve them, reduce side effects, etc.
They are non-optimized and so can be optimized. If nothing else, take a
break now and then from the drugs. Carriers can’t do that. Hmm.. if
there is a risk of physical problems, would people use them anyhow? Most
would-be Olympians would take a drug that killed them in five years if
it gave them a gold medal: are wannabe Nobelists that tough? Would we
use it in a desperate situation, a war? Should we *force* it on our
researchers, for the greater good?

B3. The drugs change your personality in interesting and/or undesirable
ways. This side effect too could probably be ameliorated, but it might
be tricky.

C. They only work if taken in early life.. Then us geezers might be
pushed aside by the rising generation in a new and spectacular way. In
fact, the country might not even be run by middle-aged people at all.

C1. They work some, not as well, if you start late.

D. They increase intelligence a *lot*. Might be possible: if we’re
talking the Ashkenazi mutations, hardly anyone has more than one, just
about nobody more than two. One in two thousand Ashkenazi Jews, at most,
carry both a Tay-Sachs mutation and a Gaucher mutation, the two most
common. But using drugs, we could in principle give you the torsion
dystonia effect *and* the Gaucher-carrier effect *and* the Tay-Sachs –
carrier effect *and* the Canavan-carrier effect *and* the familial
dysautonomia carrier effect. As a rough guess, might give you
considerably more than 20 pts – torsion dystonia seems to confer about
ten all by itself.

D1. Add even one standard deviation and society is transformed. Somehow
I think that Poul Anderson’s
*[Brainwave](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000MD6QEE/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B000MD6QEE&linkId=64f4c6e5701a3fc067127a24477255a3)*
missed the point.

D2. Real smart people become so much smarter as to be un-understandable
by usuns. This is a lot like Vinge’s Singularity, or his early short
story *[Bookworm,
Run](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00201DK22/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B00201DK22&linkId=e46b8029279abc0d409656d1ed199331)
!* .

D2a. They stop having children altogether. if you extrapolate, that is
certainly the trend, at least among women. The higher the IQ, the lower
the fertility.

D2b. The incomprehensibly smart all convert to Catholicism. Or to
something else. To them it is obvious.

D2c. The incomprehensibly smart figure out ways to get even smarter.
This story can’t be told.

D3. We run similar genetic analysis on famously smart people, looking
for strong IQ genes. Before we’re done we dig up Newton, Gauss, Clerk
Maxwell, and steal Einstein’s brain. Razib Khan is now talking about
cloning John von Neumann, but I thought this through some time ago.
Since you will never get permission to clone most of the dead savants,
the thing to do is raid all the key cemeteries at once, before anyone
has had a chance to strengthen security.

D4. We test it on chimps and overshoot. That could be bad.

E. The government bans it – the powers that be want to stay the powers
that be. It’ll only work if the powers that be have their own trump –
say, real machine intelligence, or maybe people souped-up with a
computer connection, as in *Starswarm*. Or, hydrogen bombs, coupled with
a world technological inquisition, especially biotechnology. See Niven’s
[ARM](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001TLZEUK/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B001TLZEUK&linkId=1e550b1b721e7ba124a435385d80de18)
stories, Poul Anderson’s
*[Shield](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0425047040/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=0425047040&linkId=488940518aeeabd9b61441918e1d2a8d),*
Pournelle’s
[CoDominium,](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00APAH4ZE/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B00APAH4ZE&linkId=eb1f9eedd66c5ac2d605dde3a4528767)
Vernor Vinge’s *[The Peace
War](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B003E74BSS/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B003E74BSS&linkId=28847a7a6fbad3eff883fb32b8c9993e)*.

E1. Some countries ban it, while other countries, or other sub-national
groups, try it. We all know how that one turns out. Cf *[Beyond This
Horizon](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0743435613/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=0743435613&linkId=b9f2e1a3824395e9970a47108287ffd3)*,
many others.

E2. Groups that currently have genetic advantages wish to keep their
edge and support the ban. Up to now, people could kill or oppress you
but they couldn’t *be* you, couldn’t steal your essence. That was then.

E3. The government bans it for everyone other than themselves, for good
national-security reasons. We wouldn’t want super-smart terrorists,
would we? Shortly thereafter, hereditary rule is imposed. It now works
because regression to the mean doesn’t make the nephew stupid;
intelligence is a perk of office.

E4. The government only allows use on the slow: only for leveling. Never
work of course.

