+++
title = "Āryatvārtha Nirṇayam"
full_title = "Āryatvārtha Nirṇayam"
date = "2014-05-25"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/aryatvartha-nir%e1%b9%87ayam/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/aryatvartha-nir%e1%b9%87ayam/).


					Āryatvārtha Nirṇayam				



[ May 25, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/aryatvartha-nir%e1%b9%87ayam/ "Permalink to Āryatvārtha Nirṇayam")

-   in
    [Introduction](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/introduction/)
-   [4
    Comments](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/aryatvartha-nir%e1%b9%87ayam/#comments)

# Āryatvārtha Nirṇayam

Āryatvārtha Nirṇayam: Determination of the meaning of “Aryan”-ness

While there are scores of words that are contentious and loaded with
historical baggage; ready to summon ghosts from the past to haunt a
particular target group, it is perhaps the word, “Aryan”, arguably of
course, that remains a bastard, with several theories claiming
paternity. It is difficult to understand what the word, “Aryan” meant to
the Ancient Hindu mind, the collective intelligentsia of priests, kings,
ascetics and philosophers that shaped the Sacrosanct Veda, Smritis of
Manu, Gautama and others, the Dharmasutras of Apastamba, Baudhayana and
etc and the Itihasa Purana canon (Mahabharata, Ramayana and the scores
of Puranas, all plenty with interpolations and obvious corruptions) over
a continuum of two millennia.



The word “Aryan” has been interpreted in the context of race, culture,
religion, language and etcetera, in academically and scientifically
meaningful ways. But some would go to the ridiculous extent of claiming
that it only refers to noble character as it is used in the Rig Veda.
While due credit must be given to the sheer strength of imagination on
the part of thinkers such as Dayananda Sarasvati, Aurobindo, Kapali
Sastry, Subhash Kak and others who feel compelled to interpret an entire
body of scripture as symbolic and strip it of its historical substance,
one must set the humour aside and give in, for once, to objective
thinking and approach the Rig Veda with the respect it deserves as a
text that chronicles some of the most hoary events and persons of
Bhāratadeśa.



So, were the “Aryans” an ethnic group that subscribed to a set of
cultural practices and was part of a linguistic group? The answer
depends on the era in Vedic history. When the Indo-Aryan branch of the
Indo-Europeans first entered Bhāratavarṣa, they were carriers of a
particular culture and proto-language (Proto-Vedic) and had a shared
genetic identity. However, even this did not happen as neatly as
imagined, in a single wave of migration. Manu and his progeny is likely
to have been the first Indo-Aryan settlers in Bharatavarsha and his
clan, over time, gave rise to the Ikśvākava, along with the Vaisālī and
the Videha peoples.



It might have been possible that there was a (relatively) short interval
between the era of Ikśvāku’s reign and the arrival of the second wave,
that of the Aila (Descendants of Ilā, daughter of Manu and the ancestors
of the Chandravamśi dynasties)-probably about 2-3 centuries. This seems
substantiated by the Paurānika testimony, as cited by F.E. Pargiter in
Ancient Historical Indian Tradition, that Ikśvāku inherited Madhyadeśa
as the eldest son of Manu. (Brahma 7, 20. Harivamsa 10, 634. Siva vii,
60, 17. Linga i, 65, 28. Brahmanda iii, 60, 20; Vayu 85, 21. 

The text from Harivamsa states: “ikShvAkuH jyeShTha dAyAdo madhya-desham
avAptavAn”

But in other parts of the Paurānika tradition, Yayati seems to be the
ruler of Madhyadesa with his capital at Pratiṣṭhana. It seems that the
Solar kingdoms, which derive patrilineal descent from Manu, (Whom
Pargiter had styled as the ‘Manva’ kingdoms) were pushed more eastwards
by this incoming second wave of the Aila. Going back to the meaning of
the term, “Ārya”, the Aila definitely were culturally distinguished from
the Manva although linguistically they were more or less the same stock.

However, the Aila themselves separated into the Panchajana, that is,
five different tribes with their separate territories-Anu, Druhyu, Puru,
Yadu and Turvasu-and this resulted in further cultural differentiation.
However, the Panchajana and the Manva were still genetically distinct
groups in contrast with the Dravidians who had arrived in Bhāratavarṣa
prior to even the first wave of the Ārya and the still earlier,
indigenous tribes of India. (Note that the Dravidians themselves are not
the indigenous people of India as is commonly proclaimed by some
individuals with vested interests) The latest genetic evidence also
appears to suggest the relatively recent date for the admixture of these
distinct genetic streams. [Read this enlightening article by the learned
Dienekes
Pontikos](http://dienekes.blogspot.sg/2013/08/major-admixture-in-india-took-place-42.html)

Gradually, this admixture translated into the diffusion of Ārya ideals
from Āryavarta into Prāchya and Dakshina Bharata and several ruling
tribes were embraced into the fold as honorary Kṣatriyās. However, the
term, ‘Ārya’, seems to have been remembered primarily for its linguistic
and cultural references. The tamil Saiva works often praises the
religious canon that is both “Ariyamum Thamizhum” (That is, both
Sanskrit and Tamil). Hence, the term, ‘Ārya’, seems to have been
remembered among its peripheral subscribers in the southern region
primarily for its linguistic and religious meaning. Thus, it is futile
to divide the Hindus based on ‘Ārya’ as the term has constantly evolved
and it now stands to represent a shared heritage to which we can all lay
claim.

Tags: [arya](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/arya/),
[aryan](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/aryan/),
[bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[history](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/history/),
[india](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/india/),
[indian](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/indian/),
[purana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/purana/),
[sanskrit](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sanskrit/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

