+++
title = "The Historical Wasteland"
full_title = "The Historical Wasteland of Hindu ‘Exceptionalism’"
date = "2014-05-25"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/the-historical-wasteland-of-hindu-exceptionalism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/the-historical-wasteland-of-hindu-exceptionalism/).


					The Historical Wasteland of Hindu ‘Exceptionalism’				



[ May 25, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/the-historical-wasteland-of-hindu-exceptionalism/ "Permalink to The Historical Wasteland of Hindu ‘Exceptionalism’")

-   in [Vedic
    History](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/vedic-history/)
-   [1
    Comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/the-historical-wasteland-of-hindu-exceptionalism/#comments)

# The Historical Wasteland of Hindu ‘Exceptionalism’

Anyone who has spent a good deal of time studying the historical
narratives found across the wide span of Vaidika, Pauranika and
Itihasika literature in order to reconstruct a chronologically sound
tradition, complete and coherent as far as possible, would understand
the gargantuan demands of such a task. The sheer volumes of work one has
to consult in the process, filtering out the mythology in which the
textual accounts are deeply shrouded, dissecting the repetitions of
names and etcetera are just ‘another day’ of intellectual labour.



Unfortunately for the Hindu tradition, a sense of lethargy has crept
into and eating away the attempts to reconstruct a linear and sensible
narrative. This lethargy itself can be attributed to the stereotype that
ancient Indian historiography does not exist and there is simply no
evidence to shed light onto the main actors and key events that shaped
the hoary days of the Vedic people. This stereotype was a very
comforting thought to several indologists because it gave them the
freedom to reconstruct their own narratives, fuelled by their own
ulterior motives, and unhindered by the need to cross-reference with
native sources, because there simply weren’t any. The only concerns were
archaeological (or even the lack thereof as nothing is convincing as
negative evidence) or linguistic evidences.



While we respect the advances made in the above stated fields as well as
genetics and approve of the general conclusion that there was definitely
an entry of West Eurasians into Bharatavarsha from the Northwest, we
should not neglect the vast treasures of Hindu texts which,
notwithstanding the fantastic and obviously fictional theme, still offer
a detailed remembrance of the earliest times of the Indo-Aryan people in
Bharatavarsha. This stereotypical disdain for the Hindus’ historical
self-awareness led to the above-mentioned lethargy among scholars. This
lethargy led to a single-minded focus on the issue of the entry into
India and consequently any important text had to be made instrumental to
this unhealthy obsession; or if it could not be, it was relegated to the
status of imaginative fiction. The Puranas fell victim to
“criminal”-neglect. And the motive is not hard to infer.



The Puranas, with their elaborate descriptions of a settled people,
cities, urban development and accounts of renowned personages, were too
boring. The relative stillness of the Puranas could hardly account for a
useful discussion on the Indo-Aryan incursion by the bottle-neck
Northwestern frontier, which must have upset and displaced the local
population, and thus must have involved a degree of force, resistance
and clashes. A martial document was needed to further the agenda of the
academia and the Rig Veda was perfect! But are not battles described in
the Puranas as well, you may ask. But the Pauranika texts often describe
these battles with unambiguous locations and characters, which were
hardly relevant to the bygone event of Indo-Aryan foraying into
Bharatam. The Rig Veda with its vagueness, lack of details about the
contenders in a battle, sites with untraceable names, was truly perfect!
The Rig Veda with its generous use of the word, ‘Arya’ and high
frequency of hymns that centred on the Arya’s struggles against the
Non-Arya, was a perfect candidate for the much needed chronicle of the
Aryan invasion (Or migration as they prefer to call it now) of Bharatam.



This naiveté on the part of the indologists has led much of their
audience (Including many Hindus who uncritically consume the information
presented to them) to buy into the myth that the Rig Veda is the
starting point for Hindu history when a reading of the Puranas would
tell us that the Aryans had settled in Bharatam for more than a
millennium before even the earliest parts of the Rig Veda were composed.
Of the various historians and western Indologists who approached the
issue of Hindu antiquity, most have developed a strong bias against the
veracity of the accounts found in the Puranas, giving the flimsiest of
reasons such as the Puranas were written far later than it should be, in
order to be considered as an acceptable Pramana for historical
knowledge. However, the Puranas, much like the Vedic texts, were
transmitted and proliferated thorough oral transmission though not
safeguarded with the same level of sacrosanct respect for its textual
integrity. Thus, it was subjected to sectarian interpolations (Stories
were written to further the Shaiva-Vaishnava agenda), confusion of names
in rather long-winded accounts of events (due to a lack of systematic
and disciplined memorization, as it was with the Vedas) and other
literary ‘memes. However, the Vamsa, or the ruling dynasties of various
countries in Bharatavarsha, was, for the most part, consistent as
Pargiter had taken great pains to highlight. And by a meticulous method
of omitting erroneous entries and contextualizing sudden jumps between
distant generations, it was possible for him to reconstruct the
genealogy of the Ancient Hindu dynasties.



It is high time we abandon the concept of Hindu ‘exceptionalism’ in our
approach to its history, where we assume that the Hindus were
exceptionally indifferent to preserving a comprehensive historical
record of the most ancient times, the clans that thrived, the kings and
priests who wielded power and the places which were seats of power and
culture. They were clearly interested in preserving that data for
posterity as exemplified by the abundance of genealogical information
found in the Pauranika and Itihasika texts. It is also in the best
interests of the Hindus to explore the original texts and derive a
proper historical understanding through some Prayatna. [**In the next
post**](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/ "The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 1"),
we would take one of what I believe to be Pargiter’s essential
conclusions about ancient Indian traditional history, about the great
King Sudasa of North Pancala and Samvarana of the Hastinapura lineage,
and explore an interesting discovery that I had encountered during the
course of my own investigations into the text.

Tags: [aryan](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/aryan/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[history](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/history/),
[itihasa](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/itihasa/),
[itihasas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/itihasas/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[purana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/purana/),
[puranas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puranas/),
[ramayana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ramayana/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

