+++
title = "Threading the Needle"
full_title = "Threading the Needle"
date = "2021-11-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/11/12/threading-the-needle/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/11/12/threading-the-needle/).

Threading the Needle

The problem with the idea of an early, pre-Amerindian settlement of the
Americas is that ( by hypothesis, and some evidence ) it succeeded, but
( from known evidence) it just *barely* succeeded, at best. Think like
an epidemiologist ( they’re not all stupid ) – once humans managed to
get past the ice, they must have had a growth factor greater than 1.0
per generation – but it seems that it can’t have been a **lot** larger
than that, because if they had averaged, say, 3 surviving kids per
generation ( r = 1.5) , their population would have exploded, filling up
all the habitable territories south of the glaciers in less than 2000
years.

(1.5)^40 multiplies the original population by a factor greater than ten
million !

A saturated hunter-gatherer population inhabiting millions of square
miles leaves a fair number of artifacts and skeletons per millennium –
but we haven’t found much. We have, so far, found no skeletons that old.
I don’t think we have a lot of totally convincing artifacts, although
I’m no expert at distinguishing artifacts from geofacts. ( But these
were modern humans – how crude do we expect their artifacts to be?)

For-sure footprints we’ve got, and intriguing genetic data.

A priori, I would expect hunter-gatherers entering uninhabited America
to have done pretty well, and have high population growth rates,
especially after they become more familiar with the local ecology. There
is good reason to think that early Amerindians did: Bayesian skyline
analysis of their mtDNA indicates fast population growth. They were
expert hunters before they ever arrived, and once they got rolling, they
seem to have wiped out the megafauna quite rapidly.

But the Precursors do not seem to have become numerous, and did not
cause a wave of extinctions ( as far as I know. check giant turtles.).
What might have limited their biological success?

Maybe they didn’t have atlatls. The Amerindians certainly did.

Maybe they arrived as fishermen and didn’t have many hunting skills.
Those could have been developed, but not instantaneously. An analogy:
early Amerindians visited some West Coast islands and must have had
boats. But after they crossed the continent and reached the Gulf of
Mexico, they had lost that technology and took several thousand years to
re-develop it and settle the Caribbean. Along this line, coastal fishing
settlements back near the Glacial Maximum would all be under water
today.

Maybe they fought among themselves to an unusual degree. I don’t really
believe in this, am just throwing out notions.

Maybe their technology and skills set only worked in a limited set of
situations, so that they could only successfully colonize certain
niches. Neanderthals, for example, don’t seem to have flourished in
plains, but instead in hilly country. On the other hand, we don’t tend
to think of modern human having such limitations.

One can imagine some kind of infectious disease that made large areas
uninhabitable. With the low human population density, most likely a
zoonosis, perhaps carried by some component of the megafauna – which
would also explain why it disappeared.

