+++
title = "Footprints in the Sands"
full_title = "Footprints in the Sands of Time"
date = "2021-10-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/10/12/footprints-in-the-sands-of-time/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/10/12/footprints-in-the-sands-of-time/).

Footprints in the Sands of Time

![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2021/10/tularosa-footprints.jpg?w=780)

The fossil footprints around an ancient lake in White Sands have been
known for some time, but now we have what look to be perfectly
respectable C-14 dates. They’re about 22 thousand years old, close to
the Last Glacial maximum (LGM) and, as such clearly predate all existing
evidence of human settlement of the New World (south of the glaciers,
anyhow).

There were already hints: Amerindian populations in South America,
mainly in Amazonia, carry a trace of a different genetic heritage. The
existing population closest to that trace are the inhabitants of the
Andaman Islands, between India and Burma. Other populations such as
Australian Aborigines and the inhabitants of New Guinea are also close.
There is reason to believe that, until a few thousand years ago, all of
Southeast Asia (including the islands) was occupied by related
populations, known as Australo-Melanesians.

Here’s the key insight: the fact that the Andaman-like genetic trace is
found in Amazonian Amerindians, but not in North America, suggests that
it was picked up from a pre-existing population as the Amerindians
expanded into South America. There are other possible scenarios, but it
is hard to fit them with certain known facts. For example, we have
ancient DNA from a Clovis kid, which is genetically close to modern
Amerindians in South America, but does not contain this Andamanese-like
trace. Hard to make this scenario work.

This implies that there was an earlier, less-successful colonization of
the New World, one that preceded the Amerindians. One could have
predicted this, and I
[did.](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/19/whos-on-first/)

North America looked something like this in those days:

![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/glacial-maximum-climate.gif?w=673)

Note that crossing by boat would have been difficult at this time,
assuming that settlers closely followed the coast. There is a *long*
stretch of icebound coast before you reach somewhere habitable. The LGM
was perhaps the most difficult time for a population to reach North
America from Asia, so you have to suspect that they had crossed *even
earlier*.

I say “less successful” because this population left very little sign,
compared to the later Clovis culture. We find many artifacts and some
skeletons from the early Amerindians, but very little from this
(hypothetical) earlier population: in part this might be because their
artifacts are harder to recognize ( because primitive) , but you have to
think that their population density was considerably lower.

They may have done better in Brazil, because its climate was more
favorable for hunter-gatherers than most places were back in the
dreadful LGM.

One of the interesting differences between this somewhat hypothetical
early population and Amerindians is that they seem to have been far less
competent hunters. By the time of Clovis, Amerindians had atlatls and
could apparently kill any animal, no matter how large. Ecologically
dominant. In fact, they seem to have driven almost all of the megafauna
in North and South America into extinction over a fairly short period of
time.

This \[hypothetical\] earlier population may not have had atlatls simply
because they hadn’t been invented yet: the earliest known example is
about 18,000 years old. Considering that they may have entered North
America some time well \_before\_ the LGM, this seems likely.

It may be that the alternative to being ‘ecologically dominant’ in the
Americas was not very pleasant. The Amerindians could make a living
hunting megafauna, and probably could deal effectively with the big
predators sustained by those megafauna – at minimum, they were tough
enough to make those predators think twice. After the extinction of the
megafauna, most of those predators disappeared. This means that every
other strategy of making a living – hunting lesser game, fishing,
gathering plant foods – could be pursued without much risk. The whole
landscape was theirs – the only thing they had to fear was *other*
Amerindians.

For our hypothetical Precursors, this may not have been the case.
Predators may have excluded them from much of the landscape, reducing
their access to resources, which may not have been very abundant anyhow
in the most severe part of the Ice Age.

It is safe to say that they didn’t leave a lot of skeletal fossils,
since so far we haven’t found a single one. At the same time, any
skeletal sample with useable DNA would be very valuable: as with the key
Denisovan sample, where we have learned much about a whole separate
branch of humanity from part of a little finger!

We can hope for luck finding skeletal fossils, but there may be another,
more fruitful approach: looking aDNA in sediments in ancient sites.
People have successfully retrieved ancient DNA from Neanderthal sites,
and we may hope to do the same for pre-Clovis sites in the Americas.
People ( other than James Bond) only die once, but they take a crap many
times before their deaths. This approach might let us acquire genetic
evidence from very early cultures, cultures with low population size,
perhaps essentially failed colonizations or short-term explorations.

