+++
title = "Muhammad, Aisha,"
full_title = "Muhammad, Aisha, suckling adults, goat"
date = "2020-01-17"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2020/01/17/3227/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2020/01/17/3227/).

Muhammad, Aisha, suckling adults, goat

The below is replicated from
<https://www.facebook.com/KalavaiVenkat/posts/2548790138734680> :

> A controversy erupted over a fatwa issued by a cleric of the Al Azhar
> university in 2007. The fatwa was concerned with removing the Islamic
> prohibition on a male and a female who are not married to each other
> from working together in private. The fatwa said that in such
> circumstances the woman should suckle the stranger man after which it
> is no longer haraam for the two to work together in private.
> Apparently, he becomes like a son to her!

> The cleric’s fatwa was controversial but it was accurately derived
> from authentic hadiths. Aisha, the favorite wife of Muhammad’s, once
> narrated an incident which is now preserved in Sahih Muslim 8:3425.
> The daughter of Suhail came to the Prophet Muhammad to explain a
> strange predicament she faced. Her father had a young slave named
> Salim who was recently freed. Salim was in the prime of his youth but
> lived with the family of his erstwhile master. Salim was sexually
> aware. The daughter of Suhail was also a young, and presumably
> attractive, woman. Her father was perturbed to see Salim in the
> proximity of his daughter.
>
> “What should I do?” the young woman asked Muhammad.
>
> Muhammad replied, “Suckle Salim on your breasts. It would then become
> haraam for the two of you to become sexually united. Your father would
> no longer be perturbed to see the two of you together.”
>
> The young woman followed Muhammad’s instruction and reported to Aisha
> that her father was no longer perturbed to see her and Salim in close
> proximity! Aisha also reported that Allah had revealed an authentic
> quranic verse approving this practice of suckling a stranger man.
> Aisha had written it down on a parchment and stuck it under a pillow.
> Muhammad soon died. Aisha and the other women were busy with the
> funeral when a goat came and ate the parchment. As a result, this
> revelation never made it to the Quran although it is preserved in the
> hadiths (Sunan Ibn Majah 3:9:1944).
>
> I don’t know what should amaze or amuse the reader. Is it the fact
> that a mere goat could eat away a critical revelation by the almighty
> Allah? Is it the fact that the prophet of Islam is ignorant of the
> fact that a woman lactates only during and after her pregnancy –
> unless she suffers from Galactorrhea? Is it that he is ignorant of the
> fact that a woman’s breasts are among her erogenous zones? Is it the
> irony of veiling a woman only to let her go topless and entertain a
> stranger man so that she could be his colleague?

References:

1\. <https://muflihun.com/muslim/8/3425>  
2. <https://sunnah.com/urn/1262630>

