+++
title = "Lockdown"
full_title = "Lockdown"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2021/01/12/lockdown/"
date = "2021-01-12"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2021/01/12/lockdown/).

Lockdown

Life under lockdown here in Piddletrenthide isn’t so different to life at The Wildside, on the surface at least:

Confined to a small village in the middle of nowhere – check

Travelling restricted to trips on foot or bicycle to friends’ houses, for walks and perhaps to the local shop whose most interesting merchandise, from our perspective, is sweets and matches – check

Bimonthly excursion to the market for supplies – check

What is different though is that our ‘stay-at-home’ existence there was of course of our own choosing. And we loved it. Yes there were times when the rains were in spate and visitors just a trickle when I did feel the need to get out, to have a change of scene and see some people.
Mostly though we didn’t need to go anywhere because the world came to us, literally. We had volunteers from all corners of the world and from all backgrounds, weird and wonderful. We had friends old and new from Bangalore, Goa, Bombay, Delhi, England. We had visitors – relatives of people in the village, government officials, homeschooling families, natural building enthusiasts, blog followers – who turned up often uninvited. It was enough, at times too much, to keep us busy and keep things interesting.

Lockdown in the Piddle Valley is different. For a start few people embrace something that is imposed upon them externally. In Sakleshpur we were free to go to Bangalore or even Boston anytime we wanted. It’s just we didn’t want to. Here, knowing that you’re not allowed to visit the coast 15 miles away makes you want to do just that. Secondly, not only do we not have the huge inflow and outflow of people that made our lives so varied in Sakleshpur, we’re not even meant to see our friends in the village. Social interaction is all but illegal.

And perhaps it is because of all this, and the fact that we are deep in the sun-starved English winter, that I find myself longing to get out, to go somewhere, anywhere. Suddenly those travel sections of the newspaper I long ago eschewed, preferring roots to wings, fill me with longing. A few days of somewhere warm, somewhere different, somewhere where people can be people again instead of shrinking from human contact. If only.
