+++
title = "Aristotelian vs Buddhist"
full_title = "Aristotelian vs Buddhist eudaimonia"
date = "2020-01-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/01/05/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/01/05/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/).

Aristotelian vs. Buddhist eudaimonia

Damien Keown’s [The Nature of Buddhist
Ethics](https://www.amazon.com/Nature-Buddhist-Ethics-Damien-Keown/dp/0333913094)
closes by arguing for parallels between Buddhist and Aristotelian
ethics. He claims that “there are many formal parallels between the
ideal of human perfection conceived by the Buddha and that envisaged by
Aristotle” (193), such that “Aristotelianism provides a useful Western
analogue which will be of use in elucidating the foundations and
conceptual structure of Buddhist ethics.” (196)

Is Keown right? Is Buddhist ethics like Aristotle’s? I think he is at
least right that Buddhist ethics is much *more* like Aristotle’s ethics
than its two usual competitors in modern analytical ethics,
consequentialism and Kantianism. (Sorry,
[Charles](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/11/santideva-vs-singer/)
and
[Justin](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/07/the-dhamma-is-not-a-transcendent-law/).)
It is so because Aristotelian and Buddhist ethics both focus on
dispositions, states of character to be cultivated, rather than on
actions taken discretely as Kant and utilitarians do. In that respect
Buddhist ethics can meaningfully and helpfully be called “[virtue
ethics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/02/ethics-of-disposition-not-decision/)“.
Keown may have been the first to make the virtue connection –since he
wrote his book at a time when consequentialism and Kantianism were *so*
dominant that the various forms of “virtue ethics” were barely given any
consideration at all –and we owe him for that. (In part for this
reason, I still recommend his book as possibly the best existing
introduction to Buddhist ethics.)

I think the [focus on
dispositions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/02/ethics-of-disposition-not-decision/)
against discrete actions is quite important. For that reason I [no
longer
think](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/02/is-it-wrong-to-eat-your-dead-dog/)
that “virtue ethics” is an entirely misleading category, as [I once
did](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/).
Yet there *does* still remain something misleading about it, which is
its sheer largeness. “Virtue ethics” in the sense at issue here includes
not only Aristotle and the Pali suttas but Confucians, Stoics, and
Epicureans – and these traditions do not agree on very much.

This is all of the utmost importance to me because I have long taken
both Aristotelianism and Buddhism – especially the Pali Buddhism that
Keown focuses on – to be core among [my own ethical
traditions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/12/choosing-a-few-traditions/).
So it would be very convenient for me if Keown was right and the ideals
of the two traditions were parallel in the most important respects.
Unfortunately for me, they aren’t. Or at least they historically have
not been. And Keown’s attempt to equate the two winds up avoiding what I
take to be the most crucial issues.

Let us look in more detail of at “the ideal of human perfection
conceived by the Buddha and that envisaged by Aristotle” – meaning
nirvana and
[eudaimonia](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/02/is-happiness-the-purpose-of-life/)
respectively. Keown follows [John
Cooper](https://www.amazon.com/Reason-Human-Good-Aristotle-Cooper/dp/0872200221)
in noting that for Aristotle eudaimonia is final (*teleion*), which
means among other things that “everything else that is desired is
desired for the sake of it…” (197)

I think this characterization of Aristotle’s eudaimonia is correct:
Aristotle believes that eudaimonia must include all the things we desire
for their own sakes, a comprehensive good. But two pages later Keown
then makes this startling claim:

> Whatever else nirvana is, it is indisputably the *summum bonum* of
> Buddhism and may be characterised, like *eudaemonia*, in the way
> described above: (a) it is desired for its own sake; (b) everything
> else that is desired is desired for the sake of it; (c) it is never
> chosen for the sake of anything else. This formal equivalence of
> *eudaemonia* and nirvana seems unexceptionable, and in fact involves
> little more than the conceptual unpacking of the notion of an
> inclusive final goal. (199)

Wait wait, hold on, back the truck up. “Unexceptionable”?!? Item (b)
–smuggled into the middle of the sentence without argument – is
*wrong*. We do *not* desire everything else for the sake of nirvana, not
according to classical Buddhist texts. There is a beautiful passage in
Augustine’s Confessions that treats all of our desires as misguided
longing for God: “Pride imitates what is lofty; but you alone are God
most high above all things…. Curiosity appears as a zeal for knowledge;
yet you supremely know all.” (II.13) And so on. For Augustine, God is
clearly final in the sense of (b). But *nirvana is not analogous* to God
in that way. I am aware of no comparable passage in any Buddhist text
that says our desires for [external
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/) are
really desires for nirvana.

And I don’t think they could be. For one thing, it is our desires for
those other things that keep us *out* of nirvana. Moreover, those other
things are unworthy, characterized by the [three
marks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_marks_of_existence) of
impermanence, suffering and non-self (essencelessness,
*anātman/anattā*); nothing about this is a reflection of nirvana’s
perfection, in the way Augustine would see them as a reflection of
God’s. The texts claim we seek these things because we think,
erroneously, that they *are* permanent, satisfactory and having a self
or essence; [Candrakīrti is particularly explicit about
this](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/06/dont-exclude-ethics-from-philosophy/)
but the claim is there in the Pali literature as well.

One could try to claim that only nirvana *really* satisfies those
desires (for permanence etc.) –but the Pali texts frustrate such an
attempt. Texts like the [Udāna](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Udana)
describe nirvana in terms of what it is not; they refuse to say it *is*
permanent or satisfactory or selfed/essential. (The description of
nirvana as permanent, satisfactory and with essence *does* occur in the
later [Nirvāṇa
Sūtra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mah%C4%81y%C4%81na_Mah%C4%81parinirv%C4%81%E1%B9%87a_S%C5%ABtra)
and similar
[tathāgatagarbha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tath%C4%81gatagarbha_s%C5%ABtras)
texts, but Keown is making his claims about Pali Buddhism, in which no
such doctrines occur.) We need to turn *away* from our other desires,
and toward the radically different desire that is a desire for nirvana.
In Keown’s own words, “The goal is the replacement of worthless
objectives by an orientation of the entire personality toward what is
truly good.” (222) *Replacement by*, not transformation into.

This all matters because Aristotle’s conception of *eudaimonia*, as
[Martha Nussbaum argues at
length](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/fragility-of-goodness/B212012979833A828690B9CA907A87BF),
*includes* the satisfaction of our everyday desires for such everyday
[external
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/) as
social status, praise, romantic partners, children, and a comfortable
material standard of living. (Aristotle is somewhat ambiguous on this
point, especially in [Ethics
X.6-8](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/how-to-answer-the-perennial-questions/),
but it is the general tenor of his thought.) The idea that such goods
are unworthy, and that true *eudaimonia* consists in virtue alone, was
the idea of [Aristotle’s Hellenistic
*foes*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/),
the Stoics, Epicureans, and Skeptics. But it is *that* idea that is
closest to traditional Buddhist nibbāna or nirvana –a state
characterized by freedom from disturbance and suffering, irrespective of
any such goods, as Epicurus’s
[ataraxia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ataraxia) is. (See the
[Itivuttaka](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/kn/iti/iti.2.042-049x.irel.html#iti-044)‘s
discussion of nibbāna, for example.)

This is a pretty huge distinction with tremendous ramifications for [the
way we
live](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/).
It *matters* if the things we typically desire are not worthy of
desiring, as the Pali texts repeatedly say and Aristotle does not.
Charles Taylor, in his writings on Nussbaum and on MacIntyre, refers to
this as a distinction between “revisionist” and “comprehensive” views of
the good: in the latter, which is Aristotle’s view, every good that
people do in fact seek must somehow be included in our understanding of
*the* good, of eudaimonia. But in the former, which Taylor identifies
with Plato, some goods may be found wanting, and we simply reject them.
It seems to me inarguable that the Buddhism of the suttas – and the
Udāna and Itivuttaka –is revisionist in this sense.

[Elsewhere I have
equated](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
Aristotle’s eudaimonia instead with *good karma* (*puñña*), on the
grounds that the idea of good karma has to do with the connection
between virtue and other goods, internal and external. There are
problems with this equation too. Good karma is also not a final good,
since it could *be* chosen for the sake of something else (namely
nirvana). But I suspect that such an alternative equation gets us closer
to the relationship between Buddhism and Aristotle as it really is –or
at least as it really has been. Perhaps an idea of nirvana-as-eudaimonia
might be appropriate for us to take up *now*, as a constructive
innovation – but as ever we must [acknowledge our innovations as
innovations](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/03/acknowledging-newness/).

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia)
