+++
title = "A Buddhism very"
full_title = "A Buddhism very different than the one we think we know"
date = "2020-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/01/19/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/01/19/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/).

A Buddhism very different than the one we think we know

Weterners who have studied Buddhist philosophy and ethics, even when we
have done so at length, are often thrown for a loop when we read the
[Mahāvaṃsa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mah%C4%81va%E1%B9%83sa). This
text – one of the [most historically oriented
texts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/08/asian-historicism-before-protestantism/)
in premodern South Asia – has been a central part of the Theravāda
Buddhist canon for over a thousand years, and played a central role in
creating the idea *of* “Theravāda” Buddhism.

It also looks very different from the Buddhism we constructive Western
Buddhist scholars are accustomed to thinking about. Stephen Jenkins (in
[JIABS
33.1-2](https://journals.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/index.php/jiabs/article/view/9284))
has acutely pointed out how often premodern Buddhist texts seem to
advocate gratuitous violence, and the Mahāvaṃsa is a key example. In
chapter 25, King Duṭṭhagāmaṇi battles against a people called the
Ḍamilas in order to establish the Buddhist dharma, and kills them in
large numbers. He feels remorse at the act, as we might expect him to.
But then eight arahants (enlightened ones) reassure him that he needs to
feel no remorse, because his victims were unbelievers and therefore no
better than beasts. (This text has hardly gone unnoticed by contemporary
Sinhala Buddhists seeking justification for their bloody civil war
against non-Buddhist Tamils.)

So the Mahāvaṃsa supports Steven Collins’s claim that there are two
“modes” of thinking about politics and violence in classical texts: one
that rejects politics for its inherent violence, [as Aśvaghoṣa
does](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/),
and one that is happy to endorse political violence as a necessity.
Neither side takes a *nonviolent politics* – that key goal of
contemporary engaged Buddhists, one that I find laudable [if
difficult](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/)
–as a serious possibility. (While Collins’s making of the distinction
between modes is very helpful for understanding, Collins’s chosen
*terms* for the modes seem to be specifically chosen for their
obtuseness. For some reason he thinks that people will easily remember
the terms “Mode 1” and “Mode 2” – a set of terms that seems to be
designed for people who found the “emic/etic” distinction too intuitive.
I don’t want these terms to spread if I can help it, so I’m not going to
say which number is which.)

The Mahāvaṃsa’s approach to the king’s violence looks abhorrent to our
modern eyes, and – I would say – rightly so. It would hardly be
surprising if a Buddhist ethicist like Jenkins were to say “let us
abandon texts like the Mahāvaṃsa and make them less canonical.” (Sallie
King effectively makes that move in her *Socially Engaged Buddhism* when
she proclaims that “it is easy to take expressions of contempt and acts
of violence as criteria for discerning what is *not* a valid expression
of the Dharma” – emphasis in original.) Strikingly, though, Jenkins does
not do this. He situates the Mahāvaṃsa among a body of other texts that
allow for compassionate violence (including the Upāyakauśalya Sūtra,
which Śāntideva quotes) –texts he rightly calls “a Buddhism very
different than the one we think we know.” (325) And he praises what he
sees as these texts’ ambiguity:

> I mean this in the positive sense that lack of moral certainty,
> appreciation for narrative complexity, rejection of
> oversimplification, and a high toleration for the almost unfathomable
> complexity of moral situations can be positive things…. One gets the
> feeling that Buddhist thinkers are deliberately enhancing the
> ambiguity, as if only an ambiguous ethic could do justice to lived
> reality. (325-7)

I appreciate Jenkins’s approach here because I also see something of
value in the Mahāvaṃsa –not so much on violence, or even ambiguity per
se, but on something else that is related to both of these. Namely the
Mahāvaṃsa shows us a Buddhism – a perspective committed to following the
Buddha – that is not
[single-minded](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/11/philosophical-single-mindedness-1/).
That is, its Buddhism implicitly endorses the pursuit of goals other
than nirvana, goals [beyond the removal of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).

For there is little if any reference to nirvana in the Mahāvaṃsa, or
even to the removal of suffering. Instead it is mostly a set of stories
about how kings and monks brought the Buddha’s lineage to Sri Lanka. It
provides lush descriptions of the kings’ dazzling bejewelled wealth,
showing the sort of aesthetic of abundance that ([according to Justin
McDaniel](https://books.google.com/books?id=tMWrAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA67&lpg=PA67&dq=udom+sombun+justin+mcdaniel&source=bl&ots=GOzZa-tGKY&sig=ACfU3U1UBgMFBOADF5nc60iX_x9cL_b8YQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiIl6KRirvmAhVmmuAKHTaECHoQ6AEwAXoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=udom%20sombun%20justin%20mcdaniel&f=false))
the Thais refer to as *udom sombun*. These descriptions go on at length
in order to evoke an emotional state in the reader, what [theorists
elsewhere in South
Asia](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/08/the-indian-theory-of-taste/)
would call *rasa*. The Mahāvaṃsa explicitly proclaims its purpose to be
evoking emotional states: the chapters provide their justification by
saying they are there to produce the states of *saṃvega* and *pasāda*.
On the surface of it, these would seem to be very Buddhist emotions:
*saṃvega* is traditionally understood to be shock at the futility of
worldly life, *pasāda* (Sanskrit *prasāda*) a serene joy expressed
toward the buddha, dhamma and saṅgha.

But as it turns out, in practice the text does *not* turn either of
these emotions in a Buddhist direction. It’s hard for me to see where
*saṃvega* even enters the picture: few if any characters in the text
seem particularly disillusioned with worldly life, nor are there
narrative elements that seem intended to produce such disillusionment in
the reader. (As mentioned, even the bloody violence seems to be passed
over with cheer.) Rather, the mood seems to be one of joyful
appreciation, in a way consonant with the idea of *pasāda*. Śāntideva
also works to create *pasāda* when he provides lush descriptions of the
offerings made to buddhas. But the Mahāvaṃsa differs from Śāntideva in
that that pasāda is directed *not* to buddha or dhamma, but to *kings*
–the same violent figures that
[Candrakīrti](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/politics-as-ethical-analogy-plato-and-candrakirti/)
and
[Aśvaghoṣa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/)
warn us to be suspicious of. If there’s a way this text helps us get to
the kind of nirvana that Buddhaghosa or Aśvaghoṣa would recognize, I
sure can’t figure out what it is.

Rather, it sure looks like nirvana and the reduction of suffering are
*not the point* of the Mahāvaṃsa. In that respect the Mahāvaṃsa is
probably closer to [Aristotle’s comprehensive view of the
good](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia)
than is the traditional Buddhist endorsement of nirvana. H.L.
Seneviratne, in his *The Work of Kings*, thinks the text’s references to
*saṃvega* and *pasāda* are just a cheaty workaround, a way to pretend
the text is bringing us closer to nirvana when it’s not actually
interested in that goal. Yet still this text has been held sacred by
Buddhists –monks as well as householders and kings – for over a
thousand years. And I think this fact points us to something important:
Buddhists through the ages have *had* goals in life other than the
removal of suffering, and endorsed these goals even in their sacred
texts. (Sometimes they have even adopted non-Buddhist or anti-Buddhist
texts [like the
Rāmāyana](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/12/the-christian-christmas/)
as sacred.) [We
Buddhists](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/)
today can do the same. While we should reject the Mahāvaṃsa’s violence,
like the Mahāvaṃsa itself we can seek goals other than the removal of
suffering, and remain Buddhists in spite of that.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/)
