+++
title = "Four ways to deal with"
full_title = "Four ways to deal with deontic conflicts"
date = "2020-01-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/01/10/four-ways-to-deal-with-deontic-conflicts/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/01/10/four-ways-to-deal-with-deontic-conflicts/).

Four ways to deal with deontic conflicts

Mīmāṃsā authors deal with conflicting commands according to a decreasing
scale of preferences, which seems to me comparable to the scale of
preferences according to which one deals with legal conflicts. Starting
from below, 4) The least preferred option is to say that the commands at
stake are meaningless or purposeless (nirarthaka). This is the least
preferred one because it leads to the fact that the commands are not
fulfilled. Then comes 3) vikalpa, which is equivalent to flipping a
coin, i.e., arbitrarily choosing one of the two commands to be
fulfilled. This is also not ideal, because one of the two commands is
not fulfilled and because this is arbitrarily done. Then comes 2) bādha,
which is equivalent to temporarily suspending the more general command
and applying the most specific one. The suspension allows one to retain
the general command as the default one for future undetermined
instances. Then comes 1), i.e., understanding the conflict as due to a
failure in understanding the commands. One then rephrases the seemingly
conflicting commands in a way which shows that no command is even
suspended and that there was an exception embedded in the first command.
1) is only applied in the case of conflicts between a prescription and a
prohibition. By contrast, the most favoured solution for conflicts among
prescriptions is samuccaya, i.e., fulfilling both prescriptions (e.g.
“Do x given a” and “Do y given a” can be solved by doing both x and y
given the situation a). If this is not possible, Mīmāṃsā texts speak of
recurring to vikalpa (equivalent to flipping a coin to decide which
prescription to fulfil). This is the least preferred option, because it
implies disregarding one of the two prescriptions. Hence, vikalpa is
reserved to the limit case of exactly equivalent prescriptions (e.g.,
“bake a rice-cake” and “bake a millet-cake”) which fulfil exactly the
same role and are interchangeable. What about the intermediate cases,
i.e., cases in which the two prescriptions cannot be both fulfilled, but
there are reasons to prefer one over the other? One applies bādha, i.e.,
suspension of the more general prescription in favour of the more
specific one. Suspension is generally not the most preferred solution
for deontic conflicts, because it implies the temporary suspension of a
command. Mīmāṃsā authors prefer to rephrase both conflicting commands in
a way as to embed one within the other in order to respect both. This
embedding of one within the other implies the embedment of an exception
within a general rule. I.e., out of the conflict between “Do x in every
case” and “Don’t do x in case a”, one embeds the second command as an
exception of the first as “Do x in every case but a”. This device is
called paryudāsa and it is the preferred way to solve conflicts between
a prescription and a prohibition. But why is it the case that the
conflict between two prescriptions cannot be solved through the device
of paryudāsa (i.e., embed the more specific command as an exception of
the more general one)?  
Is it because paryudāsa is by definition reserved for cases of conflicts
between prescriptions and prohibitions? Is it an a priori decision or a
reasoned one? I am currently working on this topic (reasoned
suggestions, as usual, are welcome).
