+++
title = "A ThreeHour Tour"
full_title = "A ThreeHour Tour"
date = "2013-01-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/15/a-three-hour-tour/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/15/a-three-hour-tour/).

A Three-Hour Tour

New genetic analysis indicates that Australian Aboriginals, at least
those in the northern part of Australia, picked up about 11% of their
ancestry from India, relatively recently – about 140 generations ago.
4000-5000 years, depending on generation length.

Lots of interesting things happened in Australia around that time.
Previously Australia had a Middle Stone Age technology, no better than
the Neanderthal toolkit. But around that time, microlithic stone tools
showed up, along with new food processing techniques and the dingo. Very
few dingos – they’re genetically similar, very much so. There might have
been a single pregnant bitch. Population density went up by something
like a factor of five. Altogether, the transition is similar to what
happened when anatomically modern humans replaced Neanderthals in
Europe.

Let assume that this new analysis is correct. How could this have
happened? There was never any significant colony -archeologically, it
would stand out like a sore thumb. India had all kinds of useful
technology that never made it to Australia, above all agriculture.

So the problem is this: what historical process ends up contributing
some key technology and 11% of the genome, while failing to transmit the
vast majority of available culture and technology?

Here’s a scenario. A ship from some Indian civilization about 4000 years
ago \[maybe Indus\] loses its way and ends up crashing on the shore of
Arnhem Land. Like most ships, its crew is all male. They survive the
landing, and end up warring with a local tribe. Eventually, they kill
off most of the men and annex the sobbing women. The new tribe has 5x
higher carrying capacity, essentially due to better technology, and
they’re militarily superior as well – better weapons and tactics. They
expand and expand, picking up more and more old Australian genes as they
do so. Not as an empire – they’re too simple for that – but the tribes
that descend from them keep winning. They speak the ancestor of the
Macro-Pama-Nyungan languages, which originates as a mix between their
old-Dravidian language (from the men) and some local Australian tongue
(from the women).

In the post-Columbian world, there have been events that could have gone
this way, but the players always ran into Europeans again before
anything really interesting had time to happen.

One funny thing about this scenario: the sailors lose almost all of
their civilization, and probably thought they were descending into
savagery. On the other hand, the locals probably thought of the
castaways as incredibly advanced, magicians or gods. They were both
right.

