+++
title = "Group Selection"
full_title = "Group Selection"
date = "2013-01-10"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/10/group-selection-and-homosexuality/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/10/group-selection-and-homosexuality/).

Group Selection (and homosexuality)

You can imagine situations in which natural selection would favor an
increase in frequency for a trait that aided group survival while
hurting individual reproductive success – but it’s not all that easy.
Here’s the problem: imagine a situation in which some individuals in the
group have an allele that causes them to fight in a way that saves the
collective – the catch is that some get killed in the process. Members
of the tribe that don’t have this allele are saved as well, but they
don’t pay the price. At the end of this fight, the frequency of the
self-sacrificing allele has gone down, not up. So how can the altruistic
allele hang around? How would it ever have become common in the first
place?

If the altruistic act (defined as one that increases the fitness of
another individuals while reducing personal fitness) is aimed at close
relatives, an altruistic allele can succeed. As Haldane once said, “I
would lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins”. It’s called
kin selection. Close relatives are more likely to carry a copy of that
same altruistic allele than the average bear, so altruistic acts focused
on close relatives can pay off – can cause the causal alleles to
increase in frequency. This is particularly so if circumstances allow
very big payoff from altruistic acts, for example, species that nest in
cavities. Successful defense of a breach in the nest is tactically easy,
rather like Horatius at the bridge, and greatly increases the fitness of
many relatives.

You also see a kind of altruism among some infectious organisms. Some
bacteria make a toxin that furthers the infection process. Each
individual bacterium would be better off if he stopped making that toxin
and relied on all the other bacteria to do it – it would save energy –
but if the infection starts with a single organism, the descendants are
all closely related and kin selection can favor expensive cooperation.
In some cases, like cholera or diphtheria, phages carry genes that code
for the production of toxins. You can think of this as a method of
*forcing* high relatedness.

Some people have suggested that human homosexuality is an adaptation
produced by group selection. I can’t see how this could possibly work.
They would have to do stuff for close relatives – lots of stuff. This is
a quantitative question: if they concentrated on the closest possible
relatives, nephews and nieces, they’d have to cause four more to survive
than would otherwise. We’re talking a behavior stronger and more
effective than mother love. It doesn’t exist. And how would being
homosexual help?

In some other loony scenarios, homosexuality was favored by benefits to
the group as a whole. Disregarding the fact that this kind of selection
is almost impossible in the first place, and that we don’t even find
homosexuality in most hunter-gatherer populations, what is it they are
supposed to have done to save or aid the tribe?

