+++
title = "Not Even Yong"
full_title = "Not Even Yong"
date = "2015-10-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/10/17/not-even-yong/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/10/17/not-even-yong/).

Not Even Yong

There was some noise at ASHG about someone (Tuck Ngun) claiming that
he’d found evidence supporting that idea (published a couple of years
ago) that homosexuality might be caused by epigenetic leakage. Which I
[doubted](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/12/homosexuality-epigenetics-and-zebras/).
Everyone seems to have disbelieved Ngun’s claim, mainly because the
study had no statistical power. He looked at discordant identical twins
(which I think could be very informative if done right, although low N)
and tried to see if some subset of the epigenetic state of thousands of
loci might predict homosexuality.  Multiple hypothesis testing,
uncorrected, bad.

Ngun’s work is probably
[worthless](http://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2015/10/no-scientists-have-not-found-the-gay-gene/410059/).
It doesn’t *disprove* the leaky-epigenetics theory, it’s just no
evidence at all.

What you want to do is look for is a difference in the brain between
those discordant identical twins. Sure, geneticists want to do
genetics, but that’s not the way to go in this case. Look at neuron
subpopulations, something like narcolepsy. More likely in the
hypothalamus than the frontal lobes. While you’re at it, you’ll likely
find out quite a bit about the neuroanatomical basis of male sexual
behavior.

Of course, no one could get funding for this, and if someone did
succeed, he would become an unemployable pariah… Not every researcher is
that curiosity-driven.

Here is one scenario for the discovery of the cause that actually could
happen – although there are others.. Consider the case of MPTP
(1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine), a synthetic street drug
that, by accident, zapped the neuron subpopulation involved in
Parkinson’s disease. Instant Parkinson’s, in young people. We learned a
lot about the disease from those brave junkies.

Posit a new synthetic heroin, another China White, that by sheer
accident zaps the particular neuron subpopulation that
triggers/implements male sexual attraction (and nothing else) .
Suddenly, Bob’s not *just* your uncle any more. With that kind of clue,
we’d get to the bottom of things in no time. There would be no
fundamental difficulty in determining the naturally-occurring causes of
that particular neural ablation, such as infection, toxins, or in rare
cases mutation (all of which we have seen with Parkinson’s disease).

Then we would understand.

