+++
title = "Patrick Wyman Luther,"
full_title = "Patrick Wyman Luther, Columbus and Gutenberg"
date = "2021-07-20"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/patrick-wyman-luther-columbus-and"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/patrick-wyman-luther-columbus-and).

Patrick Wyman: Luther, Columbus and Gutenberg



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F82f10d07-fe28-450d-8ce3-35c52bf2e10e_500x500.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/patrick-wyman-luther-columbus-and?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

Today on this bonus episode of *Unsupervised Learning* I’m excited to
talk to [Patrick Wyman](https://twitter.com/Patrick_Wyman) about his new
book, [The Verge: Reformation, Renaissance, and Forty Years that Shook
the
World](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B08P1MF813/geneexpressio-20).

Full disclosure, I enjoyed [The
Verge](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B08P1MF813/geneexpressio-20),
and a review will be posted from me on [National Review
Online](https://www.nationalreview.com/author/razib-khan/) within the
next week.

Wyman is the host of [Tides of
History](https://www.stitcher.com/show/tides-of-history), a podcast
about history and assorted topics which I recommend to everyone (I’ve
been a
[guest](https://www.stitcher.com/show/tides-of-history/episode/genetics-and-the-transformation-of-prehistory-interview-with-spencer-wells-and-razib-khan-68520164)).
If you’ve listened to him speak at length, you won’t be very surprised
by the topics and style of writing in [The
Verge](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B08P1MF813/geneexpressio-20).
The narrative does a great job balancing the academic with the engaging.

After reading his book I was curious to ask Wyman about how he wove
social and economic history into a persona-driven narrative. We talk at
length about the particular details of the significance of the
40-year-period he covers, and whether Martin Luther was a necessary man
(as opposed to just being sufficient).

Patrick and I also tackle meta-historical questions such as the
importance of “great men” versus forces-of-history, and whether the
Protestant Reformation was inevitable due to technological changes. It’s
a wide-ranging conversation, so if you are interested in the
nitty-gritty of historical processes I think you’ll enjoy it.

**Cross-promotion:** The six-part series on Finland is done, check it
out:

-   **[Part
    one:](https://razib.substack.com/p/i-see-finland-in-the-strangest-places)**Duke
    Tales: shades of Finnish cultural weirdness in my own backyard

-   **[Part
    two:](https://razib.substack.com/p/weirdness-as-a-national-pastime)**
    Weirdness as a national pastime: culture

-   **[Part
    three:](https://razib.substack.com/p/go-west-young-siberian)** Go
    West Young Siberian: genetics findings

-   **[Part
    four:](https://razib.substack.com/p/from-deepest-siberia-to-europes-edge)**From
    deepest Siberia to Europe’s edge: more genetics

-   **[Part
    five](https://razib.substack.com/p/frontier-finns-cabins-rakes-and-indians)**:
    Frontier Finns: cabins, rakes & Indians

-   **[Part
    six](https://razib.substack.com/p/finnish-brains-baiting-and-bottlenecks):**Finnish
    brains, baiting and bottlenecks: education and medical genetics

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F2019b3f7-01a3-4e50-9293-ed2193e48e8e_1200x900.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

