+++
title = "Beyond the removal of"
full_title = "Beyond the removal of suffering"
date = "2017-10-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/01/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/01/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).

Beyond the removal of suffering

[Last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth)
I discussed Jan Westerhoff’s potent objection to [naturalized
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/):
if there is no rebirth then we can end our suffering simply by
[committing
suicide](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/without-rebirth-suicide/).
Westerhoff takes this objection as a reason to accept rebirth. I do not.
Rather, I take it as pointing to a deeper problem with some core
Buddhist teachings as they are usually understood.

Probably the first deep philosophical thought I had came at age six in
India, when I first heard of renouncer traditions: I proclaimed, “if you
free yourself from sorrow, you also free yourself from joy.” It seemed
then, and seemed to me now, that a life without joy would not be a life
worth living. That is a major reason I [decided to get
married](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/)
and live the household life, rather than the monastic life that
Śāntideva and the Pali suttas praise as superior. For them, the
householder’s life is only a second-best option for those of us too weak
to pursue the higher monastic path. I do admire monks’
[single-minded](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/11/philosophical-single-mindedness-2/)
focus on liberation, but the texts have never quite convinced me that
their life is the *best* for human beings to follow. I think the joys of
the household life *are* worthy. I would be interested to know whether
Westerhoff believes himself to keep to the household life only because
of his own weakness. (Westerhoff and I were both at this year’s [IABS
conference](http://www.iabs2017-uoft.ca/) and I regrettably did not get
a chance to meet him. I did catch a glimpse or two of him, however, and
from his handsome curls of hair I infer that if he is a monk he does
rather a good job of concealing it.)

So I think it is fair to ask: for us Buddhists, should *dukkhanirodha*,
the cessation of suffering, be the *only* thing we strive for? I think
it is reasonable of Westerhoff to say that “The central goal of the
Buddhist path is the complete and permanent eradication of suffering
(*duḥkha*).” But why, even for those who follow this path, should we
take this as our *only* goal?

It is not clear to me why *dukkhanirodha* should take precedence over
all other possible values. It may be, [as Śāntideva
says](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/the-buddhist-problem-of-value/),
that “no one disputes” that dukkha should be prevented. But *many*
dispute the idea that the prevention of dukkha should take precedence
over all other values! As before, I read this claim of Śāntideva’s as
[MacIntyre reads John Stuart
Mill](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/the-buddhist-problem-of-value/)
is right again: it is perfectly reasonable of Mill to say that happiness
is desirable because people do actually desire it. But MacIntyre is also
right to note: it is not at all reasonable for Mill to say that
happiness is the *only* thing desirable, or that all desirable things
are reducible to happiness. And so likewise here: even if we grant the
First Noble Truth, that all physical and mental things are dukkha, we
might still stand with the likes of Nietzsche and *affirm* at least some
of that dukkha. Yes, I know this is suffering, this is unsatisfactory,
this is illness, this is impermanent, this is essenceless – *but it is
worth it*.

And once we do say it, then we have an easy response when Westerhoff
says: “for the Buddhist naturalist the choice appears to be between a
reduced amount of suffering (through practice) or a complete and
permanent removal of all suffering (through suicide). It is difficult to
see why the former should appear to be the more attractive option.”
(153) Why? Because there is more to life than the removal of suffering,
of course!

To such a view Westerhoff is within his rights to respond, as he does to
different conceptions of nirvana in his footnote 19: “Such
reconceptualizations make it doubtful, I would argue, whether we are
still speaking about a naturalized form of Buddhism, and not simply
about a kind of naturalism.” For people who take Buddhism seriously it
makes no sense to say that [one is automatically a Buddhist by virtue of
calling oneself
such](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/youre-no-buddhist/). But
at the same time, a claim that self-proclaimed Buddhists are *not*
Buddhists requires justification: for it to stand, one cannot merely say
that one *would* argue it, one needs to actually argue it. Until such
argument is forthcoming, I continue to feel comfortable applying the
label “Buddhist” to those of us who strive to reduce suffering, as one
goal among others, and see the advice offered by sūtras and suttas as
our best fount of wisdom for doing so.

It matters significantly in this regard that most Buddhists recognized
as such have not been *only* Buddhists. [Thai Buddhists have always
loved and learned from the
Rāmāyana](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/12/the-christian-christmas/),
a story whose villain is identified with Buddhist Sri Lanka. Its story
is immortalized in murals on the country’s most sacred temple,
surrounding its most prestigious monks. Is it there only for the purpose
of ending suffering? Are these monks not real Buddhists? A yes answer to
either of these questions would not be self-evidently false, but it
would seem very hard to justify.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/)
