+++
title = "The Geography of"
full_title = "The Geography of Philosophy"
date = "2017-10-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/20/the-geography-of-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/20/the-geography-of-philosophy/).

The Geography of Philosophy

As many of you may have seen on [Daily
Nous](http://dailynous.com/2017/10/19/2-6-milllion-grant-geography-philosophy/),
Edouard Machery (Pittsburgh) and Stephen Stich (Rutgers), along with
anthropologist H. Clark Barrett (UCLA) have just been awarded a US$2.5
million grant from the John Templeton Foundation. It will fund a project
titled, “[The Geography of Philosophy: An Interdisciplinary
Cross-Cultural Exploration of Universality and Diversity in Fundamental
Philosophical
Concepts.](https://www.templeton.org/grant/the-geography-of-philosophy-an-interdisciplinary-cross-cultural-exploration-of-universality-and-diversity-in-fundamental-philosophical-concepts)”
We have posted about conferences related to this topic
[before](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/08/philosophy-meets-cultural-diversity/),
and both Anand Vaidya and I have been involved in some of them (most
recently, for me, at least, the[International Conference on
Ethno-Epistemology, Kanazawa, Japan in
2016](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/22/epistemology-and-comparative-philosophy-in-confluence-and-the-apa-blog/)).

It will be interesting to see the methodology they pursue and to what
extent they make use of experts in (Indian, Chinese, African)
philosophy, as contrasted to what analytic philosophers often call “folk
intuitions” about concepts like knowledge and truth. A description of
their project:

*Throughout the history of philosophy, many thinkers have urged that
some fundamental philosophical concepts are universal–used by all
rational people. Historians and anthropologists have often been
skeptical of these claims. Recently, cultural psychologists and
experimental philosophers have begun to explore empirically whether
fundamental philosophical concepts are shared across cultures. The
results of these studies have been fascinating, provocative and
equivocal. The goals of this project are (i) to move this exciting
endeavor forward by dramatically expanding the methodologies, the range
of cultures considered, and the cultural and disciplinary diversity of
the investigators engaged in the inquiry; (ii) to motivate and enable
researchers around the world to become involved in cross-cultural,
interdisciplinary research on philosophical concepts by sponsoring
workshops in Africa, Asia and South America where our research teams can
interact with scientists and scholars in the region; (iii) to present
our findings both in scholarly publications and in an integrated format
accessible to non-specialists; (iv) to foster discussion about the
implications of the findings for venerable philosophical debates and for
practical contemporary issues.*
