+++
title = "Hermeneutics,"
full_title = "Hermeneutics, “Ricoeurian” and “Jaiminīya,” and the Question of Writing"
date = "2017-10-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/23/hermeneutics-ricoeurian-and-jaiminiya-and-the-question-of-writing/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/23/hermeneutics-ricoeurian-and-jaiminiya-and-the-question-of-writing/).

Hermeneutics, “Ricoeurian” and “Jaiminīya,” and the Question of Writing

I am a big fan of Paul Ricoeur. It’s shame, I think, that he never
learned Sanskrit, because he was deeply interested in a number of issues
that were of critical importance to Indian thinkers: the production of
meaning through linguistic signs; the relation between text, discourse,
understanding and action; the centrality to understanding of figures
such as metaphor; the transformation of the meaning of a text in its
reception among historical readers.

One thing that has bothered me, though, about Ricoeur’s thought, evident
especially in his book *From Text to Action* (1986) and a collection of
essays called *Hermeneutics* (2013), is his emphasis on writing as a
technology for “stabilizing” discourse. For Ricoeur, writing and writing
alone is what transforms language from “discourse,” a happening in time
that (in his words) “articulates a subject of discourse, an act of
discourse, a content of discourse, a meta-linguistic code, an
extra-linguistic reference, and an interlocutor” (*Hermeneutics* p. 12)
into a stable textual object that can be encountered at a limitless
distance from its original author. I understand the distinction between
an evanescent happening of discourse and a stable textual object, and I
do think it’s important for all of the reasons Ricoeur gives, but
obviously, as someone who spends a certain amount of time with a system
of thought dedicated to the interpretation of texts that are “not
supposed to be” written and were certainly “composed” without the use of
writing, red flags go off whenever I read arguments like the following:

> On the one hand, the phenomenon of inscription gives a special
> authority to what is written down. On the other hand, the distance
> thereby established from speaking aloud engenders a suspicion — and a
> question: how could such a meaningful effect have been produced?
> (*ibid.*)

Now we know that precisely this question was posed, insistently, by both
the defenders and detractors of the authority of the Vedic texts, and we
also know that these texts were not “written down,” or if they were,
their being written was entirely secondary to their being “remembered”
(*āmnāta-*). Ricoeur certainly didn’t mean to, but with his presumption
that writing is the underlying cause for the “stabilization” of the
text, first of all, and secondly of the reflections that this
stabilization engenders, he is tacitly supporting an argument like those
of [Eric Havelock](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_A._Havelock) and
[Walter Ong](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_J._Ong) along the
following lines: literacy, especially the “alphabetic literacy” of
European societies, is necessary in order to ask certain types of
questions and develop certain types of thought, and hence there is a
cognitive gap between “oral societies” and “literate societies.”
According to this kind of argument, Mīmāṁsā authors should not have been
able to raise certain types of questions regarding the gap between, as
Ricoeur called it, the text’s *authority* and its *genesis*, and if they
did, it was only because they already had a well-developed notion of a
text as a *written* object, regardless of whether they spoke of the
Vedas themselves in those terms.

There seem to me to be two ways of proceeding.

One approach would be to say that Ricoeur is just slightly mistaken, and
that the consequences he elicits—the gap between authority and genesis,
the distinction between the deixis patterns of everday spoken discourse
and those of a written text, the different stylistic codes that apply to
spoken and written discourse—are not triggered by *written* discourse
per se, but rather by *stabilized* discourse. Writing is one way of
stabilizing a discourse, but it is not the only way. A discourse can be
stabilized by being memorized and recited, taught from generation to
generation, or sung, all of which are “oral” modalities, or possibly in
other ways.

But another approach would say that, despite their representations of
the Vedas as “timeless” texts, Mīmāṁsakas related to those texts, and
analyzed them, in a way that was deeply conditioned by their own
exposure to written texts. In other words, people began interrogating
oral texts as texts, which raised interpretive problems distinct from
those of everyday discourse, only because they already lived in a
“literate” culture. I think this is an interesting approach, but one
that has a number of real problems. First of all, the action theory of
language and interpretation that Mīmāṁsakas proposed did not rest upon a
qualitative distinction between “discourse” and “text,” but rather
treated Vedic texts as an instance—indeed, the prototypical instance—of
discourse in general. Second, I can’t immediately think of any aspects
of the Mīmāṁsā project which are obviously indebted to, or impossible
without, literacy. Of course, the proliferation of commentary is
impossible to imagine in the absence of a manuscript culture, but the
system of thought itself, as we find it in Jaimini and presumably also
his earliest commentators, doesn’t seem to rely on or refer to writing.

(I leave aside a third way, which would deny that Indian systematic
thought about oral texts—whether the Vedas, or the Jain scriptures, or
Pāṇini’s grammar, or whatever—is actually “systematic thought” in the
Havelock/Ong sense, because that position seems indefensible and
ignorant to me.)
