+++
title = "The political path vs"
full_title = "The political path vs the Buddhist path"
date = "2017-10-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/29/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/29/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/).

The political path vs. the Buddhist path

I presented about [Disengaged
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/)
at the [International Association of Buddhist
Studies](http://www.iabs2017-uoft.ca/) conference in August. My talk was
paired with a presentation by [Frédéric
Richard](https://www.unil.ch/ircm/fr/home/menuinst/chercheurseuses/frederic-richard.html)
on a topic that did not initially appear to be related: the Tibetan
government in exile. As it turned out, the papers proved fascinating
mirror images of each other.

There are two different ways that the Disengaged Buddhists critique
politics. One has to do with [external
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/): the
sorts of goods that politics provides, like material goods and social
status, is [neutral or worse to our real
well-being](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/).
The other, though, is about anger and ruthlessness. I think the most
emblematic quote in this respect is this one from [Aśvaghoṣa’s
Buddhacarita](https://www.ancient-buddhist-texts.net/Texts-and-Translations/Buddhacarita/Buddhacarita.pdf),
which criticizes political engagement on both grounds:

> As for the tradition that kings obtained final emancipation while
> remaining in their homes, this is not the case. How can the dharma of
> salvation \[*mokṣadharma*\] in which quietude \[*śama*\] predominates
> be reconciled with the dharma of kings \[*rājadharma*\] in which
> severity of action \[*taikṣṇya*\] predominates? If a king delights in
> quietude, his kingdom collapses; if his mind turns to his kingdom, his
> quietude is ruined. For quietude and severity are incompatible, like
> the union of water which is cold and fire which is hot. (Buddhacarita
> IX.48-49, Johnston translation)

[Some Engaged Buddhists have
claimed](http://www.thezensite.com/ZenEssays/CriticalZen/Engaged_Buddhism.htm)
that “Buddhists have never accepted a dualistic split between
‘spiritual’ and ‘social’ domains.” Here, by contrast, not only is a
split between politics and liberation explicitly articulated, but the
two domains are proclaimed *incompatible*. I don’t think this is big
news to longtime readers of Love of All Wisdom, who have read my
[posts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/living-through-the-00s/)
on
[Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/politics-as-ethical-analogy-plato-and-candrakirti/)
[anti-politics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/);
Buddhist anti-political tradition goes deep. And it’s not the purpose of
this post to go back over that.

Rather, what is interesting to me is how ideas from my talk, like
Aśvaghoṣa’s, resonated with very different ideas in Richard’s talk.
Especially, what was new to me in that talk was Richard’s discussion of
the [Tibetan Youth
Congress](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tibetan_Youth_Congress) (TYC), a
political organization lobbying for Tibetan independence – by violent
means if necessary. Most of us are probably familiar with the present
Dalai Lama’s explicit advocacy of a nonviolent struggle for
independence. According to Richard, the TYC believes that Buddhism
itself inhibits that struggle for independence, because of its
nonviolence.

There are some questions of interpretation to be raised here. [Recent
work by Stephen
Jenkins](https://journals.ub.uni-heidelberg.de/index.php/jiabs/article/viewFile/9284/3145)
has questioned whether “nonviolence” *per se* is actually a traditional
Buddhist idea; before Gandhi, the idea of *ahiṃsā* meant only
“non-harm”, in a way that has some subtle but important differences. So
the Dalai Lama’s “nonviolence” may be less traditional than we now
think. But I think those are not the most important points in this
context.

What is striking to me, rather, is how close the Tibetan Youth
Congress’s views (as summarized by Richard) are to those of Aśvaghoṣa.
The two advocate diametrically opposite paths of action – but what they
*agree* on is that the paths *are* diametrically opposite! One can
pursue Buddhist tranquility, *or* one can engage in the severity of
politics – *but pick one*. They have very different views on which one
we should pick, but can agree that either one is muddled if we try to
have it both ways. To combine political action and the Buddhist quest
for liberation is, on both their views, a [vicious
mean](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/virtuous-and-vicious-means/).

I am not sure I would go so far as they do. I suspect that it *is*
possible to combine political action with the Buddhist path, as the
Dalai Lama or Thich Nhat Hanh do. But I think Aśvaghoṣa and the TYC may
well be right that the two *inhibit* each other. Combining the two is
harder than we think; there are good reasons why people might seek only
one path in its purity.

My own experience in recent years has confirmed this. A few years ago I
told myself I could be politically engaged without anger – [said so
publicly, on this
blog](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/08/love-is-better-than-anger-jack-layton-1950-2011/)
– but in the end I wound up [as angry as
ever](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/).
I have to agree with Aśvaghoṣa that political engagement is *dangerous*
to our mental well-being, even when we already recognize that there is a
danger.

And so too I think the Tibetan Youth Congress is probably on to
something as well. Little is to be gained by gratuitous, indiscriminate
violence, but many political goals may well require being violent at
strategic points. And one may well *need* to be harsh and angry to make
them happen. The American left seems to be a lot more energized now that
it is so outraged – even though this *does* seem [bad for its members’
own
well-being](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/).

It is tempting to boil this all down to a question of “Which one should
we pick?” – which I think is exactly what Aśvaghoṣa and the TYC both do.
In my youth I would have unhesitatingly chosen the TYC’s path in any
conflict between them; now I lean more toward Aśvaghoṣa’s. Yet I *do*
still think the best life might be found somewhere in the middle – but,
and this is crucial, not just *anywhere* in the middle. It is easy, all
too easy, to find oneself in a vicious mean, where one’s attempts at
Buddhist tranquility make one less politically effective, *and* where
one’s political anger interferes with one’s tranquility. I think I ended
up there myself, for a while at least. It is much *easier* to choose one
path and walk it exclusively. Yet to live the best life one can – a life
that [acknowledges
joy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering)
while still reducing suffering – I think it might still be worth the
grave risk of trying to combine the two. But if we are to do that
successfully, we must remind ourselves that it *is* a risk, and remain
ever vigilant of that risk.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path)
