+++
title = "Take my wife, please !"
full_title = "Take my wife, please !"
date = "2019-03-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/03/15/take-my-wife-please/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/03/15/take-my-wife-please/).

Take my wife, please !

[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/iberian-y.jpg?w=640&h=481)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/03/iberian-y.jpg)

There’s a new paper out in Science – ” The genomic history of the
Iberian Peninsula over the past 8000 years” . It discusses genetic
change over time, from hunter-gatherer days, the arrival of the
Anatolian-ancestry farmers, and the coming of the Indo-Europeans.

The chart above shows what happened when the Indo-Europeans show up.
Autosomal steppe ancestry goes from zero to \~40%, but on the
Y-chromosome, it goes from zero to 100% over a few hundred years. As
quoted in the New York Times, archaeologists **ruled out violence as a
possible cause**. \[ ” I cannot say what it is,”said Roberto Risch, an
archaeologist from the Autonomous University of Barcelona, who was not
involved in the new studies/ But he ruled out wars or massacres as the
cause. “It’s not a particularly violent time,”, he said.

Instead, Dr. Risch suspects “a political process” is the explanation. \]

For background: archaeologists have saying things like this for many
years. They denied that there had been major migrations and population
replacements in prehistory \[**proven wildly wrong** \]. They could find
a Neolithic fort in England covered with scattered bone fragments and
suggest that it must have been a place where bodies were exposed for
excarnation, like the Parsee Towers of Silence.

They’re nuts.

To those who like the notion that the Indo-Europeans triumphed because
they carried in bubonic plague ( or some other pathogen) that blasted
immunologically naive EEF farmers: find me a plague that only kills men
– all of them.

