+++
title = "It’s Time"
full_title = "It’s Time"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2019/11/26/its-time/"
date = "2019-11-26"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2019/11/26/its-time/).

It’s Time

They say here that when all your milk teeth have fallen out, and when you can reach your right arm across your head to touch your left ear, you are ready. Ready for school.

In India, the Gurukulam system started at seven or eight. This was the age you left home to go live with your guru and learn all that he could teach you. Rudolf Steiner also connected the milk teeth transition with a switch from the hands to the heart, from the physical to the emotional. Steiner schools tend to move children at this stage from the outdoor play-based kindergarten to the classroom where they learn, among other things, to read and write for the first time. And in some countries, like Finland, mainstream schooling itself starts not at four or five but at seven.

While we have long since been aware of and thought about the magical age of seven, we weren’t sure if it would indeed be a turning point for Uppu. Circumstances though recently made us re-think our overall life plan and around the same time, in the run up to his seventh birthday and with two teeth down but many to go, Uppu started saying he wanted to go to school.

We have always been very open to the idea of school as and when the children want to go. Unschooling for us has worked, and is still working, beautifully from a learning perspective. What Uppu craves though, and what we feel too he is missing out on especially now that fellow gang-mates Elena and Ethan are no longer living here, is day-in day-out friends. There are always plenty of people, children and adults, passing through to keep things varied and interesting here but, whether old friends making repeated but short visits or new faces staying for a month and then continuing their travels, they are still just passing through. However much we try to provide for his need to have mates to muck around with through the day, it is almost impossible outside school. The fact is that almost every child his age and above goes to school and that in itself has become something of a sore point. I think he is fed up of always being the odd one out.

So we welcome the idea of him going to school. But where?

There are lots of options. Locally, there are the very strict English-medium private schools and then the Kannada government schools. Further afield, there are some excellent alternative schools, including the Krishnamurti official and spinoff establishments. Almost all though require being based in a big city, bar the few residential schools which are applicable only for older children and are heavily over-subscribed. Things are a little different in Goa and Auroville, where there is a vibrant alternative community and a range of interesting schools – and of course a melting pot of all kinds of mainstream-escapees, from the arty to the completely insane, among whom we feel quite at home.

In a way then we are spoilt for choice but all – except the local ones which we have ruled out for various reasons – would necessitate a move and somehow as a family we don’t see ourselves as having much of a future either in an Indian metro or in Goa or Auroville. So we found ourselves taking the rather major decision (and in honour of which we all shaved our heads at Tirupati) to move to England. There, even in a small village, we have more than enough schooling and unschooling options on our doorstep and hopefully the chance to lead a rustic, if not wild, life together rather than Gautam having to commute 500km every weekend just to see us.

So our happy existence here must come to an end, for the time being at least, in another eight months or so. I have always said that I would have no regrets about leaving our jungle home if we had to because the time spent here has given us so much, and I stand by that. Still it is hard to think of leaving a place we have poured so much of ourselves into over the last four years, and in which we saw ourselves living and growing for many more. What will become of this place we are not sure. Perhaps it will call someone to itself, as it called us, a custodian to care for it. Or perhaps it will revel in its freedom, and we will return to find the jungle reigning supreme once more.

All we can hope is that it will continue to welcome us home.
