+++
title = "Landscapes"
full_title = "Landscapes"
date = "2018-09-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/09/05/landscapes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/09/05/landscapes/).

Landscapes

Sometimes rare experimental outcomes tell you a lot, as when a few of
the alpha particles impinging on a gold foil were scattered straight
back \[Geiger-Marsden experiment\] , implying that most of the mass and
positive charge of an atom is concentrated in a tiny nucleus.

Let’s think about the [Jim
Twins](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/04/21/biological-determinism/).
Chevys, Miller Lite, migraines, chain-smoking, finger-nail chewing,
baseball hating, vacationing on the same three-block beach near St,
Petersburg, both leaving love notes around the house, both building a
circular white bench around a tree in the front yard.Tests of
intelligence, personality, heart rate, and brain waves were about as
similar as the same person taking the test twice.

Let’s face it: the Jim Twins were the same guy twice. At least in this
case, Nature utterly pwned Nurture.

Sure, neither could have driven a Chevy in 1500, or had a Miller Lite –
so the environment influenced them all right*, but it influenced them in
exactly the same way*. Your preferences can be your constraints. They
were exposed to similar environments ( raised in similar small towns in
Ohio) – but there are always differences. Different adoptive parents,
different schools, different teachers, different friends – but none of
those differences seem to have had any lasting consequences.

If many small influences kept nudging them, differences should have
grown with time, like a random walk. Didn’t happen. Along the same
line, heritability of intelligence increases with age: people converge
onto the predicted phenotype. Again, little differences don’t
accumulate.

In order for that to be the case – the development process has to be
canalized. Most environmental differences must end up having no effect –
they don’tgenerate differences between twins. Let me try an analogy.
Think of a river basin: a drop of rain that falls into the Rio Grande
basin is going to end up in the Caribbean, whether it lands in Taos or
Albuquerque or El Paso. It matters w*hich* basin a drop lands ( Rio
Grande vs Colorado), but it doesn’t matter *where* in that basin lands.

What can knock you into a different basin? Make you a different person?
Well, trauma can: closed head injury, firing a steel rod through your
head (Phineas Gage), serious illness ( Helen Keller), shortage of a
vital nutrient ( iodine and cretins). However those aren’t the
environmental influences people *want* to exist: they want going to
school X instead of school Y to make a difference (in your capabilities
or personality: X and Y can certainly put different ideas in your head,
for instance if X=More Science and Y = Commie Martyrs).Or, winning the
lottery ought to make people different (in personality and capabilities)
– but it doesn’t. Not in typical modern circumstances, anyhow: in
medieval times t might well have kept you from starving to death.

The environment influences people want to exist, mostly don’t.

In order to push people into a different basin of attraction, make them
a different person, you apparently need to to thump them pretty hard. In
the cases we understand, that means damage.

Usually when a guy is homosexual, his identical twin is not. Family
environment doesn’t look to be the cause: something thumped the
homosexual twin.



