+++
title = "An interview with Matt"
full_title = "An interview with Matt Dasti"
date = "2016-08-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/08/20/an-interview-with-matt-dasti/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/08/20/an-interview-with-matt-dasti/).

An interview with Matt Dasti

[Matt Dasti](https://sites.google.com/site/matthewdasti/Home) is
Associate Professor at [Bridgewater State University in the Philosophy
Department](http://www.bridgew.edu/academics/colleges-departments/department-philosophy)
and one of the bloggers here at the IPB. Matt works mainly in Nyāya–he
has a forthcoming translation with Stephen Phillips of portions of the
*Nyāya-sūtras* and early commentaries.He completed his PhD at
theUniversity of Texas at Austin in 2010 (he and I were classmates for
a few years).

**1. What are you working on right now, and what do you hope to achieve
by it?**  
I’m working (with Stephen Phillips) on a select, annotated translation
of the *Nyāya-sūtra* with early commentaries, mainly Vātsyāyana,
Uddyotakara, and Vācaspatimiśra. I started this book project because I
am convinced that wider appreciation of Indian philosophy will not occur
until we have accessible primary texts that we can hand people. Right
now, there is a much out there in terms of quality scholarly articles
and monographs and a number of translations that can serve those of us
who are specialists and can reverse engineer clunky translations back
into Sanskrit. But we are lacking a wide range of accessible,
well-written translations of quality texts that an interested
non-specialist could read without undue fatigue. Hopefully, this book
will help people better access the richness of early Nyāya. It will be
published by Hackett, and the translations they publish of both Greek
and Chinese philosophy are a model of what we hope to achieve. Besides
this, there are few things I enjoy more than reading *śāstra*. It’s a
pleasure.

**2. How did you come to study Indian philosophy, and how is it related
to your current position?**  
As young man, around 15 or so, my little band of friends and I thought
we were the only people in America (or New Jersey at least!) who saw
through the big lies and searched for genuine wisdom. We scoured used
bookstores for philosophical texts. For me, one of them included a
translation of the *Bhagavad-gītā*. I was smitten, and somehow made my
way to India after I graduated high school, and found myself frequenting
ashrams and the like when I returned. When I resumed my formal
education, my mentors at Rutgers encouraged my interests in history of
philosophy and gave me the confidence that I was fit for graduate school
and the academic world. One in particular suggested The University of
Texas at Austin as a place I could pursue both of my core interests in
Greek and Indian thought. At Texas, the Indian focus far outstripped the
focus upon Greece. At Rutgers, Matt Matsuda, Edwin Bryant, and Rob and
Martha Bolton were particularly kind and helpful in my early
development.

**3. What advice would you give to students wishing to pursue the study
of Indian philosophy?**  
I’m assuming you mean in an academic context. Given this, first, I’d
tell them to start learning the languages they need as early as they
can. Generally, it gets harder as you get older and it takes a few years
before you can read competently. And to stick with it. All you need is
time and discipline. Second, I’d suggest they only enroll in a PhD
program if they love the subject so much that they would be content to
learn a lot but not find a job. It’s not a good market. Finally, reach
out and find a way to connect with people who do it and are further down
the line from you. Share your work with them and ask for their advice.

**4. What have your major intellectual influences been, philosophical or
otherwise?**  
Leaving out many important people, first, the “historical” thinkers:
Plato made me fall in love with Philosophy. John Henry Newman made me
think about belief formation and tradition in new ways. The early
Naiyāyikas drew out and nourished my incipient concern to defend what
may be called a pluralist realism. Rāmānuja and his followers
obliterated my early fascination with Advaita and provided abeautiful
vision of a unifying Vedāntic worldview, which still delights in and
affirms the particular. Nietzsche helped me appreciate that without the
latter, much of the celebrated Indian spirituality runs the risk of
being a very loud “NO.” Confucius and Xunzi helped me rediscover ritual
and learn to value it. Epictetus, Zhaungzi, Rāmānuja and other
*karmayoga* theorists have taught me that I won’t be happy if I base my
joy on the luck of the roll (I’m still working on this one). Various
philosophers who are not scholars of India have helped me rethink
various aspects of Indian thought. Among contemporary philosophers, Bill
Alston reinforced my concern with realism and McDowell’s work helped me
think about Nyāya’s view of cognition in fresh ways. Of course, much of
what I’ve done is inspired by a mode of scholarship epitomized by B.K.
Matilal and Gregory Vlastos, which sees no sharp divide between doing
history of philosophy and just doing philosophy. Ganeri, Ram-Prasad and
others are pushing this ahead in inspiring ways.

**5. What do you think you’ll do next?**  
I’m really enjoying this work on the sūtras. There is so much more to be
done. I plan to continue. Besides this, I want to go further into the
question of whether you can have an otherworldly sensibility, which is
so prevalent as a motivation for our thinkers, without devaluing this
world; a “third way” which is open to classical sorts of mysticism
without denying the value of our current lives and relationships. In
some ways, this is part of the promise of tantra and bhakti, but it
often seems stunted in our classical thinkers, undercut by an
understandable hostility toward the temporal.

**6. Where do you think the field should go next, in terms of priorities
and projects?**  
I think there are so many smart people doing interesting work. I don’t
feel comfortable saying where the field should go. I will only repeat
that if we want Indian philosophy to become integrated into the broader
philosophical world and curricula, this will be best facilitated if some
people condescend to make quality bridge work for non-specialists and
undergraduate students. It seems to me that accessible, affordable(!),
well-written translations will be more effective and are more needed
than introductory-style works of scholarship. Of course, this effort has
many fronts. Some are doing the highest quality scholarly work that
bridges and transcends boundaries and speaks to other professional
philosophers. I guess I’m enough of a Kuhnian to figure that to change
broad attitudes you usually have to catch people early on and give their
generation time to take over the discipline.

**7. Finally, what books do you recommend to help our readers be taken
further into your philosophical world?**  
It may be easiest for me to say what books I’m exited to get into now
that I’m done teaching. In this sense, it is the “world I wish to
inhabit.” I have to admit that, in the last few weeks, I’ve been most
invested in finishing the [*Dark
Tower*](http://stephenking.com/darktower/) series. If spoilers weren’t a
problem, it would be fun to draw Ethan Mills and others into a
conversation on it below. Some interesting stuff for philosophers in
there. Besides this, the books that I gave a place of privilege at the
top of my summer catch-up reading list are Pierre Hadot’s *[Philosophy
as a Way of
Life](http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-0631180338.html)*,
Jonardon Ganeri’s *[The
Self](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-self-9780199652365?cc=sg&lang=en&)*,
Chris Framarin’s *[Hinduism and Environmental
Ethics](https://www.routledge.com/Hinduism-and-Environmental-Ethics-Law-Literature-and-Philosophy/Framarin/p/book/9780415711487)*,
and Jay Garfield’s *[Engaging
Buddhism](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/engaging-buddhism-9780190204341)*.

**Previous interviews in this occasional series:**  
[Shalini
Sinha](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/30/an-interview-w…asional-series)
