+++
title = "The Pretamata Problem,"
full_title = "The Pretamata Problem, Or the Tale of PostColonial Colonization"
date = "2015-02-08"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2015/02/08/the-pretamata-problem-or-the-tale-of-post-colonial-colonization/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2015/02/08/the-pretamata-problem-or-the-tale-of-post-colonial-colonization/).


					The Pretamata Problem, Or the Tale of Post-Colonial Colonization				



[ February 8, 2015 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2015/02/08/the-pretamata-problem-or-the-tale-of-post-colonial-colonization/ "Permalink to The Pretamata Problem, Or the Tale of Post-ColonialColonization")

-   in [Abrahma Mata
    Khandanam](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/abrahma-mata-khandanam/),
    [Delving into the
    Text](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/delving-into-the-text/),
    [Pretamata
    Khandanam](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/abrahma-mata-khandanam/pretamata-khandanam/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2015/02/08/the-pretamata-problem-or-the-tale-of-post-colonial-colonization/#respond)

# The Pretamata Problem, Or the Tale of Post-ColonialColonization

Being an ethnocentric and exclusive religious system is not a real
problem as many are trying to construct. Within the larger Dharma, many
sects, sub-sects, ritual and theological systems and philosophical
schools of thought have always been formed as primarily ethnocentric
entities, spurring other ethnic groups to develop their own parallels,
in a never-ending enterprise of creativity. Despite the shared cultural
baggage as well as genetic heritage, the fact remains that we are a
conglomerate of a few thousand jātis and tribes, with each having its
own unique familial and clan practices, all co-existing within the
complex of our Dharma. The “free market system” the Dharma has embraced
makes possible the tremendous creativity of the religious spirit and
also enable many of these jātis to develop their own traditions and
institutions. For example, the Ādhīnams of the Śaiva-Siddhāntins of
Dramiladeśa, which enjoy a high degree of prestige and power like any
“Brahminical” institution, pay witness to this fact.

The problem arises when a religion purports to be inclusive but is in
reality ethnocentric as is with the case of the Mohamatta and Pretamata
mārgas. I am always amazed by many of the Cīnas here in Siṁhapurī who
are devout adherents of the Preta. They root for Yisrael and see
themselves as having a bond with certain Semitic patriarchs who wandered
in a desert region 3 millennia ago. They see their own ethnic homelands
as abominations while a country several thousand miles away is “holy”.
The Malaya jana here, of whom almost everyone follows Mohamatam, see
Arābya Bhāṣā as a divine language and see themselves as part of the
pan-Arābya identity, despite having zero ethnic or genetic connection to
the language or its Semitic original speakers. A few of them have even
left for Marūnmatta countries to wage yuddha against the “infidels” or
even conspired to do destructive deeds here. Fortunately, security
efforts have kept these problems at bay though there is no telling to
the extent this problem could grow to.

Returning to Pretamata, we note how the minds of its adherents are
colonized and they see themselves in the image of the white men who
represent this religion. Unfortunately for them, the fact that they will
never be the same in the white man’s eyes does not shine on them. The
white man brought the “enlightenment” of Pretamata to the non-white
masses wallowing in ignorance and darkness. It is therefore not in the
least surprising that Cīnas and Indians who convert to the Pretamata
feel “superior” as if they have been inducted into the Euro-American
identity. The irony is, neither the Preta nor any of the prophets in the
Yahudāgama were Caucasian. They were Semites, like all Yahudas are.
**Reading and analyzing the** **Pūrva Bhāga of the** **Yahudāgama with a
critical eye, one finds that the Yahudas initially practiced polytheism
and the gradual conversion to monotheism via monolatry was a result of
extraordinary geo-political circumstances. As a matter of fact, this is
the evolving scholarly consensus. (More on this in a future article)
Hence, like any ancient heathen people, the Yahudas were tribal, deeply
ethnocentric and despised exogamy.** And the Preta acted in perfect
concordance with Yahuda ethnocentrism. For example, consider this
account of an incident from the Preta’s life **([Mark
7:24-30](http://biblehub.com/kjv/mark/7.htm#24)):**

**[24](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-24.htm)And from thence he arose, and
went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and
would have no man know*it*: but he could not be
hid.[25](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-25.htm)For a*certain*woman, whose
young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at
his feet:[26](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-26.htm)The woman was a Greek,
a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth
the devil out of her
daughter.[27](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-27.htm)But Jesus said unto
her, Let the children first be filled: for it is not meet to take the
children’s bread, and to cast*it*unto the
dogs.[28](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-28.htm)And she answered and said
unto him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children’s
crumbs.[29](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-29.htm)And he said unto her, For
this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy
daughter.[30](http://biblehub.com/mark/7-30.htm)And when she was come
to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon
the bed.**

The same account is repeated by [**Matthew
15:21-28**](http://biblehub.com/kjv/matthew/15.htm#21), who however
calls the woman a Canaanite. But overall, there is little difference
between these two passages.

**[21](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-21.htm)Then Jesus went thence, and
departed into the coasts of Tyre and
Sidon.[22](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-22.htm)And, behold, a woman
of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have
mercy on me, O Lord,*thou*Son of David; my daughter is grievously
vexed with a devil.[23](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-23.htm)But he
answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him,
saying, Send her away; for she crieth after
us.[24](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-24.htm)But he answered and said,
I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.[25](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-25.htm)Then came she and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, help
me.[26](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-26.htm)But he answered and said,
It is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast*it*to
dogs.[27](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-27.htm)And she said, Truth,
Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters’
table.[28](http://biblehub.com/matthew/15-28.htm)Then Jesus answered
and said unto her, O woman, great*is*thy faith: be it unto thee even
as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.**

In the above two passages, it is clear that the woman is likened to a
dog! Such harsh words from the supposedly kind Preta who, we are told,
saw beyond ethnic differences. If you point this out to Pretopāsakas,
they are quick to point out that the Preta finally healed the woman. But
that just evades the main question here: Whether the Preta was, like any
typical first century Yahuda, ethnocentric or his later followers had
force-fitted him into modern notions of equality and political
correctness? At any rate, the Preta’s original intentions had been to
reform the Yahuda-mata from within. He was not interested in it becoming
a universal faith as the following verses from [**Matthew
10:5-8**](http://biblehub.com/kjv/matthew/10.htm#5) show:

**[5](http://biblehub.com/matthew/10-5.htm)These twelve Jesus sent
forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles,
and into*any*city of the Samaritans enter ye
not:[6](http://biblehub.com/matthew/10-6.htm)But go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of
Israel.[7](http://biblehub.com/matthew/10-7.htm)And as ye go, preach,
saying, The kingdom of heaven is at
hand.[8](http://biblehub.com/matthew/10-8.htm)Heal the sick, cleanse
the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received,
freely give.**

Indeed it seems that the Preta’s cult would have been nothing more than
a radical offshoot of traditional Yahudamatam. The Preta was not
interested in anyone apart from the Yahuda-jana, at least in the initial
phase of his mission. **I say initial, because towards the end of his
mission, there seems to be textual hints of a change in his outlook
towards the “gentiles”, the “heathens”.** But on the whole, the Preta
envisioned himself as the Yahudeśvara and claimed to be the person
referenced in the bhaviṣyaviṣayam in the Yahudāgama. And as many modern
scholars have pointed out (Refer to Bart D. Ehrman), the Preta was an
apocalyptic Yahuda, who preached the imminent end of the world, with the
Yahuda-jana being delivered from the rule of oppressors. What the new or
would-be-converts to Pretamata keep ignoring, deliberately or not, is
the fact that the Preta was by no means unique in claiming to be the
Yahudeśvara. There were many Yahudas who either claimed to be the
Yahuda-jana-rakṣaka or were presumed to be “the one” by the Yahudas
themselves. [**Refer to this excellent
article**](http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/11425) that sheds
some light on the lives of some of these “saviours” who were either
contemporaries of the Preta or post-dated him. There were also claimants
before the Preta (Look up, Judas Maccabeus, Simon of Peraea and
Athronges). This list of Messianic claimants comprises of Yahudas from
different backgrounds, who used differing strategies as the proclaimed
leader of the Yahuda-jana. But if there was one thing that was common
between all of them, including the famous Preta himself, it is that they
were nothing short of amiserable failure for the Yahudas.

Now, one may wonder why we are discussing the textual and historical
issues of the Pretamata in such painstaking detail. Well, as a Hindu you
may have known other Hindus who have converted to the Pretamata or those
who are contemplating such a decision. They have obviously been
“infected” by the powerful memetic viruses of the Pretamata. In other
words, they have bought into its claims for want of critical reasoning.
I believe every Hindu should equip himself with a thorough study of the
Pretamata, its historical antecedents and most importantly, the
Pretāgama, especially the Uttara Bhāga. A careful study of the Uttara
Bhāga would reveal that it is not a book written with a single aim,
inspired by “God”, like the Pretopāsakas claim. There are several layers
within it and its propensity for contradiction highlights that there
were competing interpretations of what the Preta ought to be. To go back
to the statement regarding pre- and post-Preta Messianic claimants, the
most important question a Hindu contemplating conversion can ask himself
is: **What if the Preta was merely one of many such claimants? But it so
happened that his followers managed to come up with a canon of texts,
organize the faith and transform the horrifying death of the Preta from
the failure it was, to a story about salvation.**

And in my opinion, this is the question even those who are “firmly
entrenched in the Dharma” but foolishly believe the Ponzi scheme that
“all religions are equally good and lead to the same goal”, have to ask
themselves. It is this honest self-inquiry, guided by a strong and clear
intellect, which can provide an effective vaccination against getting
“infected”.

And that is why, this article starts by establishing the fact that the
Preta, true to his Yahuda beliefs, was ethnocentric. It is not to make
the childish claim that he is racist and therefore we should ignore him.
If we carry the thinking to its logical conclusion, we have to ask
ourselves the following question: **What** **changed a primarily
Yahuda-based religious movement and altered the very course of history,
making Pretamata a movement that seeks to invade the entire earth like a
viral epidemic?** The answer lies in a certain character, whom we
encountered in the previous article: Paul.

The interested reader should do his own homework on the subject. But to
put it briefly, Paul himself was born as a Yahuda and later on in life
converted to the Pretamata. Despite his roots, it is Paul whose writings
lend themselves to an anti-Yahuda interpretation. And Paul seem to have
taken the Preta’s cult in a direction that the Preta himself could not
have imagined. (Remember that Paul never actually got to see the Preta
while the latter was still alive.) So, we do note that there is a
contradiction between the Preta’s intentions and the actions of Paul.
But the trend of departing from the Preta’s original intentions started
even before Paul. We note in one of the above quotations, [**Matthew
10:5**](http://biblehub.com/kjv/matthew/10.htm#5) that the Preta
expressly instructed his śiṣyas to not go to the Samaritans. However, in
direct contradiction to that, we find that one of the śiṣyas went to
Samaria to preach to the Samaritans as stated by [**Acts
8:5-6:**](http://biblehub.com/kjv/acts/8.htm)

**[5](http://biblehub.com/acts/8-5.htm)Then Philip went down to the city
of Samaria, and preached Christ unto
them.[6](http://biblehub.com/acts/8-6.htm)And the people with one
accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and
seeing the miracles which he did.**

Now this occurred before Paul’s conversion to the Preta-cult. But we
find the repetition of the same behaviour. Paul is indeed known for
being most aggressive in reaching out to the heathens. In other words,
we are looking for that magic moment when the Pretamata ceased to be a
Yahuda movement. Consider the following verses from [**Acts
13:42:**](http://biblehub.com/kjv/acts/13.htm)

**[42](http://biblehub.com/acts/13-42.htm)And when the Jews were gone
out of the synagogue, the Gentiles besought that these words might be
preached to them the next
sabbath.[43](http://biblehub.com/acts/13-43.htm)Now when the
congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes
followed Paul and Barnabas: who, speaking to them, persuaded them to
continue in the grace of God.**

**[44](http://biblehub.com/acts/13-44.htm)And the next sabbath day came
almost the whole city together to hear the word of
God.[45](http://biblehub.com/acts/13-45.htm)But when the Jews saw the
multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things
which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming.[46](http://biblehub.com/acts/13-46.htm)Then Paul and
Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God
should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and
judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles.**

Hence, we can conclude that it is the insurmountable Yahuda rejection of
the Preta that led to the cult ceasing to be a mere outgrowth of the
Yahudamata and spurred its transformation into a religion on its own. In
other words, the so-called universality of the Preta’s teachings is a
circumstantial result. The Preta hardly saw himself as relevant for
people outside the Yahuda. However, as we noted before, there are a few
statements to the effect that the Preta might have become more receptive
to gentile followers after the disappointment of his own people, the
Yahuda-Jana. Take, for instance, the following verse from [**Matthew
8:5-13:**](http://biblehub.com/kjv/matthew/8.htm#5)

**[5](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-5.htm)And when Jesus was entered
into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching
him,[6](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-6.htm)And saying, Lord, my
servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously
tormented.[7](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-7.htm)And Jesus saith unto
him, I will come and heal
him.[8](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-8.htm)The centurion answered and
said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof: but
speak the word only, and my servant shall be
healed.[9](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-9.htm)For I am a man under
authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this*man*, Go, and he
goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this,
and he doeth*it*.[10](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-10.htm)When Jesus
heard*it*, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily I say
unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel.[11](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-11.htm)And I say unto you,
That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
heaven.[12](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-12.htm)But the children of
the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of
teeth.[13](http://biblehub.com/matthew/8-13.htm)And Jesus said unto the
centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed,*so*be it done unto
thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour.**

But Paul, very much like the Preta who inspired him, is a man of
contradiction. He felt great concern for the Yahuda-jana, who were his
people. But at the same time, he realized the futility of his mission to
them and, in a stroke of wicked genius, sought to redefine the very
notion of Yisrael, as done in [**Romans
9:2-7**](http://biblehub.com/isv/romans/9.htm)

**[2](http://biblehub.com/romans/9-2.htm)I have deep sorrow and
unceasing anguish in my
heart,[3](http://biblehub.com/romans/9-3.htm)for I could wish that I
myself were condemned and cut off from the Messiahfor the sake of my
brothers, my own people,[4](http://biblehub.com/romans/9-4.htm)who are
Israelis. To them belong the adoption, the glory, the covenants,the
giving of the Law, the worship, and the
promises.[5](http://biblehub.com/romans/9-5.htm)To the Israelis belong
the patriarchs, and from them, the Messiahdescended, who is God over
all, the one who is forever blessed. Amen.
[6](http://biblehub.com/romans/9-6.htm)Now it is not as though the word
of God has failed. For not all Israelis truly belong to
Israel,[7](http://biblehub.com/romans/9-7.htm)and not all of Abraham’s
descendants are his true descendants.**

And having now cut the cord that links Yisrael and the Yahudas, he comes
up with a renewed definition of what is “Yisrael”, as Paul explains with
a brilliant botanical metaphor in [**Romans
11:17:**](http://biblehub.com/romans/11-17.htm)

**[17](http://biblehub.com/romans/11-17.htm)Now if some of the branches
have been broken off, and you, a wild olive branch, have been grafted in
their place to share the rich root of the olive tree,**

And voila! This is one of those rare moments where a metaphor so
perfectly describes the meme par excellence and the modus operandi of
the Pretamata. It is this “grafting” of heathen peoples that has been
occurring over the past two thousand years and not without violence and
misery. And this is the chain of grafting. The Hellenic-Roman heathens
were “grafted” together with the Yahudas who had accepted the Preta, to
replace the ones who had rejected him. Within a matter of centuries,
this extended to the whole of Europe and the Āṅglīkas saw themselves as
the “Grafter” par excellence, sending their missionaries all across the
world. And just as the Greek/Roman converts were adopted as “Yahudas”
and became part of “Yisrael”, the Indians, Chinese, Japanese, Koreans,
Africans and South Americans were adopted as “grafts” alongside the
Āṅglīkas and became part of Āṅglīka Rājyam.

When Mlecchadvīpa became independent from the Āṅglīkas and an
unparalleled power by itself, it started viewing itself as the “real”
Yisrael. Thus we see this nonsense matam, uniquely “Made in
Mlecchadvīpa” product, which we like to call “Moron”-mata. The charlatan
who founded this mata preached that the Garden of Eden is located in
Mlecchadvīpa and stated further that the Preta, after his death on the
śula, appeared in Mlecchadvīpa.

The analogy is perfect. The Yahudas who abandoned the identity of their
own forefathers and were disowned by their community, sought to re-make
the heathen Greeks (And as we saw in the previous post, the most
dull-witted among them) in a “Yahuda” mold, with the effect that these
poor heathens saw a language and culture (Hebrew, Yisrael) so alien to
their own, as sacred and superior. Instead of being proud of their
ancestry, they relished in seeing themselves as non-biological
“descendants” of Abraham. Fast forward about 2000 years later.

The Āṅglīkas (and later, the Mlecchas) abandoned their European
identity, marked by Greek and Germanic cultural ideals with deep-seated
heathen roots (Consider that in the study of pratīcya philosophy, the
phrase Anglo-American is used, to distinguish from continental European
thought). They sought to colonize the world outside Europe and cast the
“ignorant idol-worshippers” in the Āṅglīka/Mleccha mold, with the effect
that these “inferior races” (Or AKA, the white man’s burden; courtesy of
Rudyard Kipling) saw the language, culture and religion of the
Āṅglīka/Mleccha as superior to his own. And if such an attitude of
servility should persist even today, after “independence”, then are we
not confronted with a problem of “Post-Colonial Colonization”?

If you can raise the following two doubts in the mind of a Hindu convert
or a wannabe-convert, you can safely state that you have cured the
victim of the Pretamata virus.

1\. Is the Preta merely one among many Messianic claimants? If he was a
failure like all other Messiahs of the 1st century, then what is
worthwhile about believing in him?

2\. Does it make any sense for me to believe in a religion that seeks to
colonize me and degrade my ethnic origins? Does it make sense for a
religion that has an awfully specific origin in a certain location and
point of time in history to claim universality? Am I not better off
following the path of my own ancestors?



Tags: [conversion](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/conversion/),
[convert](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/convert/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[missionary](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/missionary/),
[preta](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/preta/),
[pretamata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/pretamata/)

