+++
title = "Backwardness"
full_title = "Backwardness"
date = "2012-02-10"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/10/backwardness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/10/backwardness/).

Backwardness

[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/sargon-of-akkad.jpg?w=154&h=277 "Sargon of Akkad")](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/sargon-of-akkad.jpg)[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/pacal-the-great1.jpg?w=220&h=293 "Pacal the Great")](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/02/pacal-the-great1.jpg)

Back around the time I was born, anthropologists sometimes talked about
some cultures being more advanced than others. This was before they
decided that all cultures are equal, except that some are more equal
than others.

Anyhow, that kind of comparison can be interesting. In the Old World,
civilization arose first in the Middle East, and that heavily influenced
later starts such as European and Chinese civilization. Civilization in
the Americas seems to have arisen completely or almost completely
independently: there may have been some pre-Columbian contacts, but it
looks as if the Amerindians developed agriculture and technology on
their own.

I’ve been trying to estimate the gap between Eurasian and Amerindian
civilization. The Conquistadors were, in a sense, invaders from the
future: but just how far in the future? What point in the history of
the Middle East is most similar to the state of the Amerindian
civilizations of 1500 AD ?

I would argue that the Amerindian civilizations were less advanced than
the Akkadian Empire, circa 2300 BC. The Mayans had writing, but were
latecomers in metallurgy. The Inca had tin and arsenical bronze, but
didn’t have written records. The Akkadians had both – as well as draft
animals and the wheel. You can maybe push the time as far back as 2600
BC, since Sumerian cuneiform was in pretty full swing by then. So the
Amerindians were around four thousand years behind.

