+++
title = "Diversity risks The"
full_title = "Diversity risks The white hindu case"
date = "2017-10-11"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2017/10/11/diversity-risks-the-white-hindu-case/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2017/10/11/diversity-risks-the-white-hindu-case/).

Diversity risks: The white hindu case.

The following is an excerpt from a friend’s wise views on the matter:

========================

i’m frankly appreciative of any Hindu who’s doing useful work for
dharma. But I’m also pragmatic enough to see that “diversity” comes with
its problems 🙂

say a million whites become Hindus tomorrow: nothing vague or
“spiritual”; they become your average temple-going, external sign
sporting, minimally observant Hindu…where will they stand on issues such
as temple sovereignty, the current attempts to destroy sabarimala’s
ritual rules (MY NOTE: This is about granting entry to fertile women,
viz –
<http://indiafacts.org/readytowait-campaign-reclaim-hindu-temples-traditions/>
), some state organ choosing priests (MY NOTE: in violation of sacred
Agama-s) etc??

I’m not saying that they will all be a problem. But fact is, many of
them would probably take a stand against traditional schools and
teachers on these issues…

what are they converting to? Is there a fixed, basic “catechism” to
which all new converts will subscribe regardless of the particular sect
they convert to? That regardless of their (possibly) individualist,
egalitarian and liberal background, there are some basics they should
not question or attempt to controvert/subvert…

========================

Postscript: It must be noted that white converts to hinduism tend not to
be humble supplicants yearning to regain connection with their
ancenstors, ournoble pagan cousins – rather they’re given to be quite
loud mouthed and presumptuous. Not withstanding their ancestors’
miserable failure at saving their pagan religions, they presume to
lecture us about how we should run our society and affairs.

