+++
title = "How the commentaries"
full_title = "How the commentaries protect the root text"
upstream_url = "https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/06/28/how-the-commentaries-protect-the-root-text/"
date = "2021-06-28"

+++
Source: [here](https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/06/28/how-the-commentaries-protect-the-root-text/).

How the commentaries protect the root text

Commentaries have many uses, besides delighting the reader/listener in some cases. When I read the Śrīvaiṣṇava commentaries, especially those of **Periyavāccāṉ Piḷḷai,** I feel enthralled: I feel that despite the centuries that separate us, Piḷḷai takes me by hand, and tells me how to read and interpret a text, tells me about his likes and dislikes, and without telling me, displays his deep knowledge, impressive scholarship and firm devotion. Of course, as I grow, I could talk back to him, and tell him that his interpretation of the text is subjective, that I’ll read it differently, and so on. But I can’t get away from my mind the image of an older man holding the hand of a little girl and helping her discover a wholly new, baffling world, his own, and that of the *Nālāyira Divya Prabandham* (NDP). I realise that that sounds rather cheesy. Ah well.

Anyway, I’m not writing this to go on about how I feel about Piḷḷai, but rather to ponder on the important function of a commentary, whether intentional or not, of safeguarding the text, from extinction, interpolations, alterations, corruptions, you name it. If a commentator gives the variants, that’s an added bonus. When I was reading about **Kampaṉ’s *Irāmāvatāram*** years ago (I can’t remember whose essay it was, terrible!), I was made aware of the fact that if so many interpolations exist in it, it’s because this work, despite being a masterpiece, did not have a commentator to protect it. Some time ago, I read parts of Mu. Arunachalam’s *Tamiḻ Ilakkiya Varalāṟu*, and in the section on the Tamil *Bhāgavata*s, he explains that a Tamil scholar and editor of the 19th-20th centuries, Gopala Pillai, if I remember correctly, had deliberately changed the verses in many of his editions to suit his Vaiṣṇava inclinations. Including in his edition of Kampaṉ’s *Irāmāvatāram*. This is something relatively unheard of as far as the text of the NDP is concerned, probably, precisely because there were early medieval commentators to ensure its “proper” transmission. Also, I guess that this was made easier by the fact that the NDP has only been transmitted by the Śrīvaiṣṇavas, assuring a certain uniformity and conformity despite there being different channels of transmission among them.

What got me thinking of all this is again some of the things I read by Mu. Arunachalam, on the topic of **Villiputtūrār’s *Pāratam***, one of the Tamil rendering of the *Mahābhārata* (you can download the standard Vai. Mu. Kō.’s edition [here](https://www.tamildigitallibrary.in/book-detail?id=jZY9lup2kZl6TuXGlZQdjZp3kJIy&tag=வில்லிபுத்தூரார்%20பாரதம்#book1/)). Now, the number of verses vary according to the editions (4330, 4339, or 4351). One story claims that the original number was 6000, but clearly, they do not exist now. Another story claims that his son contributed some verses. Did he? Which ones? Do they exist now? We (or at least I) don’t know. Because Villi apparently did not complete his work, a certain Aṭṭāvatāṉam Araṅkanāta Kavirāyar composed 2477 extra verses and “completed” the original work, and published it in 1902 (I’m glad that at least he didn’t present it as part of the original work). Something similar had happened in the 18thc.: Nallāpiḷḷai and Murukapiḷḷai considered the work too short, so they built upon Villi’s verses, and composed an extra 11000 verses and added them to the core text, which is now known as the *Nallā Piḷḷai Pāratam*. (While looking for an edition of *this* text, I only found [a simple retelling in Tamil](https://www.dinamalar.com/news_detail.asp?id=89185): oh why? why? why? The academic in me wonders why anyone would bother to produce a gloss when all efforts should have gone into making the original text of this *Nallā Piḷḷai Pāratam* more widely accessible!)

Apart from that, oral traditions have so many stories about Villiputtūrār: that the king made him write the *Mahābhārata* because he didn’t want to deny his brother his inheritance, and composing this work made him realise what he was up to, and the consequences of such behaviour. Another story says that the king, knowing of Villi’s scholarship but worried that a staunch Vaiṣṇava would not be interested in writing the *Mahābhārata*, **created** the problem in the first place (by causing a rift between the two brothers’ wives) so that he could make him write the work in Tamil. Another story claims that Villi was an arrogant scholar who went about challenging other poets, and cutting down their ears if they lost to him, which they all did, except for Aruṇagirināthar, who spared him his ears and taught him a lesson… There should be a *guruparamparā* for the poets. I guess there was a book called *pulavar purāṇam*, but of course, it’s not available, not even in PDF.

These are some reflections that came to me as I sit preparing for a talk on Villiputtūrār’s work which, by the way, so few scholars seem to take up. Not even the Śrīvaiṣṇava scholars seem to care about it, even though Villi himself is said to have been one (he is even referred to as Villiputtūr Āḻvār, but it’s not clear if the Śrīvaiṣṇavas call him that). Why? Tricky question. Who knows? Is the original epic enough for the Śrīvaiṣṇavas, who don’t need a translation for the *itihāsa* which they can understand and which is a text with authority for them? Is it because Villi praises the other gods? Maybe. By the way, Mu. Arunachalam deals with some of those verses, even though they are a minor part of the *Pāratam*, and says that Villi never belittles Śiva just because he is a Vaiṣṇava. Indeed, a very nice thing. But I have a feeling that judging non-Śaiva scholars based on their treatment of Śiva can be seen everywhere in his writings. Clearly, no one is perfect.

Anyway, to conclude, I’m grateful that the venerable Piḷḷai protected the NDP with his stylus, so that we could focus on other issues now. This is also the reason why I think that rather than the NDP, it’s the *Irāmāvatāram* and *Villi Pāratam* that needs to be critically edited.
