+++
title = "Complete English"
full_title = "Complete English Translation of nilamata purANaM"
date = "2015-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2015/12/12/complete-english-translation-of-nilamata-puranam/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2015/12/12/complete-english-translation-of-nilamata-puranam/).

Complete English Translation of nilamata purANaM

 The Nilamata Purana

  
by Dr. Ved Kumari

 Jammu and Kashmir Academy of  
 Art, Culture and Languages,  
 Srinagar

 Om auspiciousness. Salutation to the auspicious Ganesa.  
 Salutation to the venerable Vasudeva Om.

1-2. Having paid homage to the god Hari – the abode of Sri, the giver
of  
boons, the highest lord, the master of three worlds, the finder of cow  
(earth), the imperishable and the unchangeable – the honourable king  
Janamejaya, the supporter of the family of Pariksita, asked Vyasa’s
pupil  
Vaisampayana.

3\. Janamejaya (said): “Kings of various countries – the great heroes –
came to  
the great Bharata war of my forefathers.

4-5. Say, why did not the king of Kasmira come there? Why was that king
not  
chosen by the sons of Pandu and Dhrtarastra? The region of Kasmira, of
course,  
occupies an important place in the world.

6\. Vaisampayana (said): “Accompanied by his four-fold armies (the king
of  
Kasmira) went to the Svayamvara to fight with Madhava, the son of
Vasudeva.

7\. A fight between him and the wise Vasudeva took place there as had
taken  
place between Naraka and Vasudeva.

8-9. Consequently he was thrown down by Vasudeva in that good combat.
Out of  
respect for that country, Vasudeva coronated his pregnant queen, so that
the  
posthumous son might rule.

10\. Afterwards, she gave birth to a male child who was named Gonanda.
Being a  
child, he was brought neither by the Pandavas nor by the Kauravas.”

11\. Janamejaya (spoke): “O best among the twice-born, why did the
high-minded  
Vasudeva honour (so much) the country that he himself coronated a
woman?”

12- 13. Vaisampayana (said): “O best amongst the kings, the goddess Uma
is the  
same as Kasmira. What was formerly, an enjoyable, heart-enrapturing lake
for  
six Manvantaras since the beginning of the Kalpa, became a beautiful
territory  
in this Manvantara.

14-16. Filled with rows of rice-fields, fully thriving and endowed with
good  
fruits etc., inhabited by the people who perform sacrifices and are
engaged in  
self-study and contemplation – virtuous ascetics well-versed in the
Vedas and  
the Vedangas – by highly prosperous Ksatriyas adept in (the use of) all
the  
arms and weapons, by Vaisyas engaged in (earning) the means of
livelihood, and  
by Sudras serving the twice-born, it is bedecked with the temples of the
gods  
and all the holy places, and is auspicious.

17\. 0 protector of men! all the sacred places, which are on the earth,
are  
there. Thronged with the hermitages of the sages (it is) pleasant in
heat and  
cold and is auspicious.

18\. Unconquerable by the enemy-kingdoms, ignorant of the fears born of
them,  
rich in cows, horses. elephants etc. it is devoid of the fear of
famines.

19\. Not dependent on rains, enjoyable, holy, beneficial for living
beings,  
endowed with the qualities (of producing) all grains, it is devoid of
dangers  
and is thickly populated.

20\. Possessed of the grace like that of a temple due to the (presence
of)  
tender ladies, it is devoid of evil serpents, tigers, buffaloes and
bears.

21\. Always full of festivals, twangings of the bows and the sounds of
the  
Vedic recitals, it is crowded with ever-sportive men and is surrounded
by ever  
happy persons.

22\. Full of gardens and pleasure-groves and resounding with the sounds
of  
drums and lutes, it is always crowded with people fond of drinks and is
dear  
to the hearts of good men.

23\. Laden with various types of flowers, fruits, trees, creepers and
medicinal  
herbs, it is full of hosts of wild beasts and is enjoyed by the Siddhas
and  
the Caranas.

24-25. O controller of the enemies, the holy region of Kasmira is
possessed of  
all the sacred places. There are sacred lakes of the Nagas and the
holy  
mountains; there are holy rivers and also the holy lakes; there are
highly  
sacred temples and also the hermitages attached to them.

26\. In the center flows, making as it were the parting of the hair,
the  
Vitasta – the highest goddess visibly born of the Himalaya.”

27\. Janamejaya (asked): “O Twice-born, how did that which was a pure
lake in  
former Manvantaras, become a province in Vaivasvata (Manvantara)?”

28-29. Vaisampayana (replied): “O best of the kings, once in olden days,
the  
excellent king Gonanda enquired the same point from Brhadasva after  
worshipping him who had reached there in the course of a pilgrim’s
journey”.

30\. Gonanda (asked): ‘There did not exist, in the previous Manvantaras,
this  
country named Kasmira How did it come into being in Vaivasvata Period?’

31-33. Brhadasva(spoke): ‘The passage of the sun through one sign of
the  
zodiac is called a solar month. Two months should be known as a season
and  
three seasons as an Ayana. Similarly, two Ayanas make one year and O
king, the  
years, numbering four lacs and thirty two thousands, make Kaliyuga.
Twice as  
much as this, O king, is Dvapara. Thrice-multiplied is Treta and four
times  
multiplied should be known as Krta.

34\. Of seventy one Caturyugas is called one Manvantara here.

35\. At the end of that Manvantara, all the movable, and immovable
creations on  
the earth are destroyed completely.

36-38. 0 lord of the earth, this whole world then turns into a sea.
The  
mountains Himavat, Hemakuta, Nisadha, Nila, Sveta, Srngavat, Meru,
Malyavat,  
Gandhamadana, Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Suktimat, Rksavat, Vindhya and  
Pariyatra are not destroyed. The whole of the rest of Jambudvipa is
effaced  
completely.

39\. Then, after the destruction of this world, the lord Mahadeva
himself, in  
the form of water, stays all around this world.

40-41. At that time, the goddess Sati assumes the form of a boat and
the  
future Manu, through magical power, places all the seeds in that
(boat).  
Having assumed the form of a fish, Visnu – the father of the world –
drags off  
that boat by means of (His) horn.

42\. 0 protector of the earth, the God, having drawn off the boat,
fastens that  
to the top of that mountain and goes to an unknown state.

43\. 0 king, see in this western region, this mountain-peak called
Naubandhana,  
holy and destroyer of sins and fears.

44\. 0 controller of the enemies, when the period equal to hat of Krta
passes  
away, then Manu brings about the creation of beings as before.

45-46. The goddess Sati, with the body in the form of the boat, becomes
the  
earth and on that earth comes into being a lake of clear water, known
as  
Satidesa, six Yojanas long and half of that in breadth, enjoyable,  
heart-enrapturing, and the sporting-place of the gods.

47\. Deep like the sky, bright with lotuses containing cool and clear
water, it  
is the most charming (lake) on the whole earth.

48-49. 0 king, at the approach of this Vaivasvata Manvantara, Daksa gave
his  
thirteen daughters to Kasyapa, the son of Marica.

O best of the kings, listen to their names from me. The sons of Aditi
are the  
gods and those of Diti are the Daityas.

50\. (The son) of Danayusa is Vrtra and (the sons) of Surabhi are the
Bhadras.  
The Yaksas and the Raksasas are regarded to be the sons of Khasa.

51\. Airavana is the son of Ira; ten Gayanas are (the sons) of Prava and
the  
celestial host of the Apsaras is born of Muni.

52\. The Kalakalpas and the Kalakeyas are regarded to be the sons of
Kala. The  
Danavas are the sons of Danu, and of Krodha are born ten daughters.

53\. 0 king, the Nagas are the sons of Kadru, and Garuda and Aruna – the
best  
among the birds – are the two sons of Vinata.

54\. Kadru and Vinata, jealous of each other were, as was destined,
always at  
daggers drawn.

55-57. Once, seeing the horse Uccaihsravas born of the water, Vinata  
pronounced that to be white, while Kadru, bent on doing mischief, said
to  
Vinata “I, by all means regard that horse as possessed of black hair.” O
lord  
of the earth, then both of them betted complete slavery of each other
with  
reference to that horse. Persuaded thus by Kadru (her) sons did the
same.

58\. Afterwards both of them saw that excellent horse as black-haired,
and  
Kadru said to beautiful Vinata, “You have been won over”.

59\. Highly glorious and highly strong Garuda rescued Vinata who had
been won  
over as a slave, by bringing Soma from Indra.

60\. From Indra he obtained the boon of eating the Nagas. He ate up
the  
Pannagas as a consequence of their enmity to his mother.

61\. While the Nagas were being eaten by the high-minded Garuda, Vasuki
sought  
the protection of Janardana, the god of the gods.

62\. Vasuki said: “Salutation to you, O unfathomable supreme god!
Salutation to  
you, O holder of bow, mace and sword in your hands! Salutation to you,
the  
destroyer of the Danavas! Salutation to you praised by the lotus-born  
(Brahma)!

63\. Salutation to you engaged in good of the world! Salutation to you,
the  
pleaser of Indra! Salutation to you, the giver of boons to the
devotees!  
Salutation to you, the demonstrator of the right path.

64-65. I have approached the god possessed of a beautiful colour like
the  
lustre of the fully bloomed blue lotus, clad in two garments like the
glowing  
gold, sinless, worthy of being solicited, having lotus-like feet placed
in  
(the lap of) the daughter of the sea, highest, earliest and eternal. I  
prostrate myself with devotion to that first god.

66\. You lie on Sesa’s pure hood variegated with thousand jewels of rows
of the  
heads. Thinking about the good and evil of the whole world, O god,
protect me  
today.

67\. O infinite, the lord of the birds, possessed of highly fierce and
dreadful  
speed, is destroying my family rapidly. O praised by the excellent
sages, you  
check that Tarksya whose strength is like that of the wind. Protect me
today”.

68-69. Brhadasva (said): The venerable god said to Vasuki who was
agitated  
with fear: “O possessed of unparalleled strength, you along with the
pious  
Nagas may dwell in the country of Sati, in the sky-like lake of holy
water.

70\. The enemy of the serpents shall not kill those serpents who will
make  
their abode in that lake.

71\. O lord of the Nagas, my mount – the enemy of the Nagas – shall not
kill  
him who, with his abode in the country of Sati, dwells unthreatened from
all  
sides.

72\. O highly fortunate one, coronate Nila in the kingdom of those
highly  
strong Nagas who shall dwell in the country of Sati.”

73\. Vasuki did as was stated by the god of gods. Then there remained no
fear  
of Garuda for the Nagas who stayed there.

74\. O best among the kings, the lotus-eyed Indra accompanied by Paulomi
was  
sporting once on the bank of that lake.

75\. Induced by Time (i.e. Death) a Daitya-chief named Sangraha who
was  
exceedingly difficult of being conquered, came there while Indra was
sporting.

76\. The semen of that (demon) who had seen Saci, was discharged in
that  
reservoir of water. Mad, due to being subject to passion and desirous
of  
carrying away Saci…

77\. Thereafter, the year was over in that fight against Indra. The
fight  
between both of them – Indra and Sangraha – continued for one year.

78\. Having killed him at the end of the year, the god Indra received
honour  
from the gods and went to heaven while being worshipped by those who
have  
their abodes in heaven.

79\. A child was born in the waters out of that evil-minded Sangraha’s  
discharged semen which had fallen in that lake.

80\. Due to compassion, the Nagas brought up that child in the waters.
As he  
was born in the water so he was called Jalodbhava (water-born).

81\. Having propitiated the god Pitamaha with penance, he obtained from
him a  
(triple) boon, viz, immortality in the water, magical power and
unparalleled  
prowess.

82-83 Having obtained the magical power, that Daitya- chief devoured the
human  
beings who lived in various countries near that lake, viz., the
inhabitants of  
Darvabhisara, Gandhara and Juhundara, the Sakas, the Khasas, the
Tanganas, the  
Mandavas, the Madras and the inhabitants of Antargiri and Bahirgiri.

84\. Harassed by that sinner, they fled away in fear from the country
and he  
roamed fearlessly in those desolate lands.

85\. At this very time, the venerable sage Kasyapa travelled over the
whole  
earth in connection with holy pilgrimage.

86-97. In this holy Bharatavarsa – the giver of the reward of good and
evil –  
(he visited) auspicious Puskara, difficult of access and giver of the
world of  
Brahma, Prayaga, teeming with sacrifices and destroyer of all sins,  
Kuruksetra, the field of piety, Naimisa, the destroyer of sins,
Hayasirsa, the  
holy abode of high-souled Fathers, the celestial Carankata, the remover
of all  
sins, the holy Varaha mountain, the holy Pancanada, Kalanjana along
with  
Gokarna, Kedara along with Mahalaya, Badhirasrama, the holy abode of
Narayana,  
Sugandha, Satakumbha, Kalikasrama, Sakambhari, Lalitika, Saligrama,
Prthudaka,  
Suvarnaksa, Rudrakoti, Prabhasa, Sagarodaka, Indramarga, Matanga-vapi,
the  
destroyer of sins, the holy Agastyasrama, Tandulikasrama, the holy
Jambumarga,  
the holy Varanasi, the holy goddess Ganga, daughter of Jahnu and girdle
of the  
sky, Yamuna, the destroyer of the noose of Yama, the swift-flowing
Satadru,  
the Sarayu, possessed of the sacrificial posts, the goddess Sarasvati,
the  
Godavari, the Vaitarani, the Gomati, the Bahuda, the Vedasmrti, the Asi
along  
with the Varna, the Tamravarnotpalavati, the Sipra along with the
Narmada, the  
Gona, the great river Parosni, the Iksumati, the Saratta, the Durga,
the  
Jatasila, the Kaveri, the Brahmani, the Gauri, the Kampana the Tamasa,  
Gangasagara Sandhi and Sindhu sagarasangama.

98-99. 0 king, (he visited also) the Bhrgutunga, the Visala, Kubjamra,
the  
Raivataka, Kusavarta at Gangadvara, Bilvaka, the mountain Nila, the holy
place  
Kanakhala and other sacred places.

100\. Having heard that Kasyapa was on a religious tour, Nila – the king
of the  
serpents – went to the sacred place Kanakhala for seeing him.

101\. Having reached there, that king of the serpents saw his father,
pressed  
his feet and saluted him after announcing his own name.

102\. The father smelled his forehead and honoured him in the proper
manner.  
Directed then by him (the father), he sat on the matting made of Kusa
grass.

103\. 0 king, listen to what the seated Naga communicated respectfully
to the  
father Kasyapa, the abode of all penances.

104\. ‘Having heard that you – lover of Dharma (piety) – are visiting
the  
sacred places, I, with a desire to serve, have immediately approached
your  
honour.

105\. O Brahman, all the sacred places in the eastern, the southern and
the  
western (part of the) country have been seen by you. Let us go now to
the  
northern direction.

106\. O honour-giver, there are holy places of pilgrimage in Madra
country and  
on the Himalaya – the best of the mountains.

107-8. (There is) the auspicious Vipasa, the pacifier of sins and giver
of  
eternal bliss, the river Devahrada, a bath in which gives the heaven,
the  
sin-removing god Hara Haririsvara and the holy confluence near
Karavirapura.

109\. At that place the Devahrada joins the Vipasa, the best of the
rivers. In  
the Vipasa, there is the perpetually holy Kalikasrama.

110-11. (There is) the holy Iravati, the destroyer of all Sins. Sixty
thousand  
sacred places dwell in single Iravati, specially in Revati (Naksatra)
and on  
the eighth day (of a fortnight).

112-13. (There are) Kumbhavasunda possessed of holy water, the river
Devika  
possessed of holy water, the great river Visvamitra which is sacred
always,  
(the river) called Udda which is highly sacred and the various
confluences (of  
the rivers). The religious merit (lies) in the Iravati and also in the
Devika.

114-118. Brought down by your honour for doing favour to the Madras, it
is the  
goddess Uma who is famous on the earth as Devika and by seeing whom a
man  
certainly becomes purified in this world. (There are) Indramarga,
Somatirtha,  
the holy Ambujana, Suvarnabindu, the auspicious abode of Hara, the  
sin-destroying abode of Skanda, the highly sacred lord of Uma at
Rudratirtha,  
Durgadvara, possessed of holy water, Kotitirtha, the sacred place of
Rudra,  
Kamakhya and Puspanyasa. 0 honour-giver, (there is) Hamsapada pronounced
as  
holy and so also Rsirupa.

119\. In the area extending over four krosas, there is Devikatirtha at
all the  
places where every well and pool is holy in all respects.

120\. (There is) the sacred river Apaga and the holy Tausi which pleases
the  
sun. There is the Candrabhaga the best of the rivers – whose water is
cool  
like the rays of the moon.

121\. Vaivatitlamukha is the meritorious holy place of the Candrabhaga
and so  
also is the sin-destroying Sankhamardala.

122\. (There are) Guhyesvara, Satamukha, Istikapatha, the holy Kadambesa
and  
the area around it.

123\. The area extending from the holy Satamukhaupto the holy place
Guhyesvara,  
is equal, in holiness, to Varanasi or is even higher than that.

124\. The great river Candrabhaga is always holy everywhere but is
specially so  
on the thirteenth of the bright half of Magha in conjunction with Pusya.

125\. All the sacred places on the earth, including the seas and the
lakes,  
shall go to the Candrabhaga, on the thirteenth of the bright half of
Magha.

126\. Vastrapatha is stated to be holy and so also the god Chagalesvara,
the  
second Bhaumi and also her birth place.

127\. The sacred place of the lake which is an incarnation of the body
of Sati,  
is the lake Visnupada famous Kramasara, the destroyer of all the sins.

128\. O sage, please visit immediately these and other holy places by
bathing  
at which, even the evil-minded human beings are freed (from the sins).’

129\. Brhadasva (said): Addressed thus he whose desire had already
been  
aroused, said “Let it be so” and went to those holy places in the
company of  
Nila.

130\. Having crossed the river-goddesses Yamuna and Sarasvati, he
visited  
Kuruksetra where Sanniti is famous.

131-132. O sinless, a multitude of the holy places is called Sanniti on
the  
earth. It is, verily, the spot to which all the tirthas including the
seas and  
the lakes always go in the end of the dark half of the month.

133\. He, who performs Sraddha there at the time when the sun is
eclipsed by  
Rahu, obtains the best award of (performing) a thousand
horse-sacrifices.

134\. Having seen that Sanniti, (he saw) Cakratirtha also about which a
verse  
sung by Narada is current on the earth.

135\. “Oh! the persistence of the people for the sun-eclipse! The
religious  
merit obtained at Cakratirtha is ten times more than the eclipse.

136\. Having visited the sacred places called Cakra and Prthudaka, he
saw the  
holy Visnupada and Amaraparvata.

137\. Afterwards, having crossed the rivers Satadru and Ganga, the sage
reached  
Arjuna’s hermitage and Devasunda.

138\. Having crossed the illustrious and sin-destroying Vipasa, Kasyapa
saw the  
whole country desolate at that time.

139-140, Seeing the country of the Madras as desolate, he spoke to the
Naga,  
‘\~O Nila, tell me – the inquirer – as to why this country of the Madras
has  
been deserted? This has always been charming, devoid of the calamity of
famine  
and full of the wealth of grains!”

141\. Nila said: “O venerable one, all this is known to you that
formerly a  
demon-child named Jalodbhava – the son of Sangraha – was reared up by
me.

142-143. Now that impudent fellow, who obtained boons from Brahma of  
imperceptible birth, ignores me like anything and I am incapable of
keeping  
him under control due to the boon of the lord of three worlds.

144\. By that villain of evil intellect – eater of human flesh – this
whole  
country of the Madras has been depopulated.

145-146. O lord, the countries rendered desolate by him are mainly  
Darvabhisara, Gandhara, Juhundara, Antargiri, Bahirgiri and those of
the  
Sakas, the Khasas, the Tanganas and the Mandavas. O venerable one, make
up  
your mind to check him for the welfare of the world.

147\. Brhadasva (spoke): Addressed thus he said “Be it so” and after
taking  
bath in the holy places all around, he came to that best limpid lake in
the  
country of Sati.

148\. O king, after taking bath there, he gave up walking on foot and
went to  
the eternal world of Brahma, merely by his own power.

149-150. He went along with Nila, the high-souled king of the Nagas. O  
controller of the enemies, both of them reached the abode of Brahma and
made  
obeisance to the lotus-born god and the gods Vasudeva, Isvara and
highly  
intelligent Ananta, who were present there by chance.

151-152. Honoured by them, these two told the activities of Jalodbhava  
(Water-born). Then the god Pitamaha said to this Naga-lord and the sage
of  
unparalleled valour, “we shall go to Naubandhana to subdue him.

153\. Then the god Kesava will undoubtedly kill him. “Having heard this,
Hari,  
the killer of the strong enemies, went (mounted on) Tarksya.

154\. O sinless, after him went Hara, mounted on the bull, along with
his wife.  
Brahma went mounted on the swan and the two Nagas mounted on the cloud.

155\. Kasyapa went by his supernatural power. Indra heard that and, in
the  
company of the hosts of gods, went to that place where Kesava had gone.

156-158. Yama, Agni, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Nirrti, Adityas, Vasus,
Rudras,  
Visvedevas and the hosts of Maruts; Asvins, Bhrgus, Sadhyas, the sons
of  
Angiras, the illustrious sages, Gandharvas, the hosts of heavenly
maidens; all  
the wives of the gods, the mothers of the gods, the hosts of
Vidyadharas,  
Yaksas, seas and rivers (all went there).

159\. Ganga went mounted on crocodile, Yamuna on tortoise, Satadru on
bull and  
Sarasvati on buffalo.

160\. 0 King! Vipasa (went) mounted on horse, Iravati on elephant,
Candrabhaga  
and Sindhu on tiger.

161\. Devika (went) mounted on wild ox, Sarayu on deer, Mandakini on man
and  
Payosni on goat.

162\. O king, Narmada (went) mounted on peacock, Gomati on Saranga
deer,  
Godavari on sheep and Kampana on swan.

163\. O king, Gandaki (went) mounted on he crane, Kaveri on camel, the
holy  
Iksumati on crocodile and the holy Sita on she crane.

164\. Lauhitya (went) mounted on Camara deer, Vanksu – the fast going
one – on  
Kroda (hog), Hladini on partridge and Hradini on cock.

165\. Pavani (went) mounted on a horse, Sona on a serpent, Krsnaveni on
cloud  
and Bhuvena on hare.

166\. These and other rivers also went mounted on their respective
mounts. All  
these, with a desire to see fight, followed the lord of the world.

167\. Having reached Naubandhana, Kesava, verily, took a firm stand.

168\. Hearing the sound of the retinue of the gods, the evil-minded
demon,  
knowing himself to be imperishable in the water, did not come out.

169\. Having come to know that he would not come out, the pleased
Madhusudana  
entered Naubandhana, in the company of the gods.

170\. Rudra (took stand) on Naubandhana peak, Hari on the Southern peak,
Brahma  
on the Northern peak and the gods and the Asuras followed them.

171\. Thus, they entered the mountain. Then the pious- minded god
Janardana,  
with a view to kill the demon, said to Ananta:

172\. “Breaking forth Himalaya today with the plough, make soon this
lake  
devoid of water.”

173\. Brhadasva (said): Then Ananta, resembling a mountain and possessed
of  
lustre equal to that of the full moon, expanded himself, covering the
earth  
and the heaven and terrifying the hosts of demons all around.

174\. Dressed in blue, wearing diadem fastened with gold, worshipped by
all the  
gods, he, broke forth Himalaya, the best of the mountains on earth,
with  
plough.

175-180. When the king of the best mountains had been broken, the water
flowed  
forth hurriedly with force, terrifying all the beings with its violent
rush  
and sound and overflowing the tops of the mountains with curved waves
like  
Himalaya touching the sky. When the water of the lake was
disappearing,  
Water-born practiced magic. He created darkness all around. O hero among
men,  
the world became quite invisible.

Then the god Siva held the sun and the moon in his two hands. In a
twinkling  
of the eye, the world was brought to light and all the darkness was
destroyed.

When the darkness had vanished, unfathomable Hari, assuming another body
with  
the power of Yoga, fought with the demon and witnessed that fight
through a  
different body.

There was a terrible fight between Visnu and the demon, with trees and
peaks  
of mountains. All those hosts of gods… (Hari) cut off, forcibly, the
head of  
the demon and then Brahma obtained gratification.

181\. Brahma, Visnu and Sambhu gave their own names to the peaks on
which they  
had taken their stand, on the earth.

182-183. O best among men, they said to the high peaks of the
high-souled king  
of the mountains: “Whoever shall see you after taking bath in this lake
called  
Kramasara, shall see three of us on the mountain and will go to heaven.”

184\. Brhada¤va (said): See, O king, these are those peak – Brahma,
Visnu, and  
Mahesvara. That which is Naubandhana peak is Sankara.

185\. The one on its right side is celebrated as Hari and the left one
as  
Brahma. Even the evil-doers are freed by seeing these (peaks)

186-187. To the north of that which is proclaimed as Visnupada in
Kramasara,  
Brahma – the best of the gods – himself erected a hermitage. The
venerable  
sage Kasyapa constructed a hermitage in the western half.

188\. Mighty Mahadeva himself erected a hermitage at the spot where
Visnu stood  
and obtained victory at that time.

189\. In the other part of that place, the honourable plough-holder
Ananta,  
abiding by the instructions of Vasudeva, constructed a great hermitage.

190\. On the western side of Mahadeva’s hermitage, the sun and the
moon,  
honoured by the gods, constructed their beautiful and holy hermitages.

191\. At a distance of one Yojana lessened by one-fourth of a Yojana
from  
Mahadeva’s hermitage, Hari erected his hermitage celebrated as
Narasimha.

192-193. Afterwards, other gods erected their hermitages, each one
separately,  
in the lake or on the waterless place. The sages whose wealth is
penance  
erected hermitages, and the rivers created several places of pilgrimage.
So  
did the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Yaksas and the mountain-kings along
with  
the Guhyakas.

194\. Visnu and Rudra – the prominent ones in the world – made their
abodes  
there along with the lotus-born (Brahma). The whole world has made its
abode  
there. The country is meritorious and the holiest.

195\. Then, the Sudarsana wheel – intoxicated with the blood of
Jalodbhava –  
wandered in that deserted land and was caught by Sankara.

196\. With discus in his hand, he went where (stood) the god Janardana.
Then  
laughing heartily, Hari said to that god Sankara.

197\. “O divine one, hand over the discus – destroyer of the hosts of
the  
Daityas to me.” Sankara (too) said in a joke to Hari who was laughing.

198\. “Wandering at its will it has been found by me by chance. O
Janardana, I  
shall return your discuss on the receipt of a gift.”

199-200. “Be it so”, said the destroyer of Madhu and received the
discus. O  
king, this is the place you stand on now, where Hari – the best of the
gods –  
made a joke and got erected his own statue in that pose.

201-204. O lord of kings and controller of enemies, Janardana Hari,
having got  
erected such establishment of Sambhu and the goddess (Parvati) in that
pose,  
made his abode on the head of Jalodbhava. O lion among men, the sages,
the  
gods, the Nagas, the Gandharvas, the hosts of the heavenly maidens, all
came  
there at the head of Jalodbhava to see this (statue) in which both
Kesava and  
Siva – the destroyers of all sins – are represented and to see
Janardana, the  
god of gods who erected the divine image.

205-206. When the chief gods, sages and Nagas had taken their seats,
Kasyapa,  
standing in front with joined hands, said to the boon-giver Visnu, “O
god, let  
this country be inhabited by human beings and be holy as well as
charming.”  
When Kasyapa had spoken thus, the Nagas uttered these words:

207-208. “0 best among the sages, we would not live in the Company of
men.”  
Then Prajapati Kasyapa certainly became angry and said to them, “As you
speak  
audaciously; without paying regard to my words, so you shall have to
dwell in  
the company of the Pisacas. There is no doubt here.

209\. Kasyapa having spoken thus, Nila said with joined hands, “O
Brahman, they  
are overpowered by anger and know nothing”.

210-212. Then Kasyapa, the most pious sage, spoke to him, “In the centre
of  
the Sea of Sand, there is an oasis six yojanas long. There dwell
highly  
terrible Pisacas belonging to the side of the Daityas. Nikumbha – the
noble  
and strong lord of the Pisacas – has been appointed by Kubera for
keeping them  
in check. Every time in the month of Caitra, he along with many Pisacas
goes  
to fight.

213-214. There are five crore Pisacas who are the followers of
Nikumbha.  
Nikumbha goes along with them and fights continuously (against the
evil-minded  
Pisacas) for six months. Of the evil-minded Pisacas, too, there live
only five  
crores.

215\. O Nila, those who exceed ten crores on both the sides are
destroyed every  
time, in the period of six months.

216\. Due to the favour of the god (Kubera), the mighty Nikumbha, along
with  
his five crore (followers), comes again every time on the bright
fifteenth of  
Asvayuj.

217-218. For six months he lives happily on the Himacala. From today I
have  
allotted to him a dwelling-place here for six months (of each year). You
shall  
have to live here for six months with him along with his armies and for
six  
months, after his departure, in the company of men.”

219-220. Addressed thus, the pious Nila said to his father, “We are
ready to  
live always in the company of men. We would not live with the Pisacas
who are  
cruel and who like cruelty.” When Nila the Naga-chief spoke thus, Visnu
said :

221\. “O Nila, the words of the sage will be effective for one Caturyuga
(i.e.  
four aeons). After that you will live\~ in the company of men only.

222\. Here the Pisacas will always become weak. Endowed with strength,
they  
will go, to the Sea of Sand for six months.

223-224. The men will worship the Naga in whose territory they shall
dwell,  
with flowers, incense, ointments, eatable offerings, incenses of various
types  
and excellent gifts of dramatic performances.

225\. Those men in this country, who will follow the good customs laid
down by  
you, will be endowed with animals and grains.

226\. Prajapati is called Ka, and Kasyapa is also Prajapati. Built by
him this  
country will be called Kasmira.

227\. Because water called Ka was taken out by Balarama (the
plough-wielder)  
from this country, so this will be called Kasmira in this world.

228-229. O Naga, because Kasmira is the same as Uma so – She – nourished
by  
me, celebrated as Visoka and assuming the form of a woman shall dwell
at  
Vrddhatirtha.

230\. O Naga, at that sacred place there shall always be the
dwelling-place of  
Vasuki, the king of the Nagas. Worship him who lives there.

231\. O chief of the Nagas, that lord of the kings of the Nagas is a
part of my  
own self. He who disobeys his order meets destruction at my hand.

232-233. O Naga, the dwelling of the Nagas is the city named Bhogavati.
Having  
become a Yogi that Naga-chief (Vasuki) dwells there as well as here. But
with  
his primary body, Vasuki, protecting the Nagas, shall live in Bhogavati.
O  
sinless one, you (also) dwell here constantly.”

234\. Having said so, Visnu then went on his desired course. The gods,
the  
sages, the Nagas, and the Gandharvas went away as they had come.

235\. Since then, the country is inhabited for six months (of the year),
by  
human beings belonging to various countries, and for six months by the
eaters  
of raw flesh.

236\. O chief of the kings, having collected rice, grains etc. the human
beings  
go away after taking permission and came back always on (the full-moon
day of)  
Caitra.

237-238. O king, pleased to see Kasmira thus populated, Kasyapa
worshipped the  
god Sankara and induced the goddess Uma to purify this country by the
gift of  
water. She – the in destroying one – is renowned as the river Vitasta.

239\. Having worshipped the god Kesava, he induced Laksmi to purify
this  
country. She is glorified as Visoka.

240\. Induced by Kasyapa, Aditi, the mother of the gods also, having
become the  
river named Trikoti, flows in this country.

241\. Induced by Kasyapa, Saci also, who is the wife of Indra, became in
this  
country, Harsapatha, by name the destroyer of sins.

242\. Diti, following the advice of the sage, became (the river)
Candravati.  
The goddess Yamuna gave her own portion to the Vitasta.

243\. Thus, by the order of Kasyapa, the mothers of the gods and the
demons and  
the holy wives of the gods assumed the forms of rivers.

244\. O lord of the earth, then, due to the advice of Kasyapa, the
sacred  
waters, the oceans and the rivers went to Kasmira and her vicinity.

245\. O lord of the kings, thus, on the arrival of Vaivasvata Antara,
the  
highly meritorious and beautiful wife of Hara was born as Kasmira.

246\. Desiring continuous welfare, you should regard the king Kasmira as
born  
of a portion of Hara and never disobey him.

247\. Gonanda (spoke): “How did Sati, Saci, Ganga, Aditi, Yamuna, Diti
and the  
goddess Karisini obtain the forms of rivers here?”

248\. Brhadasva (said): “Once the glorified goddesses went to see
Kasyapa. The  
venerable sage Kasyapa induced them there (thus).

249\. The beautiful country named Kasmira has been created by me. O
possessed  
of pure smiles, cherish that (country) by gift of water.

250\. Aditi, Diti, Saci and the river Ganga said,”Let it be so” but
neither Uma  
nor Karisini (spoke).

251\. Then he worshipped Sankara for (inducing) Sati, Hara thereafter
said to  
his wife: “Do as has been said by Kasyapa.”

252\. The goddess then spoke to the sage. “That country being my own
body is  
already purified. What is to be done by me there?”

253\. Kasyapa (said): “As the human beings are always associated with
Pisacas  
there, so their intellect does not always diverge from sin.

254\. Dishonoured in all countries, possessed of evil practices and
covered  
with impurities…

255\. O beautiful faced, their sin can be allayed by you alone, as the
sin  
committed in this land is regarded to be very weighty by me.

256\. Brhadasva (said): After knowing this fact, the goddess, having a
face  
beautiful like the moon and possessed of great compassion, said to her
lord:

257-59. “O father of the world, I shall assume the form of a river in
the  
Nether World. Make a stroke with your spear near the abode of Nila,
where, O  
lord, while breaking the mountain, was (placed) the point of the plough.
By  
that stroke of the spear I shall come out of the Nether World and shall
follow  
the way made with the plough up to the place where there is the great
river  
Sindhu.” The god Hara (accordingly) did this and so did the beautiful
Sati.

260-61. Sankara himself named her as Vitasta. Because Hara had excavated
with  
the spear a ditch measuring one Vitasti, through which the good river –
gone  
to the Nether World – had come out, so she was given the name Vitasta
by  
Svayambhu.

262\. Then, O king, the people in all the countries heard that the
goddess  
Sati, after assuming the form of a river, had appeared in Kasmira.

263-64. Then the people, possessed of great sins, came to have bath in
that  
(river). Being afraid of them, she went away quickly from that way
excavated  
by means of spear to the Nether world. Propitiating her, Kasyapa again
brought  
her out near Pancahasta.

265\. Issuing forth from the abode of the Naga Pancahasta, she had
covered a  
distance of one gavyuti only when an ungrateful person, verily, saw her.

266-67. Seen by an ungrateful one, she again disappeared. Persuaded once
more  
by the sayings of Kasyapa, the best of the rivers allowed her person to
be  
seen at a distance of a Krosa from that Cakra. Then seen by one who
had  
illicit relation with a friend’s wife, she again disappeared.

268\. By the word of Kasyapa and praised by thousands of Brahmanas,
the  
beautiful river was brought out at the hermitage of Narasimha.

269\. Again at a distance of one Krosa, the great river, seen by a  
Brahmana-killer, vanished at once and then Kasyapa said to her:

270\. “Salutation to you, O daughter of the king of mountains;
salutation to  
you, loved by the best sages; salutation to you, the giver of boons,
worthy of  
being solicited and possessed of sacred character by association with
Hara.

271-72. O goddess – devoid of impurities and grief, having holy and
cool  
water, with the banks approached by the frolicsome wives of the gods,
embraced  
by the twice-born and the gods – afraid of whom you are running away,
those  
very men – devoid of all sins and shining with great lustre – surround
you.

273\. O goddess, just as a thing burnt in the fire gets purity, so is
the  
purity (obtained) from your sight. All sins become purified in the same
way. O  
great goddess, be favourable!

274\. O great river, you have been requested for the purification of
the  
sinners, so purify the sins. O swiftly going one, do not go out of
sight.”

275\. Gratified thus with devotion of the high-minded Kasyapa, the
goddess  
spoke to Kasyapa who was speaking in that way.

276-78. “I do not dare purify those who are associated with too much of
sin.  
For this implore Laksmi, the beloved of the bowholder (i.e. Visnu). She
is  
capable of purifying even the three worlds. Aditi, Diti, the great river
Ganga  
and all other rivers do not bear any comparison to her. Request today
only  
Laksmi – the beloved of Kesava.”

280-81. Govinda said to Laksmi. “O goddess go, do not be late.”
Addressed thus  
by Kesava, Laksmi – filled with grief – spoke this sentence: “O Lord,
Sati has  
already gone there. She will, verily, take away the credit of me who
shall go  
afterwards.

282\. Knowing her full of grief, Kasyapa spoke again. You are the
supreme power  
appearing in various forms.

283-84. O goddess, daughter of the sea, devoid of dust, holy, abode of  
auspiciousness, it is you who are Kasmira, it is you who are glorified
as Uma,  
it is you who, O goddess, are living in the forms of all goddesses.

285\. The water of the Vitasta, mixed with your water, may be such as is
the  
honey mixed with nectar. Bathed in your water, even the sinners become
free at  
once and are purified.”

286-87. Lauded by Kasyapa, she became devoid of grief. The giver of
boons,  
(she) thought, “I must act according to the words of my lord and of the
sage.  
Certainly, there is no use of my thinking. Having assumed the form of a
river  
she went quickly. Kasmira spoke:

288-89. “Go soon before Sati reaches here to wait for you. O beautiful
one,  
purify (this) country with water before she purifies it first. You will
get a  
good name.” Having heard her words she became griefless.

290\. That river, therefore is always called Visoka (Griefless) by the
people.  
Kasmira, whose speed is like that of the mind, also told (everything) to
the  
goddess Sati.

291\. Having listened to the activities of Laksmi, Sati, who had heard
all the  
details, became pleased and stood waiting in the way near the hermitage
of  
Dhaumya.

292\. Visoka, too, afterwards, came through the hole of Akhu as it was
vacant  
and saw Vitasta who was standing in front.

293\. O chief of the kings, Visoka – freed of all jealousy on seeing
Vitasta –  
joined her. Then Vitasta, who had reached there first, appropriated her
name.

294-96. O lord, then angry Visoka cursed Kasmira, “O wicked one, as I
have  
been absorbed by you today by means of falsehood and you have informed
Sati  
about my activities, so your people will be mostly liars, possessed of  
impurities, hired servants and dishonoured in the worlds.

297\. As regards taking away of my prestige by Sati, there is no
humiliation to  
me as the goddess Sati, O Kasmira, undoubtedly is the same as I.

298\. Then the best among the rivers, namely Sati accompanied by Laksmi,
went  
slowly through the way made with the plough, purifying the people.

299\. Aditi, the mother of the gods celebrated as Trikoti, joined the
goddess  
Vitasta.

300\. O king, then (joined) Saci, the wife of Indra, named as river
Harsapatha,  
and Diti, the mother of Daityas, Candravati by name.

301\. Receiving good rivers in this way, the goddess became united with
the  
Ganga and the Sindhu.

302\. The water of Vitasta mixed with that of Sindhu is like milk mixed
with  
nectar, beauty associated with elegance and knowledge associated with
good  
nature.

303-4. 0 king, she became there such as is bravery associated with
humility,  
piety associated with wealth, clay of high quality refined through  
purification, Kama associated with mind, gem associated with gold,
life  
associated with health, and profit associated with honour.

305-6. Bound by affection, Tapana’s daughter – the goddess Ganga – due
to the  
great respect and devotion for the sage, augmented with her own part
the  
Vitasta, the best of the rivers, the destroyer of all sins. The Sindhu
should  
be regarded as the Ganga and the Vitasta as the Yamuna.

307\. The place, where there is the confluence of these two, should be
regarded  
as equal to Prayaga. Appropriating the water of the Ganga, the Yamuna
said to  
the Ganga:

308\. “O possessed of beautiful colour, at Prayaga my name is
appropriated by  
you and in Kasmira your name has been appropriated by me.”

309\. Then the Ganga said to her, “O beautiful one, I must again
appropriate  
your name when I am designated as Sindhu.”

310\. Having come to know this fact, Sati – the river going in the
company of  
the Sindhu – divided itself and did not go beyond the Himalaya, through
the  
way made with the plough.

311-13. The sage Kasyapa again spoke to her possessed of great fortune:
“O  
beautiful one, you must necessarily go by the way made with the
plough,  
otherwise the whole country will be turned into a lake.” Persuaded again
and  
again by Kasyapa, that excellent river went in anger through the way
made with  
plough. So, though clear, she is seen as a dirty one at that place.

314\. Kasyapa said: “Assuming the form of a river called Vitasta, O
goddess,  
the daughter of the mountain, you are not a river (but) an ascetic lady,
wife  
of Sarva, even higher than Sarva.

315\. May there be happiness for you. You are the daughter of the
mountain and  
on account of (being born) from his body are (called) the
mountain-river. O  
wife of Rudra, you are borne by Sambhu and being requested, you flow (in
the  
form of a river).

316\. Those great sinners also who having offered their bodies to you
are gone  
to heaven are pleased to see their bodies carried away by (your) waves.

317\. They are surprised to see their bodies (and say), ‘We are in
heaven, and  
being in the water, are still sporting in (the river which is a form of)
Uma.

318\. O goddess, the fire of hell for the human beings is pacified with
your  
cool outpourings called waves, born of water-drops and sent forth by the
wind.

319\. O goddess, born of the mountain, you pacify the fire of three
times seven  
hells for the human beings by means of your waves shining with earthen
lamps.

320\. Those persons who will take bath in your holy water, shall go to  
Brahmaloka, even if they have committed Great Sins.

321\. Those who bathe even once in your waters, do not see, even in
dream, the  
dreadful tortures of Yama induced by the contraction of his eye-brows.

322\. The sages know that for a Brahmana always performing (his) duties,
a bath  
in you is the giver of salvation and a bath in the Ganga is the giver
of  
heaven.

323\. Purifier of even the three worlds, you are possessed of great
influence.  
O goddess, you are Uma, the mother of all gods and not a river.

324\. O goddess,(you are) the solidity of gods, the goddess Bharati of
gods. O  
river, you are always the satisfaction of all beings on the earth.

325\. O goddess, do favour upon me. Engaged in the welfare of this
country, go  
further from this abode with an unannoyed mind.

326\. You are half of the body of Hara. You are the wife of the God and
not a  
stream who while running to meet Sindhu have been requested by me.

327\. Sankara alone is your lord and the ocean is not different from
Him. Go  
quickly to your lord Siva by meeting the ocean.

328\. Having heard thus, the goddess again remembered her own saying
and  
becoming eager, made up her mind to go to him.

329\. Then, the stream bearing resemblance to a hill of water, went
forth with  
great force, doing as it were the parting of Himalaya’s hair.

330 O king, then she joined the goddess Krishna and hundreds and
thousands of  
other nice rivers.

331\. Passing through the middle of Svairajakas and a part of Matras,
and  
crossing Bhogaprastha, it joined the Ganga.

332\. Verily this sin-destroying Vitasta – the best of the rivers –
appeared on  
the earth in the company of Laksmi, due to the instruction of Kasyapa.

333\. O king, (there appeared) also Aditi, Diti, Saci, the excellent
river  
Ganga and the daughter of the Sun, i.e. Yamuna.

334-35. Living thus in Kasmira the four aeons passed After the
completion of  
those four aeons, at the end of the month of Asvayuj, the human beings
went  
out after having made collections of rice etc.

336 An old good Brahmana named Candradeva – descendant of Kasyapa – did
not go  
out due to despondency and due to being ordained by future events.

337-38. He was not killed due to the fear of Nikumbha and also for the
sake of  
sport. The Pisacas, then, played with that Brahmana as the little boys
(play)  
with a bird tied to a string. Agitated by the Pisacas, he obtained
complete  
indifference (to worldly objects).

339\. Oppressed by the Pisacas and with cold and snow, that old good
Brahmana  
roamed with a perplexed mind and while roaming, he reached (that place)
where  
(lived) that king of the Nagas.

340\. At the place where Ananta had formerly fixed his plough, there
(existed)  
since olden times, the highly exalted abode of Nila.

341-42. At that very time, the mighty Nila, the lord of the Nagas,
seated on a  
nice couch under Dhanada, the best of the mountains, was being served by
the  
high-souled Pisaca Nikumbha and highly powerful and dreadful Nagas.

343\. The Nagas and the Naga-maidens who had made their abodes in
Kasmira,  
waited in large numbers upon that Naga-king.

344\. Some of the Nagas were praising the king, the others were fanning
(him),  
while others, again, were waiting upon him, the pious one seated on an  
excellent couch.

345-50. Seeing in their midst, Nila, resembling a mass of black
antimony,  
shining forth with his ear-rings and the diadem of sun-like colour,
adorned  
with one garment shining like the lightening, and the China-silk
resembling  
the rays of the moon, shining due to a variegated canopy decorated all
around  
with rows of little bells and due to seven hundred terrible
snake-hoods  
radiant with jewels and surrounded by garlands of effulgence spread
forth by  
gems of the lamps studded with gems, Candradeva thought “This must be
Nila.”  
Due to the favour of that mighty lord of the serpents, that twice-born  
approached the Naga, did obeisance, touches, the earth with his knees
and then  
pronounced the hymn of praise.

351-52. Candradeva said: “Salutation to you, O Nila, sovereign-king of
the  
Nagas, possessed of lustre like that of the blue lotus, resembling a
mass of  
blue clouds, having abode in dark blue waters, you shine, O Naga, with
seven  
hundred hoods, You blaze forth like the seven-horsed sun, with rays.

353\. O Nila of dark blue complexion, O lord of the gods, O king of the
Nagas,  
you – chief of the hooded ones, sitting in the sky and called immortal –
are  
seen, as it were, through meditation, by your own gods who are wise and
who  
have subdued sins.

354\. O Nila, enthroned like the lord of sacrifice you are propitiated
with  
various rites, for the attainment of salvation, by the Brahmanas who
know the  
meaning of the Vedas and perform proper sacrifices in worldly matters.

355\. O lord of the Nagas, the chiefs of the gods recognize you as fire
and as  
the sun in the sky. Shining like fire, O Nila, you accomplish the deeds
of  
your devotees.

356\. By me you have been seen as appearing for some reason, though you
dwell  
in all the beings. Then remember. ed, you release me from the great
calamity.  
Salutation to you, O lord of men, protect (this) Brahmana.

357\. O Nila, shining with the multitude of water-torrents, you shimmer
like  
Visnu, the lord of the immortals. Being a creator of the creator, you
enjoy  
the company of the lord of Yama and always bow down before Vasudeva.

358\. Clad in blue raiment and possessed of blue eyes, O Nila, O lord of
the  
Nagas, even a man of unrestrained senses who contemplates you – the lord
of  
the gods and all pervading like the Ether – is saved by your grace.

359\. O Nila, the Vedas have sung about you – the eternal one – as the
essence  
of the Vedas, the object of worship in the fire, the fulfiller of the
desires  
of those who seek salvation and those who are ambitious (of material
gain).

360\. Illumined by you the Brahma is indivisible, pure and the highest.
Due to  
its minuteness, it is called Ether and is even with all the limbs,
uncreated.

361\. O Akincanya, you, too, have not been able to explain the true
essence of  
that highly minute (and still) great one. For being the support of all
the  
elements, you are the great essence of your own self and of that
imperishable  
one.

362\. O Lord of the Naga-kings, Kadru adorned with a thousand sons
shines  
exceedingly by you only as Aditi by Visnu only.

363\. O Lord, you alone shine so much with penance and send forth water,
snow  
and showers.

364\. O highly pious one, Prajapati Kasyapa – the father of all beings –
is  
adorned exceedingly by having you as a son.

365-66. O Lord, in you there is piety, truth and forbearance. In the
wars  
amongst the gods and the demons, you have slain hundreds and thousands
of the  
demons who were (like) thorns for the gods and the Brahmanas. O mighty
one,  
you are the giver of the boons, worthy of attainment and slayer of the
armies  
of the enemies of the gods.

367\. Having compassion on your devotees, you are highly devoted to
Janardana,  
the god of the gods. You are exceedingly dear to Him as is that Naga
Vasuki.

368\. O Naga, the Dhanada (“Wealth-giver”, the name of a mountain) is
always  
your friend as of Siva. Well-known as the lord of wealth, you give
wealth to  
(your) devotees.

369\. You are the refuge of the Nagas as Indra is of the gods. O pious
one,  
know that I am full of devotion for you.

370\. Nila said: “Hail to you, O best among the twice. born. O lord of
the  
Brahmanas, Luckily you have approached me and are to be honoured as you
have  
been regarded as a guest by me.

371\. Happiness to you! Ask for a boon which is desired by you and is
dear to  
your heart. Visit my home and stay there as it may please you.”

372\. Candradeva (spoke): “O best among the Naga-chiefs, you must give
me a  
boon. I ask for a boon and you are worthy of granting that to me.

373\. O possessed of terrible prowess, let the human beings live
constantly in  
Kasmira. The people are always oppressed in going away and coming again.

374\. Leaving their homes and cities of various sorts, the human beings…
May  
they live (here) with your favour. This is the boon I solicit for.

375\. Nila (said): ” O best among the twice-born, it will be so. Acting
upon my  
instructions received by me from Kesava, the human beings may live
here  
constantly.”

376-77. Saying thus, Nila took the Brahmana to his home, worshipped him,
fed  
him properly and told him the practices (to be followed) for living in  
Kasmira. The Brahmana also lived happily in the home of Nila for six
months.

378\. When the (full moon night) of Caitra had passed, men poured in
from all  
sides and there came also the king named Virodaya surrounded by many
horses  
and elephants.

379-80. When the human beings had entered, the young Brahmana appointed
by  
Nila approached king Virodaya with hoards of wealth and related to him
the  
whole account. The king also related the whole incident to all the
people.

381\. Since then, human beings acting upon the instructions of Nila
lived  
happily in Kasmira after constructing houses there.

382\. Having constructed various sorts of houses, temples, sacred
places,  
villages and cities, the people lived in that dwelling-place.

383\. Since then, very little snow falls in this country and the people
always  
obey the words of Nila.

384\. Vaisampayana (said): Told thus by Brhadasva, king Gonanda,
possessed of  
curiosity, asked that sage again:

385\. O descendant of Bhrgu, possessed of great lustre, tell me as to
which  
were the holy practices which Nila, formerly, pronounced to Candradeva?

386\. Brhadasva (said): O king, listen attentively to that which the
Naga –  
seated on a couch – told the Brahmana seated on a silver stool.

387\. Nila (said): “Having bowed before Hrsikesa Hari the preceptor of  
Parasara, I shall relate to you the practice (to be followed) for living
in  
Kasmira.

388\. O son of Kasyapa, on Asvayuji there comes Nikumbha, after killing
in  
battle, many Pisacas gone to the sea of sand.

389\. The full moon night should be celebrated for his worship. Know
that from  
me.

390\. The houses should be white-washed and worshipped. Men, especially
the  
children, must take bath and anoint themselves.

391\. Men should not eat anything on that day. Food should be given only
to the  
children and the sick.

392-93. The houses should be worshipped with heaps of leaves along
with  
fruits. Having kindled fire after the rise of the moon, one should
worship  
Rudra, moon, Uma, Skanda, two Nasatyas and Nandi, each one separately
with  
water of honour (argha), garlands and eatable offerings.

394\. Then Nikumbha should be worshipped with Krsara (rice mixed with
pulse).  
Men possessed of horses should worship Revanta, the son of Aditya.

395\. Persons possessing cows should worship Surabhi and those who have
got  
goats should worship fire.

396\. Shepherds should worship the god (Varuna), the lord of waters, and
those  
who own elephants should worship the lord of the Ganas.

397\. Having performed sacrifice in the fire and having worshipped the
best  
Brahmanas, one should worship one’s own self and eat vegetarian food in
the  
company of friends, servants, wife, children etc.

398\. That night should be passed by men in the vicinity of fire, amidst
all  
sorts of vocal and instrumental music mingled with the sound of conches.

399-400. 0 king, (that night) should be passed with good dramatic  
performances. Then, early in the morning, the persons – well anointed
and well  
adorned – should perform fire-worship and the ceremony of touching
auspicious  
things.

401\. One should feast in the company of friends and should play to
one’s  
contents. One should sleep that night, and afterwards, on the next one.

402-6. People – with all parts of their bodies smeared with mud;
besmearing  
their friends here and there with mud; speaking, for the sake of love,
various  
beautiful utterances concerning persons having sexual intercourse and
the  
women fit for cohabitation, instigating sex-instinct; saying indecent
words  
and crying aloud – should play. On that day, in the morning, the Pisacas
of  
dreadful sight – the followers of Nikumbha – enter all the human beings.
In  
the evening, they leave the body of one who does so and is bathed and
enter  
that of another, cursing him, who does not do so. Then the bathed
persons  
should worship Kesava.

407-8. With their bodies anointed and well-adorned, they should worship
the  
Brahmanas and feast themselves in the company of friends, servants,
wives and  
children. Since then, the human beings, especially the Brahmanas, should
keep  
the fire kindled in their houses, at night, for a period of six months.

409-10. A lamp should be placed outside the home, at night, for one
month.  
Till the full-moon night of Karttika, this Kaumudi – the giver of bliss
–  
should be celebrated. Then after the passing away of that fortnight,
there  
should be the celebration of “Sleep with happiness” (Sukha Suptika).

411\. 0 Brahmana, listen to me who am saying as to how is that to-be
celebrated  
on the fifteenth. None except the sick and the children should take
meals on  
that day.

412-13. After sun-set, one should worship Laksmi and then lamp-trees
should be  
placed in the temples of the gods, crossings of the roads, cremation
grounds,  
rivers, hills, houses, bases of trees, cow-pens, court-yards and shops.

414-15. O twice-born, all the shops should be decorated with clothes.
After  
that, in the place surrounded by rows of earthen lamps, O lord of the  
twice-born, a person, well adorned and dressed in new, should eat in
the  
company of friends, relatives, the Brahmanas and servants.

416\. Next day, the persons – well anointed and well decorated should
gamble  
and listen to vocal and instrumental music.

417\. They should also feast in the company of the persons mentioned
above. For  
him who wins in that gambling, the year is auspicious.

418-19. During that night, the place where the beds are placed, should
be  
well-decorated with perfumes, clothes, incense and jewels. It should
also be  
surrounded by lines of lamps and perfumed with incense. That night
should be  
spent by them in the company of wives.

420\. 0 Candradeva, the friends, the relatives made by marriage and
the  
maternal relatives should be honoured with new clothes and so also the  
Brahmanas and the servants in the proper manner.

421\. On the eleventh night of the bright half of the month, the man
observing  
fast should wake up God Hari with songs and dances.

422-23. In the month of Asadha, Kesava’s statue, sleeping on the couch
in the  
form of Sesa, should be made of stone, clay, gold, wood, copper, brass,
silver  
or He may be painted in a picture. His feet should be shown in the lap
of  
Laksmi.

424\. 0 excellent sage, know from me the way in which that (deity) is to
be  
awakened at the end of the bright half of Karttika.

425-27. During the night of the eleventh, vigil should be observed with
songs,  
dances, instrumental music, Brahmaghosa, the sounds of Vina and
Pataha,  
recitation of the Puranas, hearing of the Puranic stories, singing of  
devotional hymns, presentation of dramatic performances, charities,
earth  
decorations, offerings of flowers and incenses, various sorts of
eatable  
offerings, trees of lamps, and various sorts of fire-worships.

428-431. Having worshipped the image at night, with eatables like
cakes,  
vegetables, rice boiled in milk, fruits, preparations of sugar-cane,
honey,  
grapes, pomegranate, holy basil, and salt; with brush, red thread, red
and  
white sandalwood, Alaktaka paint, seeds and fragrant saffron, the wise
should  
wash the auspicious image after taking bath in the holy water of a
river.

432-34. That awakened image made of the above-mentioned materials – if
the  
figure be painted in a picture – … should be carried on an altar and
the  
wise should bathe that (image) placed on the seat, in the proper manner,
in  
accordance with the rules of the Pancaratra and according to one’s
means  
firstly with clarified butter, oil, honey; then with curd and milk, and
then  
with the five preparations of cow’s milk.

435-39. Thereafter, should be applied to the image, the unguents, namely
the  
ground seeds of Phaseolus Radiatus (masacurnam), the ground seeds of
Ipomoea  
Turpethum (masuracurnam), (ground) fruits of Emblic Myrobalan
(amalakani),  
Symplocos Recemosa (rodhram), Curcuma xanthorrhiza (kaleyakam), powder
of  
Tabernaemontana coronaria (tagaram), the pericarp of a lotus (karnakam),
the  
white mustard (siddharthakam), Pamcum Italicum (priyangu), fruits of
citron  
(bijapurakam), all the medicinal herbs, all scents, all seeds, gold,  
auspicious things as far as these may be available, jewels, Kusa grass,
water,  
clay dug out by means of elephant’s tooth and bull’s horn from the bank
of a  
river, cow-pen, ant hill, confluence (of rivers), water-tank, the place
of  
Indra (king), the lake, and the peak of the mountain. Having given bath
to the  
king of the gods with all these, one should give the auspicious yellow
pigment  
called gorocana.

440\. Then should be given, as far as the means may allow, pitchers made
of  
gold, well decorated and full of the leaves of Jati flowers and fruits.

441-42. Having bathed Govinda amidst announcements of good day,
recitation of  
Veda, tunes of Vina and Venu, the sounds of Sutas, Magadhas and Vandis,
that  
well anointed, well decorated and well-dressed (Govinda) should be
worshipped  
with Jati flowers along with buds.

443\. Incense should be given along with pollen of flowers and
beautiful  
earthen lamp. Then the god should be worshipped with rice boiled in
milk.

444-45. Then the Bhagavatas should be honoured with gifts of grains
and  
jewels. Thereafter should be performed fire-sacrifice and after that
should be  
worshipped the Brahmanas, according to one’s means, with clothes,
ornaments,  
jewels, cows, horses, elephants and cash-money. One should take meals  
afterwards.

446\. On the thirteenth should be honoured, as the means may allow, the
persons  
whose means of livelihood is stage i.e. wrestlers, panegyrists etc.

447\. On the fourteenth, either nothing should be taken or milk only may
be  
taken and on the fifteenth should be worshipped Janardana, the god of
the  
gods.

448-51. On Paurnamasi, nothing should be eaten during the day time.
After the  
rising of the moon, Krttikas, Karttikeya, Khadga and Varuna along with  
Hutasana should be worshipped with garlands, scents, incenses, eatables
of  
various kinds like the rice boiled in milk, vegetables, preparations
of  
sugarcane, half ripe barley, cakes of sugar covered with seeds,
beautiful  
trees of lamps and worship of the twice-born.

452-53. After performing worship thus, one should put the earthen lamp,
which  
was placed at the outer side of the house for a month, in a basket and
taking  
in the vicinity of water, make that flow along with some eatables. The
bottom  
of the lamp should be painted with sandalwood.

454\. Having made a fish of sand, one should fill it with milk, provide
it with  
eyes of jewels, and then give it to a Brahmana.

455-56. Then a nice white bull – clothed, endowed with all scents and
bearing  
all sorts of grains should be given to a twice-born according to one’s
means.  
He waits (for the donor) in the Kantara i.e. the path of the god of
Death. By  
means of that (bull) the wise men, verily, cross the way of the god of
Death.

457\. The givers of the bull enjoy themselves in the heaven, for as many
years  
as there are hair on the body of the bull.

458\. After worshipping Visnu with red garlands, one should take milk
etc. and  
then go to sleep.

459-60. Thus, the Awakening of the God should be observed for five days.
The  
wise men should sleep on bare earth for five days and take bath daily in
the  
cool water of the river.

461\. The god Hari, the Brahmanas and the Fire should be worshipped. O  
descendant of Kasyapa, the eating of meat should be avoided even with
great  
effort.

462\. The meat-eaters, namely, the Danavas, the Yaksas, the Daityas, and
the  
Pisacas along with the Raksasas avoid meat for these five days.

463\. Having worshipped thus the lord of the gods, possessed of (the  
fulfillment of) all desires, one, having reached the end of life, is
honoured  
in the world of Visnu.

464\. It is in accordance with one’s means that all this, may be even
little,  
should be performed. One gets (by this) the whole merit. Dishonesty in  
money-matters should be avoided.

465-66. Formerly, Kasmira was constructed by the high- souled Kasyapa,
on the  
first day after the passing away of the (full-moon day of) Karttika, so
a  
festival should be celebrated there on that day by all human beings –  
well-fed, well anointed, possessed of happy minds and surrounded by
good  
people.

467\. Vocal and instrumental music should be listened to and auspicious
things  
should be resorted to. New clothes should be worn, and those who are
given to  
drinking should drink.

468\. The sun along with his ganas is pleased with him.

469\. The same procedure should be followed on the seventh of Magha and
also on  
the seventh of Asadha, by those who desire victory and renown.

470\. 0 best among the twice-borns, this triad of the seventh days is  
compulsory. By following this procedure on all the seventh days, one
is  
honoured in the world of the sun.

471-74. On the full-moon night of Margasirsa, one should take meals at
night (  
only), and worship the moon with white garland etc., grains, other types
of  
food, gifts of lamps, fruits, gifts of salt, fire-worships, worship of
the  
Brahmanas and worship of women (whose husbands and sons are alive). A
pair of  
red clothes should be given to a Brahmana woman whose husband and sons
are  
alive and also to a sister, father’s sister and the wife of a friend. O
best  
among the twice-born, this full-moon night should certainly be
celebrated by  
the wise.

475-76 Others may be celebrated as the means allow or even may not be  
celebrated. By this, women get beautiful form and great prosperity. So
the  
full-moon nights should be specially observed by women.

477\. On the day on which falls the first snow, should be worshipped,
O  
Brahmana, the Himalaya and the two seasons Hemanta and Sisira.

478 My worship should be performed and also that of the local Naga.
Fruits and  
leaves growing on the Meru should be offered to the mountain.

479\. Baka flowers (Grandiflora) should be offered and also the
auspicious  
incense made of bdellium. O best among the twice-born, oblations of half
ripe  
barley should also be made.

480\. Food-preparations of half-ripe barley along with purified butter
should  
be given to the Brahmanas, and a festival full of songs and dances
should be  
celebrated.

481\. On snow-fall, new wine should be drunk by those who are given to  
drinking. Special meals should be taken according to one’s desire.

482\. The goddess Syama should be worshipped with flowers, incense,
paints,  
grains, food-preparations, fruits and roots by those who are
well-anointed and  
well-decorated.

483-84. Clad in heavy cloaks and clothes, seated on the snow along
with  
friends, servants, children and relatives, they should eat special
food,  
listen to vocal and instrumental music, see dances of harlots and honour
the  
ladies.

485-86. Sraddha should be performed with vegetables on the 8th of the  
dark-half of Pausa, with meat on the 8th of the dark-half of Magha, and
with  
cakes of flour on the 8th of the bright-half of Phalguna, in the proper
way,  
by a person intently devoted. On the 9th days of those very (months
and  
fortnights) should be performed Sraddhas for women.

487-88. After performing Sraddha one should pass the night, with effort,
in  
celibacy. When the full-moon night of the Pausa be associated with
Pusya, then  
a person, besmeared with the powder of white mustards, should anoint his
body  
with purified butter.

489-92. Then shining greatly after taking bath from vessels full of
all  
medicines, he should worship Narayana, Sakra, Soma, Pusya, Brhaspati,
each one  
separately with water of honour, garlands, eatable offerings etc. Then,
O  
twice-born, after performing sacrifice with Mantras belonging to the  
above-mentioned gods, he should worship the Brahmanas with wealth, and
after  
touching auspicious things, he should eat preparation of purified butter
and  
milk. A new silken cloth should be given to the officiating priest
knowing  
(future) time.

493\. Doing thus, a man obtains prosperity from the point of view of
wealth and  
grains. So the bath of such type which destroys sins, should be
performed.

494\. When there is Uttarayana, one should bathe Madhusudana according
to one’s  
means. The devotee of Hara (should bathe) the god Hara.

495-96. After anointing the stone-images with purified butter, one
should make  
similar images of purified butter. These images should be worshipped
with  
purified butter, conscientiously, by the wise for a period of three
months.

497\. Fuel should be given to the Brahmanas and grass for the cows to
the  
twice-borns, according to one’s means.

498\. One who does so, conquers well his enemies and obtains beauty born
of the  
lustre of the fire of the body and also good resort (after death).

499-500. On the 12th of the dark half after the passing away of the
full-moon  
night of Pausa, one, observing fast and bathed, should offer sesame and
water.  
Having prepared the offering of sesame and having performed sacrifice
with  
sesame, one should give sesame to the Brahmanas for the removal of all
sins.

501-503. After that on the 14th of the dark-half of the month, one
should take  
bath, before sun-rise, in the cool water of the Vitasta or the Visoka or
the  
Candravati or the Harsapatha or the Trikoti or the Sindhu or the holy  
Kanakavahini or any other holy river or the water-reservoirs and the
lakes.

504\. Seven kand-fulls of water should be offered in the name of Yama,
one for  
each name. Listen from me those names:

505\. To Yama, to Dharmaraja, to Mrtyu, to Antaka, to Vaivasvata, to
Kala and  
to Destroyer of all life.

506\. Having taken bath, one should worship Dharmaraja with flowers,
incenses,  
scents and a great quantity of rice mixed with pulses.

507\. Fire-worship should be performed with sesame mixed with clarified
butter,  
and the Brahmanas should be fed with rice mixed with pulses, and should
be  
given the sacrificial fee.

508-9. O best among the twice-borns, by doing so a man is purified and
freed  
from all sins if he be not associated with Great Sins. How can there
be  
salvation for the performer of Great Sins, without performing
atonements?

510\. Bath etc. everything is considered to be imperishable therein, if
the  
fifteenth (of the dark half of Pausa) be joined with Sravana.

511-14. On the 4th of the bright half of the month of Magha, one
desiring  
prosperity should worship Uma with lamps, grains, garlands, incenses,
ginger,  
coarse sugar, Kusumbha flower, salt, saffron, collyrium, comb and
Kunda  
flowers brought even with great effort. O descendant of Kasyapa, the
women,  
who are devoted to their husbands and whose husbands are alive, and also
the  
sisters etc. should be worshipped there. Same should be done in the
month of  
Asvayuj and same in the month of Jyestha.

515\. A man possessed of devotion should celebrate all 4th days, but
this triad  
of fourth days (should be celebrated) certainly. O Brahmana, the women
should  
especially celebrate these (days).

516\. On the full-moon night of Magha, a man should perform Sraddha with
sesame  
and give enough food consisting of pious offerings to the crows.

517\. After the passing away of the eighth of the month of Magha, there
should  
be celebrated for three days, a small festival. Know the procedure of
that  
from me.

518-19. In the twenty fourth Treta, Hari shall assume the form of a
human  
being, Raghunandana Rama, son of Dasaratha. Thence forward should be  
celebrated a small festival and after that (small one) a great one.

520\. Caru (grain boiled in milk or butter or water) of all grains
should be  
prepared with effort. The Brahmanas, the relatives made by marriage and
the  
maternal relatives should be worshipped with that (caru) and cakes of
flour.

521-22. The goddess Sita – wife of Rama – should be worshipped with
effort. On  
the 9th should be fed the Brahmanas with eatables made of flour mixed
with  
honey, as the means may allow. Karisini should be worshipped.

523\. On the tenth should be prepared rice of various types and with
that  
should be worshipped the Brahmanas, the friends and the followers.

524\. One should honour one’s own self and listen to vocal and
instrumental  
music. Ceremonies of touching auspicious things should be performed,
verily,  
for three days.

525-26. O twice-born, if that twelfth (day) be associated with Sravana,
then  
the wise observing last should worship the god Hari and do all
performances  
with sesame as said before. O giver of honour, everything done in that
becomes  
imperishable.

527\. On the dark fourteenth after the passing-away of that (twelfth),
one  
observing fast, should take bath and worship Mahesvara.

528\. The wise should bathe the Linga with its woolen covering put
aside, with  
the method followed in the Awakening of God and with materials
mentioned  
above.

529-30. Having worshipped (the Linga) with scents, garlands, red
clothes,  
ointments, eatable offerings of various types and pleasing of Fire and
the  
Brahmanas, devotion with vigil at night should be observed. Siva Dharmas
and  
(the stories about) the incarnations of Siva should be listened to.

531-33. In the eatable offerings for Sankara, animals should be made of
flour.  
He should be worshipped on the fifteenth also. O best among the
twice-borns,  
there too, meals consisting of half ripe barley and cakes of sugar
covered  
with sesames should be taken. The God must be necessarily worshipped on
the  
14th of the dark half of that month. In other months, He may or may not
be  
worshipped according to one’s desire. Having worshipped Him, one is  
established in Rudraloka and obtains mastery over the Ganas.

534\. O best among the twice-borns, listen to me who am saying as to how
the  
festival in the bright half of the month of Phalguna should be
celebrated.

535\. Observing fast, the persons – bathed and adorned – should place
earthen  
lamps on the snow at the time of night-fall.

536-37. After that, the gods and the Fathers should be fed. Next day,
the  
houses and especially the temples should be worshipped with beautiful
garlands  
of grains. Then should be worshipped Sita with scents, garlands etc.

538\. After that, special meals should be taken, and then should be
celebrated  
the festival, full of songs and dances.

539\. Except the cooked food which is to be given daily, nothing should
be  
given on that day. Anything received should be got hold of with great
effort.

540\. Next day, one should decorate oneself, touch auspicious things
and  
celebrate a special festival.

541\. On that day, gifts should be given to and accepted from the
twice-borns,  
dependents, craftsmen and relatives.

542\. Those who are addicted to drinking should drink wine and the
Brahmanas  
should take auspicious drinks. The bed chamber should be perfumed with
the  
perfume of incense.

543-44. None should be made ill-disposed on that day. Happy women –
well-fed,  
well-dressed, well-scented, well-anointed and decorated with ornaments
–  
should play in the company of men.

545\. On the rising of the moon in the (full-moon) night of Phalguna,
the moon  
and after that Aryama also should be worshipped.

546-47. Vigil should be observed during the night by singing, dancing
and  
playing on instruments. On next day should be viewed the performances of
the  
dancers, the actors and the singers. This should continue up to the
fifth of  
the dark-half (of Phalguna).

548\. Meals consisting mainly of a medicinal plant Parpata should be
taken for  
five days and decoration of the womenfolk and the self should be made.

549\. O twice-born, on that very fifth day Kasmira becomes menstruating
so her  
worship must be performed thereafter.

550\. A beautiful stone-image of Kasmira should be made and that should
be  
worshipped by offering unguents, clothes and eatables.

551\. Decorative things like flowers, incense etc. should not be given
to her  
for three days. O best among the twice- born, offering of milk is also  
prohibited.

552\. The worship should be performed by women, by no means by men. The
goddess  
should be bathed by women on the 8th of the dark half of that month.  
Afterwards, she should be bathed by the twice-borns, from pitchers full
of all  
medicines.

553-554. Having bathed that goddess with scents, seeds, jewels and
fruits  
successively, they should worship her with scents, garlands, clothes,  
ornaments, food and special preparations of cow’s milk.

556-56. Sacrifice for the gods should be performed with eatables of
triangular  
shape made of ground Phaseolus Mungo (mudga), husked rice and unhusked
rice  
and these should be given to the relatives also. Fire-worship should
be  
performed and so also the worship of the Brahmanas.

557\. The women – well-bathed, well-scented, well-fed and well-dressed –
should  
be pleased on that day.

558\. O twice-born, food should be sent to the friend’s house, and music
of  
Tantri-instrument should be listened to at ease by the well-fed
(persons).

559\. O best among the twice-borns, Kasmira – bathed after menstruation
–  
becomes pregnant since then, so cultivation should be started after
that.

560-63. Having made the field ready on a day told by the astrologer,
one,  
surrounded by the friends, should worship the goddess Earth, a pair of
bulls,  
cow, horse, Baladeva, Mahadeva, Vamadeva, the Sun, the Moon, the lord
of  
medicines, Parjanya, Indra, Pracetas, Rama, Laksmana, Sita, Sesa – the
bearer  
of the earth, Brahma, Kasyapa, Fire, Wind, Sky, each one separately
with  
garlands, scents, incenses and eatable offerings.

564\. Fire-worship should be performed, and after that the worship of
the  
Brahmanas (should be performed). Then sacrificial fee should be given to
the  
Brahmanas, according to one’s means.

565\. Thereafter, a man – well-anointed, well-decorated, well-fed and
possessed  
of auspicious features should sow the seed.

566\. The seed, drenched in water rendered holy with gold, should be
sown with  
gold amidst high sounds of musical instruments, and Brahmanas on a holy
day.

567-68. At first one should plough the auspicious earth which is
already  
inclined (to receive the seed). O twice-born, well-decorated one should
eat,  
in the centre of the field, in the company of friends, wife and
dependents. A  
festival full of singing and dancing should be celebrated with heart-  
enchanting sounds of musical instruments.

569\. O twice-born, it is stated that on the eleventh day following
(the  
full-moon night) of Phalguna, the women should worship the god Candra.

570\. Men should never worship him. Due to a boon given by Brahma, he is
to  
receive worship from the women.

571\. (He should be worshipped) with the flesh of water-born animals,
various  
types of eatables, garlands, incenses and fragrant saffron.

572-73. After such worship, the wise should worship him on the twelfth.
O  
twice-born, after being sent out of one’s house through the door, he
should be  
brought in through the ventilator. Then he should be placed at one’s
will.

574\. O best among the twice-born, on the fourteenth of that
(fortnight).  
Sankara should be worshipped and a great festival should be celebrated
at  
night.

575\. O Brahmana, highly strong and pious-minded Nikumbha, along with
his  
followers, worships Sankara on that fourteenth.

576\. Vigil should be observed during that night and the worship of
Sambhu –  
the god of gods – should be performed with effort.

577\. Nikumbha – the lord of the Pisacas – should also be worshipped and
the  
well-prepared oblations should be offered to the Pisacas.

578-80. (Offerings) mixed with cakes of meat and other non-vegetarian
food,  
fish, meat etc. should be placed under the trees, in cow-pens, in
various  
types of houses, on road- crossings, in streets, court-yards, rivers,  
prominent vacant houses, on tops of mountains, in palaces,
burning-grounds and  
on roads. O descendant of Kasyapa, children should be protected during
that  
night, in every house.

581\. Sportive men should pass that night in the company of courtesans,
with  
the observance of the vow of celibacy and with singing, dancing and  
heart-enchanting musical instruments.

582\. Then on the last dark fifteenth of the year, one should perform
Sraddha  
and offer food to the dogs, at one’s desire.

583-84. O descendant of Kasyapa, on the first day in the beginning of
the  
blight half of Caitra, the worship of Brahma must be performed by the
wise  
with various sorts of flowers, scents, clothes, ornaments, incenses,  
fire-worships and pleasing of the Brahmanas.

585\. On that very day, Mahasanti ceremony should be performed by the
rich, for  
the obtainment and preservation of wealth.

586\. O descendent of Kasyapa, on that very day should be worshipped
Time, as  
formerly, the reckoning of time was started on that day.

587\. On that very day, verily, Brahma created this world at sun-rise. O
best  
among the twice-borns, we have heard thus.

588\. The gods Brahma Visnu and Mahesvara should be worshipped. Rites
for  
propitiating planets and constellations should be performed in
accordance with  
the instructions of an astrologer.

589\. O giver of honour, all the planets, and all the stars should be  
worshipped, and also the year and all other parts of Time.

590\. Kala and Kalpa both are to be worshipped and so also fourteen
Manus who  
had been in the past and shall be in future. Listen to their names from
me.

591-92. First of all (comes) Svayambhuva Manu, then (come) Svarocisa
Manu,  
Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata, Caksusa, Vaivasvata, Arkasavarni,
Brahmasavarni,  
Bhadresa, Daksasavarni, Raucya and Bhautya.

593-95. O Brahman, fourteen lords Or the gods namely Vihabhuk,
Vipascit,  
Sucitti, Nidhi, Vibhu, Manojava, Tejasvi, Vadi, Adbhuta, Santi, Vrsa –
the  
excellent god, Rtudhama – the lord of the gods, Suci and Sukla are to
be  
worshipped.

O best among the twice-born, the worship of Yugas (Ages) also should
be  
performed.

596-97. Five Samvatsaras, two Ayanas, six seasons and twelve months
should be  
worshipped. Two fort-nights and fifteen dates should also be
worshipped.  
Caranas, Muhurtas and Rasis should be worshipped separately.

598-600. Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrgu,
Sanatkumara,  
Sanaka, Sanandana, Dharma, Vasistha, Satya, Kama, Artha, Hutasana,
Vasus,  
Rudras, the guardians of the worlds who live on the Lokaloka mountain,
and the  
guardians of the quarters namely, Sudhama, Sankhapada, Ketuman and
Hiranyaroma  
should also be worshipped.

601-605. O best of the Brahmanas, Sakra etc. (should be worshipped) and
so  
also the daughters of Daksa, namely, Sati, Khyati, Smrti, Svaha,
Anasuya,  
Svadha, Priti, Ksama, Sambhuti, Sannati, Arundhati, Kirti, Laksmi,
Dhrti,  
Medha, Tusti, Sraddha, Kriya, Mati, Buddhi, Lajja, Vasu, Santi, Pusti,
Siddhi,  
Rati, Arundhati Vasudhasi, Lamba, Bhanu, Marutvati, Samkalpa, Muhurta,
Sadhya,  
Visva, Aditi, Diti, Kala, Danayu, Simhika, Muni, Kadru, Krodha, Ira,
Pava  
Vinata, Surabhi, Khasa, Bhrsasva, Suprabha and Jaya.

606\. Bahuputra and his two wives should be worshipped. Aristanemi
accompanied  
by his four wives should be worshipped.

607\. Rddhi, Vrddhi, Nidra, Dhanesa and Nadakubara (should be
worshipped). The  
treasures Sankha and Padma should be worshipped and so also Bhadrakali
and  
Sarasvati.

608\. Vellas, Upavedas, Vedangas, all the abodes of knowledge, Nagas,
Yaksas,  
Pisacas, Garuda and Aruna (should be worshipped).

609\. Of the continents, namely, Jambu, Saka, Kusa, Kraunca, Salmali,
Gomeda  
and Puskara each should be worshipped separately.

610\. (The seas) of salty water, milk, butter, curd, wine,
sugarcane-juice and  
tasty water (should be worshipped).

611-12a. Holy Uttara Kurus, Ramya, Hairanvata, Bhadrasva, Ketumala,
Ilavrta.  
Harivarsa, Kimpurusa and Bharatavarsa (should be worshipped).

612b-15. Nine divisions of Bharata, namely, Indradyumna, Kaseruman,
Tamravarna  
Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa, Saumya, Gandharva, Varuna and this Manavadvipa  
surrounded by the seas should also be worshipped. Four oceans should
be  
worshipped and so also the seven Nether worlds, namely, Rukmadbhauma,  
Silabhauma, Nilamrttika, Raktabhauma, Pitabhauma, Sveta and Krsnaksiti.

616-17. O best among the twice-borns, Kalagniruda, Sesa, Varaha, Hari
and the  
worlds, namely, Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svar, Mahah, Janah, Tapas and Satya should
be  
worshipped. One should worship the Earth, the Water the Fire, the Air,
and the  
Ether.

618-620. (One should worship) the Mind, the Intelligence the Soul and
the  
unmanifested Purusa. (One should worship) Himavant, Hemakuta, Nisadha,
the  
mountain Nila, Sveta, Srngavan, Meru, Malyavan and Gandhamadana.

The chief mountain named Manasottara should be worshipped and so also  
Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Suktiman, Rksavan, Vindhya, Pariyatra and
Kailasa –  
the best of the mountains.

621-622. O giver of honour! (one should worship) the seven rivers
(namely),  
Bhagirathi, Pavani, Hladini, Hradini, Sita, Vanksu and Sindhu. (One
should  
worship) Suprabha, Kancanaksi, Visala, Manasahrada, Sarasvati, Oghananda
and  
Sumeru having unsullied water.

623-624. (One should worship) sacred places such Puskara, and rivers
such as  
the Vitasta and others. (One should worship) Saci, Vanaspati, Gauri,
Dhumrorna  
of beautiful form, Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka and auspicious Anumati. (One
should  
worship) Ayati, Niyati, Prajna, Mati, Vela and Dharini.

625\. (One should worship) the two gods, namely, Dhata and Vidhata, and
also  
the seven metres. (One should worship) Airavana, Surabhi and
Uccaihsravasa.

626\. (One should worship) Dhanvantari, Dhruva, and arms and weapons.
(One  
should worship) Kumara, Vinayaka and Vinayakas.

627\. (One should worship) Sakha, Visakha, Skanda, Naigamesa, the
wind-Gods and  
Fever – the lord of diseases.

628\. (One should worship) Valakhilya sages and Kasyapa, Agastya and
Narada.  
(One should) worship also the holy nymphs and the gods who drink Soma.

629\. (One should worship) Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Visvedevas, Asvinas,
Bhrgus,  
Angiras, Sadhyas and highly strong Maruts.

630\. (One should worship) the twelve suns (namely Dhata, Mitra, Aryama,
Pusa,  
Sakra, Amsa, Varuna, Bhaga, Tvasta, Vivasvan, Savita and Visnu).

631\. Dhara, Dhruva, Bhoja, Apa, Anila, Anala, Pratyusa and Prabhasa
are  
proclaimed to be eight Vasus.

632-33. Angaraka, Surya, Nirrti, Ghosa, Ajaikapad, Ahirbudhnya,
Dhumaketu,  
Dhvaja, Vahana, Isvara, Mrtyu, Kapali and Kankana, these eleven Rudras
should  
be known as the lords of three worlds.

634\. Kratu, Daksa, Vasu, Satya, Kala, Kama, Dhvani, Kuru, Vak and
Danuja,  
those ten shining ones are called Visve (devas).

635-36. O best among the speakers, Nasatya and Dasra should be known
as  
Asvinas.

Bhuvana, Bhanava, Sujanya, Sujana, Tyaja, Suva, Murdha, Daksa, Vaya,
Bandhuka,  
Prasava and Vyaya are regarded as twelve Bhrgus.

637-38a. Atma, Ayus, Manas, Daksa, Mada, Prana, Havisman, Gavistha, Rta
and  
Satya these ten highly strong gods are the sons of Angira.

638b-39. Manas, Mada, Prasna, Nara, mighty Pala, Diti, Haya, Naya,
Hamsa,  
Narayana, Vibhu and Prabhu are pronounced as twelve Sadhyas.

640-45. These forty nine, namely, Ekajyoti, Dvijyoti, Trijyoti, Jyoti,  
Ekacakra, Dvicakra, highly strong Tricakra, Rtajit, Satyajit, Susena,
Senajit  
Agnimitra Arimitra, Prabhumitra, Aparajita, Rta, Rtavan, Dharta,
Nidharta,  
Varuna, Dhruva, Vidharana, highly strong Devadeva, Idrksa, Adrksa,
Ihadrk,  
Amitasana, Krtina, Prasakrd, Daksa, highly glorious Samara, Dhata,
Ugra,  
Dhanu, Bhagma, Abhiyukta, Sadasaha, Dyuti, Vasuratha, Adrsya, Vama,
Kamajaya,  
Virat… are called Maruts.

646-47 Visvakarma, the originator of all crafts, should also be
worshipped. O  
Brahman, each of these, namely, the weapon, the conveyance, the
umbrella, the  
seat, the emblem and the drum, should be worshipped separately with
scents,  
garlands, paints, offerings of lamps, incense and the eatables.

648-49. Having performed the worship of these, one should worship
specially  
the planet, the Naga and the month which presides over the year, and
(should  
worship) also the planet of the future year, and the (presiding) day of
the  
month.

649-50. The wise would know the planet and the month from the mouth of
the  
astronomer. The month, the year and the day also should be known from
the  
astronomer. These should be worshipped with plenty of food and heaps
of  
flowers.

651\. Having known the day of the Naga-year from the Phalaveda, one
should  
worship that (day) with solid food and other articles of diet.

652\. Then, fire-sacrifice with utterances of Omkara should be
performed, with  
reference to all, in due order, with purified butter, unhusked barley
and  
sesame.

653\. Sacrificial fee should be given to the Brahmanas with separate
reference  
to each of those (planets etc.). Then Brahmanas, the friends, the
relations  
connected by marriage and the kinsmen should be fed.

654\. Special meals should be taken and a great festival should be
celebrated.  
O best among the twice-borns, Brahmana astronomers should be worshipped.

655\. The best of the Brahmanas – those who are acquainted with  
astronomy-astrology and those who know history – should be honoured
with  
cash-money, heaps of grains and clothes.

656\. 0 twice-born, the reciters (of the Puranas and the Epics)
desiring  
sacrificial fee should also be worshipped. One should decorate one’s own
self  
with flowers, ornaments and perfumes.

657-59. This is called Mahasanti, the destroyer of all sins, the
pacifier of  
all evils, the destroyer of bad dreams of Kali, the giver of long life
and  
prosperity, the increaser of wealth and prosperity, the destroyer of
diseases  
and enemies, the cause of the advancement of the government and the
country,  
auspicious, holy, and the giver of happiness in both the worlds.

660\. 0 best among the twice-borns, all those who have been mentioned by
me  
before you, go to the abode of Brahma in the beginning of the month
Caitra.

661\. 0 always sinless one, the assembly of Brahma assuming (different)
forms  
at will, bears specially a steady form, heart-enchanting and
undefinable.

662\. In that assembly, the above-mentioned (gods etc.) salute, serve
and  
praise Brahma undefinable and completely detached (from worldly
fetters).

663\. Visvavasu, Salisi, the two Gandharvas Haha and Huhu and others led
by  
Narada sing (the praises of) the preceptor of the world.

664-65. Thousands of divine damsels, specially Urvasi, Menaka, Rambha,  
Mitrakesi, Alambusa, Vigvaci, Ghrtaci, Pancacula, Tilottama, Sanumati,
Amala,  
Vanda and others dance near the lord of the gods.

666\. Then, in that assembly of all the gods, the god Brahma appoints
the  
planets etc. as protectors of the Human year.

667\. 0 best among the twice-borns, having worshipped the sustainer of
the  
worlds, the gods – pleased and strengthened – go after this, to their  
respective places.

668\. 0 best among the twice-borns, Sri should be worshipped on the 5th
of the  
bright-half in the month of Caitra. That is called Sri-Pancami.

669-70. The fifth day deserves worship by all means and definitely so
the one  
in the month of Caitra. O best among the twice borns, he who worships
Laksmi  
on all the fifth days, is not separated from her throughout his life and
after  
death he obtains the world of Visnu.

671-72. Skanda should be worshipped there with fragrant garlands,
scents,  
ornaments, clothes, cock, bell, goat, toy and nice eatable offerings.

673\. This 6th of Caitra is (to be celebrated) necessarily, the rest
(may be  
celebrated) at one’s will. All the children remain healthy in his house
who  
celebrates this.

674\. On that very 9th, the purified man, observing fast, should
worship  
Bhadrakali with plenty of flowers, incense and grains.

675\. Bhadrakali who rules over the gods, should be worshipped on all
the 9th  
days, (but) he who worships her on that (9th), obtains success in his  
undertakings.

676-77. 0 best among the Brahmanas, the deity presiding over house
should be  
worshipped on the 11th of the bright half of the month of Caitra, with  
flowers, ornaments, incense, vegetables of various sorts, incenses of
various  
types and worship of fire and the Brahmanas.

678\. On the bright 12th of the month of Caitra, Vasudeva should be
worshipped  
in the proper way after observing fast.

679\. Kamadeva (painted) on a cloth should be worshipped with various
types of  
garlands and diverse incenses, on the 13th of the bright half of Caitra.

680\. One should decorate one’s own self and worship the ladies of the
house. O  
twice-born, this (13th day) should be necessarily celebrated, the rest
may be  
or may not be celebrated.

681-82. 0 descendant of Kasyapa, best among the Brahmanas, on the 12th,
a  
pitcher full of cold water and decorated with flowers and leaves should
be  
placed before Kamadeva (Cupid), and before sun-rise a husband himself
should  
bathe his wife with water (from that pitcher).

683\. 0 best among the twice-born, on the 15th of the bright-half of the
month  
of Caitra, Nikumbha goes for fighting with the Pisacas in the sea of
sand.

684\. So, in every house, the worship of every one of those (Pisacas)
should be  
performed with effort, in the noon. Know the procedure from me.

685-86. Having made the (image of the) Pisaca with clay, leaves etc.,
one  
should worship that (image) with scents, garlands, clothes, ornaments,
the  
eatables, namely, sweetmeats, cakes, meat, drinks, weapons of various
sorts,  
umbrella, shoes and stick.

687-88a. Men should offer to him, two baskets full of dried food and
those  
eatables which may last long. Singing should be carried on and the
instruments  
Anaddha and Tantri should be played upon.

688b-689. Having worshipped him in the middle of the day, the wise
should,  
according to his means, again worship him, as before, at the moon-rise.
Then,  
he – benediction for whom has been pronounced by the Brahmanas – should
be  
sent off.

690\. The musical instrument Tantri should be played upon while he is
being  
sent. O descendant of Kasyapa, he must be followed on the next day.

691-692. And the nearby hill should be climbed. After returning to home,
the  
festival should be celebrated by singing, and playing on musical
instruments.  
Special meals should be taken in the company of friends.

693\. A nymph named Ira, employed by Visvavasu, was formerly cursed by
Sakra  
(and) was exiled from the assembly of the gods.

694\. She attained the state of being a plant in the Himavat, the best
of the  
mountains. After Nikumbha’s exit, her body breaks up into various forms.

695-96. When the goddess Ira is adorned with Ira flowers, he wise man –
well  
dressed, well-anointed, good-minded and well-concentrated should go to  
Ira-garden, accompanied by Ira wife and host of sons, and should worship
the  
goddess his with other flowers.

697\. (He) should offer various sorts of eatables and nourishments along
with  
earthen lamps. Special meals should be taken after going to Ira-garden.

698\. Then, the Brahmanas, the wife, the friends and the relatives
should be  
honoured with Ira-flowers. Ira-flowers should be stitched together with
a red  
thread.

699\. Those (stitched flowers) should be worn by one’s own self and
specially  
offered to the ladies. Vocal and instrumental music should be listened
to, and  
dance-performances should be seen.

700\. Special drink containing Ira-flowers should be taken. Ira
(flowers)  
should be presented to the gods. The gods are pleased in that way.

701\. With him who well-concentrated offers one thousand Ira (flowers)
to  
Kesava, the lord of the gods is pleased and he goes to heaven.

702\. Rudra, Brahma, the Moon, the Sun, Subha, Karisini and Durga should
be  
worshipped with Ira (flowers). All the gods are pleased (with the
offerings of  
Ira flowers)

703\. Ira is favourite of the Nagas and specially mine.

704\. I am excessively pleased with him who worships me with Ira flowers
in  
Ira-garden.

705\. On the third of the bright (half) of the month of Vaisakha,
sacrifice  
should be performed with barley, and barley should be given to a
Brahmana.

706\. One should worship Visnu with barley and also eat barley. O
descendant of  
Kasyapa, the worship of Ganga should be performed on that day.

707\. Muttering of god’s name, sacrifices, oblations to the manes,
penance,  
bath etc. all are said to be imperishable (on that day). Even a little
charity  
becomes perpetual.

708\. Having undergone fast on the second (day), (these rites) should
be  
performed strenuously by men on the third day, on the bank of the
Sindhu.

709-710a O Brahman, the god Visnu, the lord of the world, shall be (born
as)  
the preceptor of the world, Buddha by name, at the time when the Pusya
is  
joined with the moon, in the month of Vaisakha, in twenty eighth Kali
Age.

710b-12. Listen from as to how his worship should be performed in the  
bright-half, from that period onwards, in future. The image of Buddha
should  
be bathed (with water rendered holy) with all medicinal herbs, all
jewels and  
all scents, in accordance with the sayings of the Sakyas. The dwellings
of the  
Sakyas (i.e. Viharas) should be whitewashed with care.

713\. Here and there, the Caityas – the abodes of the god – should be
provided  
with paintings. The festival, swarming with the actors and the dancers,
should  
be celebrated.

714\. The Sakyas should be honoured with Civara (the dress of a
Buddhist  
mendicant), food and books. All this should be done till the advent of
Magha.

715\. O twice-born, eatable offerings should be made for three days.
Worship  
with flowers, clothes etc. and charity for the poor (should continue for
three  
days).

716\. 0 best among the twice-borns, the Brahmanas should be worshipped
with  
sesame, on the full moon day of Vaisakha. Bath, sacrifice, and funeral
rites  
(should be performed) with sesame.

717-18. Gift of wealth should be made and earthen lamps should be given
for  
the temple. Sesame should be offered to the Brahmanas and sesame should
also  
be eaten.

719\. O best among the twice-borns, on 11th of the dark half of Magha,
one  
should undergo fast and on the 12th, should do everything prescribed by
me in  
connection with Vaisakha.

720\. On the full moon day of Vaisakha, one should worship seven or
five  
Brahmanas with Black or other sesame mixed with honey.

721\. Whatever sin is committed throughout life is destroyed that very
moment,  
when (the thought) “May Dharmaraja be pleased” comes to the mind.

722\. Thereafter, barley – the king of the medicinal herbs becomes ripe.
The  
gods and the manes should be worshipped then with barley-grains.

723\. Then, one – anointed, garlanded and dressed in new clothes –
should eat  
barley-food in proper procedure, amidst sounds of musical instruments
and the  
Brahmanas.

724-25. O lord of the twice-borns, on the 8th after (the full moon day
of)  
Jyestha, one should worship Vinayaka along with his ganas, with heaps
of  
sweetmeats. sweet vocal and instrumental music and pleasing of the
Brahmanas.

726\. Or Vinayaka should be worshipped on all the 8th days. Worshipping
him  
after undergoing fast, one gets success in undertakings.

727-28. O best among the twice-borns, when the conjunction of Svati  
constellation takes place in the month of Asadha then should be
worshipped the  
god Wind, with scents, garlands, much rice cooked in milk, various types
of  
ground parched grains, varied flowers and other blossoms.

729\. O Brahman, in the end of the bright half of Asadha, a festival
with vocal  
and instrumental music should be celebrated for five days, for bringing
sleep  
to the god.

730\. On the 11th and the 14th, Dhanahotra should be performed and vigil
should  
be observed for two nights. The Brahmanas and the Satvatas should be  
worshipped on the 12th and the 15th.

731-32. On the 13th, gifts for dramatic performances should be made in
a  
proper procedure and money should be given, as far as the means may
allow, to  
those who earn their living through stage.

733\. What has he – the high minded – to do with violent sacrifices, by
whom  
Kesava has been worshipped in the ceremonies of Causing Sleep and
Awakening?

734\. When the conjunction of Vaisvadeva constellation takes place in
the end  
of the month of Asadha, the learned scholar should worship the gods, in
the  
manner prescribed in the case of Wind-god.

735-36. On the occasion of Daksinayana (the southern progress of the
sun), one  
should give to the Brahmanas, ground parched-grains mixed with milk,
snow,  
sugar, green vegetables, umbrella, shoes, garlands and water receptacles
full  
of cold water.

737-38. O twice-born, Kasyapa – the founder of this country – should
be  
worshipped at the appearance of Rohini constellation after (the full
moon day)  
of Asadha, with scents, garlands, eatable offerings and worship of the  
Brahmanas. Rohini cows along with their calves should be worshipped on
that  
day.

739\. At the appearance of Sravana, one should take bath in the
confluence of  
the Vitasta and the Sindhu and worship the bow-holder (Visnu) – the god
of the  
gods.

740\. After calling upon the Brahmanas to pronounce benedictory
formulae, one  
should play to get pleasure and should take there, verily, special
meals.

741\. The chantings of the Samaveda should be listened to on that day,
and the  
unmarried girls should specially play in the water.

742\. At the time, when the moon is united with Sravana constellation,
one who  
takes bath, gets prosperity in all places and times.

743-44. O twice-born, the god Madhusudana is born in the human world
for  
removing the burden (of the earth) on the dark eighth following the
(full moon  
day of) Sravana, in the end of the 28th Dvapara. O best among the
twice-borns,  
it is heard by us.

745\. From that period onwards, the worship of the god of gods and the
goddess  
should, be performed on that day, in the proper manner.

746-47. O best among the twice-borns, Devaki and Yasoda should be
worshipped  
on that day, with scents, garlands, eatables made of barley and wheat,  
eatables mixed with cow’s milk, and fruits of various types. Having
performed  
worship thus, a great festival should be celebrated at night.

748-49. In the morning, before the rising of the sun, women dressed in
clothes  
dyed with safflowers, should carry all the images, amidst charming
sounds of  
vocal and instrumental music, to the beautiful and auspicious bank of a
river  
or a lonely lake.

750\. Eatables made of barely along with preparations of sugarcane,
pepper and  
purified butter should be eaten on that day.

751\. Then, on the dark fifteenth united with Pitr constellation,
satiating  
libations of water and other oblations for the manes should be offered
with  
effort.

752-53. Subhasitas, Barhisads, Agnisvattas, Kravyada, Upahutas, Ajyapas
and  
Sukalins, all these hosts of Fathers should be worshipped with a great  
quantity of food, incense and flowers. O best among the twice-borns,
funeral  
rites with sesame should be performed with effort, on that day.

754\. On everyday of the bright-half of the month of Pausta, Mahendra
and the  
goddess Sati (Saci?) should be worshipped.

755\. O best among the twice-borns, painted on the cloth, he should be  
worshipped in the proper manner by kings as indicated by an astrologer.

756\. The cowherd should worship the Brahmanas with eatables, grains,
fruits,  
herb-roots, jewels, clothes and incense.

757-58. Mahendra should be worshipped along with his host (of warriors),
the  
weapons and the mount. O Brahmana, on the bright fifth of Indra’s
fortnight,  
my worship should be performed with a great quantity of scents, incense
and  
grains, gifts of garlands and clothes, gratification of the sacred fire
and  
the Brahmanas, gifts of various sorts for the dramatic performances,
and  
decorations of the earth. The worship of the local Naga also should be  
performed on that very day.

760\. In the fortnight following that (Indra Paksa), Sraddha should be  
performed everyday specially with Syamaka corn except on the fourteenth.

761a. The fourteenth (day of the fortnight) is prescribed for those who
were  
killed by means of weapons.

761b-62. Kesava has stated that Sraddha may be performed for the whole
of the  
fortnight or it may be performed in the fortnight excepting its (first)
one-  
third part, or in the last one-third. On the thirteenth, however,
Sraddha must  
be performed necessarily.

763-64. O best among the twice-borns, even he who lives on the bread
supplied  
by others, he who has got no wealth and he who is a manual labourer,
should,  
somehow or other, perform the funeral rites on the thirteenth. Know
while I am  
saying. Here is the verse sung by the Fathers.

765\. Will he be born in our family who may offer to us milk mixed with
honey,  
on the thirteenth in Varsa and Magha?

766\. O best among the twice-borns, the wise men should always worship
the  
guardians of the quarters on the 4th which falls in the fortnight of
the  
funeral rites in the month of Prausthapada.

767-69. Weapons should be worshipped at night in the temple of Durga.
O  
descendant of Kasyapa, after taking bath in the morning and after
worshipping  
all (the things) mentioned above, one should take one’s meals and
perform  
expiatory rites when the sun is just to set. This (ceremony) called
Nirajana  
should be known by those who are adept in the performance of Salihotra
and are  
thus the preservers of astronomy (described) in the Kalpa (Sutras) and
the  
works related to the Atharvaveda. After this, should be worshipped
those  
who-earn their living by means of stage- performances.

770-74. O twice-born, when the thousand-rayed (sun) is united with
Kanya  
constellation then one should observe fast and worship the sage Agastya,
with  
full pitchers, gourds, barley, rice, purified butter, beautiful Jati,
Padma  
and Utpala (flowers), white sandalwood, cow, bull, clothes, jewels
born-of the  
sea, umbrella, shoes, staff, slippers, a great quantity of rice cooked
in  
milk, nice fruits and herb-roots, various sorts of food, eatables, by
feeding  
the fire and the Brahmanas, and by giving up eating of one fruit for
the  
complete year. Having thus worshipped Agastya, one should worship the  
astrologer.

775\. Then, one should see the great sage Agastya as shown by him
(astrologer).  
A man gets the desired objects after seeing the sage Agastya.

776\. When the grains are ripe, one should, on a day of the bright
fortnight  
prescribed by an astrologer, worship the gods, the manes, the water, the
fire  
and the Brahmanas.

777-78. Having worshipped the twice-born and the astrologer, one –
dressed in  
new clothes, well-anointed, well- adorned, garlanded, facing the east,  
purified, with Vedic recitations in front…

779\. Having painted in the centre Brahma and hooded Ananta, one should
paint  
(the figures of) the guardians of the directions established in their  
respective directions.

780\. Their worship should be performed with incense, garlands,
unguents,  
clothes, jewels, fruits and eatables, and by gratifying the fire and
the  
Brahmanas.

781\. Rice mixed with sugar and the preparations of all (other) grains
should  
be given to the Brahmanas, the servants and the relatives.

782-83. Rice should be eaten by the wise (persons) themselves at night
and not  
in the day time. Absence of wealth dwells during the day in rice, at
night in  
curd and ground parched grains and always in Bauhinia variegata
(kovidara) and  
Feronia Elephantum (kapittha).

784\. On the 5th of that (fortnight), the god (Varuna) – the lord of the
waters  
– should be worshipped. Just as the goddess Uma is to be worshipped so
(should  
be worshipped) Dhanada.

785\. The virgins should be bathed on the 6th of that very (fortnight),
and  
should be decorated on the seventh.

786-87. Men should decorate themselves and also the women and the
children.  
With their bodies anointed with moist vermillion-powder, they should
play for  
pleasure amidst dances and instrumental music, on the 8th of the same  
(fortnight). After taking bath, one should worship the goddess named
Asokika.

788\. Flowers, food, incense, bed and seat along with the upper blanket
should  
be offered. Food mixed with sugar should be eaten.

789-90. He who desires to get prosperity, should worship Uma on that
day, with  
incense, food, earthen lamps, garlands, curd, grains or sugar, or
safflowers  
and salt or saffron, collyrium and bangles. After going to a garden
adorned  
with water (falls) and trees…

791-92. O best among the the twice-borns, then a noble man temperate in
food  
should take bath in the water of the Vitasta, for seven days on 10th
etc. –  
three days before, three days after and on 13th, the birthday of the
Vitasta.

793.94. O Brahmana, Vitasta should be worshipped on those seven days,
with  
scents, garlands, eatable offering, gifts of beautiful earthen lamps,
various  
sorts of flags, red threads, bangles, various sorts of fruits and by  
gratifying fire and the Brahmanas.

795\. Gifts for dramatic performances should be made and actors etc.
should be  
honoured on three days following the birthday of the Vitasta.

796\. On the 12th which falls within the festival of the Vitasta, a wise
man  
should observe fast and worship the god Hari.

797\. This is prescribed permanently. Others may or may not be observed.
O  
twice-born, that 12th is regarded as the Great one and is always
auspicious.

799-800a. The 12th which is united with Budha constellation is also
stated to  
be great. Madhusudana himself told me that the recital of God’s names,
bath,  
charity funeral rites etc. performed on that (12th), become twelve-fold.
O  
twice-born, if that 12th is united with Budha and Sravana
constellations, that  
certainly becomes highly great. Every thing performed on that day
becomes  
imperishable.

800b-802. One gets the merit which is stated (to be got) at Sannihati,
when  
the sun is eclipsed if one takes bath on that day, in the confluence of
two  
rivers, and gives in charity, at that time, a pair of shoes, umbrella,
full  
pitcher, a pair of clothes, food etc. If one observes the rest (of the
12th  
days) one is honoured in Svetadvipa.

803\. If that very 12th is united with Sravana constellation, he, if
desiring,  
may have mastery over the worlds for as long as there are the fourteen
Indras.

804-805. Taking out some clay, on that day, from the confluence of
Vitasta and  
Sindhu, one should always take bath with that at the time of taking
bath. By  
that (bath) a man gets always the merit of taking bath in the
confluence.

806\. After that, on the 4th of Asvayuj, the worship of the gods is
performed  
with all means and in the manner told about the ninth day.

807\. There should be honoured the lucky ladies whose husbands are alive
and  
who are devoted to their husbands, and also the sisters and others.

808\. Just as in the month of Asvayuj, so in Magha and so in Jyestha,
(these  
ladies) should be honoured. Thus, there is the triad of 4th days.

809\. Uccaihsrava should be worshipped with effort, in the bright
fortnight of  
Asvayuj when the moon is united with Svati constellation.

810\. O twice-born, if that (union of the moon with Svati constellation)
be on  
the 9th, then horses should be worshipped and the rites for their
pacification  
and welfare should be performed daily.

811\. (For fastening to the horses) a wise man should piece together
paddy  
(dhanya), Semecarpusanacardium (bhallataka), Costtus-speciosus
(kustha)  
Acaruscalamus (vaca) and white mustard (siddharthaka) by means of a
thread of  
five colours.

812\. Sacrifice should be performed in the fire with the mantras dealing
with  
Vayu, Varuna, Surya, Sakra, Visnu, Visvadevas and Agni.

813\. The horses should he controlled by persons holding weapons in
their  
hands. Beating them and mounting upon them should be prohibited on that
day.

814-15. When the moon is united with Sakra constellation, then the
best  
elephants – Kumuda, Sravana, Padma, Puspadanta, Vamana, Supratika,
Anjana and  
Nila – should be worshipped. After doing salutation, the same procedure
as  
told with reference to the horses, should be followed in the case of
the  
elephants.

816-19a. Then, on the 8th, the artisans, having undergone fast, should
worship  
Bhadrakali in proper manner, with valuable incenses, garlands, clothes,
lamps,  
jewels, eatables, fruits, herb-roots, meat and various sorts of
vegetables,  
and by gratifying the fire and the Brahmanas. (Bhadrakali should be  
worshipped) also with leaves of Bilva, sandalwood, purified butter,
drinks of  
various types and grains and by decoration of the earth, dancing and
singing  
and the observation of vigil at night.

819b-20a. O twice-born, the books should be worshipped in the temple of
Durga  
and the artisans should also worship their tools.

820b-22. Having obtained auspiciously the musical instruments and
armours and  
weapons, one – with pleased mind – should eat food mixed with curd and  
consecrated with sacred formulae by a Brahmana, and give that also to  
dependents, friends and astrologers. The women should go to a fruit-tree
and  
worship…

823\. Having worshipped the goddess with flowers, lamps, incense, food
etc. one  
should offer balls of food to an eagle. Gladly accepted by him, the  
food-ball…

824-26. O Brahmanas, food should be offered to the friends, the
relatives, the  
Brahmanas, and the dependents, in spring and winter, on the 8th or the
4th,  
and on the 14th and the 9th of the bright fortnight and not of the other
one.  
Just as the worship of the goddess was performed, so should the meals be
taken  
in front (of her).

827-28. O Brahman, the wise should, in this very manner, make
offerings,  
excluding the food-ball for the eagle, to the goddess of the house, in
the  
beginning of the year.

That (offering) should be made at home and never under a tree.

829\. When the beautiful vine-grove is ripe one should go there
accompanied by  
one’s wife, servants and friends.

830-33. Anointed, bathed, garlanded and well-dressed, one should worship
the  
goddess Syama, in the vine-grove, with flowers, incense, grains,
eatables,  
much half-ripe barley, purified butter and honey, and by gratifying
the  
Brahmanas. O twice-born, the grapes should be offered, first of all, to
the  
Brahmanas. Then, the meals consisting mostly of grapes should be taken
and  
after that a festival full of dancing and singing should be celebrated.

834\. King’s bath (to be performed) in accordance with the instructions
of  
works on astrology, which is fruitful at all times, is prescribed on the
day  
of Pusya constellation in every month.

835-36. O twice-born, all should worship the moon, the stars, the
planets and  
also the gods of the constellations, with the wealth of flowers, incense
and  
food, at the time when the moon is united with Janma-constellation.
The  
Brahmanas and the fire should be worshipped and the festival of vocal
and  
instrumental music should be celebrated.

837-838. O best among the twice-borns, the king should perform every
year, a  
Laksahoma and a Kotihoma. The procedure of their performance should be
known  
from the Kalpa (sutras) and the works related to the Atharvaveda.

839\. All these acts which are to be performed always, and others which
are for  
specific purposes, should be performed after consulting the astrologers
and  
the priests.

840\. O best among the twice-borns, the kings should take the
coronation-bath,  
every year at the anniversary of their coronation, always in the same
manner  
as in the beginning.

841-43. Having undergone a fast, the priest should give offerings in
the  
sacrificial fire, with the groups of formulae, namely Pratiratha,
Sabda,  
Varsa, Ayusya and Abhaya, and with mantras sacred to Visnu, Sakra,
Savita,  
Brahma, Rudra and Varuna. The city should be made swarming with flags
and  
banners.

844\. The road should be made dustless by (sprinkling) pure waters.
The  
citizens – bathed and well-dressed – should wear garlands.

845\. The prominent courtesans, the prominent citizens, the outsiders
and the  
chiefs of the ganas should go to the palace of the king.

846\. The city and the roads should be adorned by actors and dancers.
The pious  
king, who has already taken bath, should be again bathed with the five  
products of the cow (i. e. milk, curd, butter, urine and dung).

847-48. He should be bathed by the chiefs of ganas of the Sudras, the
Vaisyas,  
the Ksatriyas and the Brahmanas, (standing) in west, south, east and
north  
respectively, by means of pitchers made of earth, brass, silver and gold
and  
full of water, milk, curd and purified butter.

849\. A great uproar consisting of the sounds of musical instruments,  
conch-shells, wishes for happy day along with (the sounds of)
professional  
singers, should be made at the time of bath.

850\. The subordinate kings should have umbrellas and chowries in their
hands.  
The king who has already taken bath, should be again bathed with clays,
in the  
proper order.

851\. Then, the head of the kings should be purified with the clay from
the  
peak of a mountain, the ears should be sanctified (with the clay) from
an  
ant-hill and the neck with that from the temple of Sakra.

852-53. His heart should be purified with the clay from the door of
king’s  
palace, and the back with the clay from the temple. The right arm
(should be  
purified) with the clay dug by means of elephant’s tusk and the other
one,  
with the earth dug with the horn of the bull. His waist (should be
purified)  
with the earth from the door of a Vaisya and his thighs with the earth
from a  
lake of lotuses.

854-55, The citizens – bathed and well-dressed – should hold auspicious
things  
in their hands. Already bathed, the king should again be bathed with
(water  
sanctified with) all auspicious herbs, all scents, all jewels, all
seeds, all  
flowers, all fruits, Durva-grass, Gorocana paint and sprouts.

856-58a. Then, keeping ahead the priest seated on bhadrasana, the
well-dressed  
people – the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas, the Vaisyas, the chiefs of the
Sudras,  
the leading courtesans and the merchants – should anoint the king in
proper  
manner, in accordance with the sayings of the astrologer, with the water
of  
the sacred places brought there, as far as possible.

858-60. Then, the king – bathed, anointed, crowned, garlanded, diademed
and  
decorated – should worship the gods, touch the auspicious objects, give
the  
last offering (in the sacrifice) and after that, honour with heaps of
wealth,  
the astrologer along with the priest and other Brahmanas, as far as the
means  
may allow. He should also announce freedom from fear.

861\. He should release all who are gone to the slaughter-house, like
the  
animals (gone to the slaughter house). All, except those who are thorns
for  
the world, should be released from bondage.

862\. The Home-priest himself should make the king sit on an auspicious
and  
beautiful Lion-throne covered with the skin of a tiger.

863-65. With auspicious objects in their hands, all the subjects should
see (  
him).

Having worshipped the umbrella, the weapons, the arrays of elephants
and  
horses, he should climb- a decorated elephant and give away heaps of
wealth.

Having gone around the whole of the city, he should return to his home,
honour  
the subordinate kings and the leading citizens with wealth and bid
farewell to  
them.

866\. Having got up, the king should daily worship the gods, the
twice-born,  
and the fire and see the (reflection of his own) face in purified
butter.

867\. (He should) listen to the announcement of the date and the
constellation  
and act according to the instructions of the physician. Having gone to
the  
court, he should see to the legal procedure impartially.

868\. O best among the twice-borns, (the king) should never insult
anybody and  
should always check internal dissension.

869\. This country being difficult to approach and so free from the fear
of the  
circle of enemies, the strongly-rooted kings are destroyed here due to  
internal dissension.

870\. O twice-born, the gods always reside in Kasmira-mandala. Devotion
must be  
shown towards them and also towards the Nagas and the Brahmanas.

871\. The Pisacas also should be worshipped with the rites including  
home-offerings. The people should be settled well and made to follow
the  
(traditions of the) country.

872-73. All the people immigrating (to Kasmira) from the other
directions,  
should be honoured. O descendant of Kasyapa, all should be penalized
in  
accordance with their crimes. The king should neither be very hard in
giving  
punishment nor should forgive anyone. He should carry on the
administration in  
accordance with the instructions of the treatises on polity.

874\. O Brahman, during the six months, when Nikumbha has gone out and
not  
returned, the kings should go on pilgrimage, to the temple of the god.

875\. O Brahman, listen from me, who is telling the procedure in which
the  
festival of the pilgrimage should be celebrated, in every temple of the
gods,  
at least once a year.

876-78. Praised is the pilgrimage on the 4th to the abode of Vinayaka,
on the  
6th to the abode of Kumara, on the 7th to that of the sun, on the 9th to
the  
temple of Durga on the 5th to the temple of Sri, on the 8th or the 14th
to the  
temple of Mahadeva, on the 8th to the temple of Sakra, on the bright
151h to  
that of the Moon, on the 4th to that of Dhanada and on the 5th to that
of  
Varuna.

879-80. The fifth, the twelfth and the fifteenth are honoured for
pilgrimages  
to the abodes of all the Nagas.

O descendant of Kasyapa, the bright fifteenth is prescribed (for
visiting the  
abodes of) all the gods. The houses of the guests may be visited on all
the  
dates.

881\. He who intends to go on a journey should, first of all, worship
the lord  
of Vinayakas, on an auspicious day, with heaps of sweetmeats.

882\. On the 2nd day should be observed the pacification of the planets
and on  
the 3rd should be performed the worship of the Gandharvas.

883\. On the 4th, the Pisacas should be worshipped and on the 5th should
be  
performed the worship of the local Naga.

884\. On the 6th day, the Brahmanas should be honoured and on 7th, the
poor and  
the helpless.

885\. Listen to the procedure, in which the bath giving ceremony should
be  
celebrated, after having performed thus properly, the sacrifice for
seven  
days.

886-87. The temple of the god should be whitewashed and painted. Having
thus  
performed the sacrifice decorated with multitude of flowers, the image
should  
be bathed, in accordance with the instructions of Kalpa and Sakha,
amidst  
sounds of good-day songs and dances of fortunate ladies.

888\. Thereafter, the citizens, with dances leading their procession,
should  
bring the holy water for bathing the image, with great pomp and show.

889\. (The water should be brought) from a sacred place situated near
by,  
placed either on the back of an elephant or in a conveyance drawn by
horses or  
bulls or men. 890. Having got (water), they should bathe the image with
that  
(water) in the proper manner. As regards the city, the same procedure as
told  
with reference to the coronation of the king, should be followed.

891\. At the arrival of the day of the pilgrimage, Kutagara decorated
with  
clothes, garlands, scents and banners should be constructed.

892-93. Having placed there the (original) image and another of similar
form,  
the Kutagara should be drawn by horses or bulls or strong men decorated
with  
garlands and clothes. The king along with his army should follow.

894\. If the city has no king, the president (Pradhana) should accompany
(the  
procession). Others should offer worship with incense at various places.

895\. Amidst murmuring sounds, high sounds and the cries of victory,
the  
auspicious Kutagrha should be carried around the city through an even
road.

896\. Then, after the entrance of the image into the temple of the god,
a great  
festival of singing and dancing should be celebrated.

897\. The arrangements for dramatic performances of those who earn their
living  
by the stage, should be made on the next day. O best among the
twice-borns,  
money should be given to wrestlers and others in accordance with their  
strength and efficiency.

898\. O best among the twice-borns, at the time of the dramatic
performances,  
the human spectators should be honoured with betel-globes, flowers etc.

899\. 0 best among the twice-borns, cooked rice along with flowers and
fruits  
should be scattered for the beings, who are invisible spectators in the
cave.

900\. The lord of the Nagas spoke thus to that Brahmana possessed of
fame. This  
should be done with effort, by those who desire health, (long) life,
and  
wealth.

901\. For those people who shall act according to the instructions of
Nila as  
far as their means permit, there shall be health, (long) life and much
wealth.

902-3. After death, these people will certainly go to the world of the
gods.  
Their sons and grandsons also shall share heaven, (long) life and wealth
and  
shall be provided with long life. There is no doubt here. All the
sayings of  
Nila are known to you also, O king!

904-6. So having heard (all this), act thus as to bring more happiness
in the  
world and the country. Whatever instruction of Nila has been in abeyance
due  
to the fault of time, revive all that, O king, the giver of honour, at
my  
saying.

If the instructions of Nila are not followed, then occur here floods,
excess  
of rain, drought, famine, deaths, untimely death of the king, and
dreadful  
punishments from the king.

907\. The snow-fall also occurs to a great extent. So the instructions
of Nila  
must be announced to the people repeatedly.

908\. Those who act upon them shall be endowed with cattle, grains and
wealth.  
You, too, shall be always victorious everywhere.

909\. Vaisampayana said: “Even told thus by Brhadasva, the king
Gonanda  
restarted (only a few of the) practices which had been in abeyance due
to the  
fault of time.

910-11. Thereafter, he was overthrown by Balabhadra at Mathura. If a
king of  
Kasmira acts upon all the instructions of Nila, he never meets with
untimely  
death. There never occurs any terror in that country”.

912\. Janamejaya (spoke): What did Gonanda – the king of Kasmira – ask
after  
this, when he had heard from Brhadasva, the customs to be followed by
him?”

913\. Vaisampayana (said): “Having heard the sayings of Brhadasva,
Gonanda –  
the king of Kasmira – spoke to Brhadasva, the best of the sages.”

914\. Gonanda spoke: “Tell me the names of those Nagas who have mainly
their  
abodes in Kasmira. I want to hear about them.”

915\. Brhadasva said: “(There live) Nila, the king of the Nagas,
Vasuki,  
Upataksaka, the two Nagas, Kambala and Asvatara, (the two Nagas)
Karkotaka and  
Dhananjaya,

916\. Ailapatra, Ananta, the Nagas Nanda and Upanandaka, Kulika,
Svetasankha,  
Palasa, Khedima, Badi.

917\. Helihala, Sankhapala, the two Nagas Candana and Nandana, the two
Nagas  
Nila and Mahanila, the two Nagas Vatika and Sandika,

918\. Two Padmas, two Mahapadmas, two Kalas, two Kacchapas, two
Samudras, two  
Samudranas, two Gajas, two Taksakas,

919\. Two Nagas named Hastikarna, two Hastis, two Vamanas, Mahisas,
two  
Varahas, two Nagas named Kupana,

920\. Paniya, Anika, Kanakaksa, Kalinkaka, Arjuna, Pundarika, Dhanada,  
Nadakubara,

921\. Kheda, Sapala, Kherisa, Lahura, Ledira, Kheda, Pharathada,
Jayanta,  
Tvausama,

922\. Two Sudanas, Suparsva, Sunasa, Pancahastaka, Pradyumna, Andhaka,
Sambhu,  
Salva, Mulesvara, Ghasa,

923\. Ugola, Sahunimadhya the two Nagas Gandhila and Picchala,
Svadhada,  
Musakada, Pisitada, Ghatodana,

924\. Narayana, Aniruddha, Vasudeva, Jalandhama, Patra, Manasa,
Uttaramanasa,

925\. Amanasa, Kapah, Sankarsana, Satacara, Khilecara, Rohinyakhya,
Saktika,

926\. Akhuphala, Phalapha, the Naga Kanasara, Susrava, Devapala, the
Naga-chief  
Balahaka.

927\. two Nagas Candra and Surya, (two Nagas) Suci and Sukla,
Viduratha,  
Phelada, Sukumara, Khidiva, Vijaya, Jaya,

928\. Uduca, Krophana, Vayu, Sukra, Vaisravana, Apama, Mandukanasa,
Gandhara,  
the Naga Surparki, Dhvani,

929\. Samana, Lolabha, Bhadra, Bindu, Bindusara, Nada, Tittiri,
Prastabhadra,  
the Naga Grahapati,

930\. Aparajita, Pandita, Kopati, Durjaya, Astaka, the Naga Himasara,
the Naga  
Phalasara, Para,

931\. The Naga Agrasara, the Naga Nilasara, Viha, Asulaksa, Aksipala,
Prahlada,  
Yamaka,

932\. Anista, Sumukha, Veda, Khadgapuccha, Vibhisana, Mauhurtika,
Priyasvami,  
Kumara, another Candanopama,

933\. Kapala, Caranasanda, the Naga Puranaka, Kadamba, Apada, Vali,
Vibhuti,  
Kalakunjara,

934\. Dava, Cakradhara, Svabhra, Bhava, Deharaka, Guda, Andha, Pangu,
Kusthi,  
Kana, Badhira, Vanthaka,

935\. Anagapada, Kitava, Sukara, Prasava, Utkara, Sadhiya, Satapada,
Yoga,  
Satamukha, Druha,

936\. Atinidra, Atibahubhuk, Bindunada, Sirojada, Kamaraksa,
Visalaksa,  
Suvartaksa, Bhayanaka,

937\. Bhuvira, Dharmalavanya, Daityaraja, Sadangula, Gandharva,
Dhrtarastra,  
Kusuma, Kuhara, Kuha,

938\. Mahaksa, Vadhusa, Kadusa, Deva, Danava, Naksatra, Masaka, Pita,
Gautama,  
Susubha, Jiha,

939\. Svarga, Sikharavasi, Srivasa, Sridhara, Khaga, Langali,
Balabhadra,  
Svarupa, Pancahastaka.

940\. Kamarupa, Darikarna, Saptasirsa, Balahara, Sunetra, Bahunetra,
Hanuman,  
Angada, Hara,

941\. Habaka, Pathara, Patha, Mala, Vimalaka, Mata, the Naga
Satamukha,  
Citrasva, Dadhivabana,

942\. Susima, Kaliya, Kala, Patana, Khadira, Atri, Savala, Varnaka,
Lalana.

943\. Heliyara, Hemiyara, Valira, Keluka, Nimi, Catara, Lelihana,
Pancasya,  
Pingalodara,

944\. Krta, Treta, Dvapara, Sama, Samvatsara, Khalvata, Bahuroma,
Kapoti,  
Puspasahvayi,

945, Rastresvara, Siniri, Satananda, Atikopana, Ananda, Jayananda,
Trisirsa,  
Jatila,

946\. Gandha, Soma, Gargya, Initi, Saniti, Airavata, Kauravya, Masada,  
Kumudaprabha,

947\. Havotsava, Satha, Sanya, Satrughna, Rama, Laksmana, Mahadeva,
Kamapala,  
Gosira, Yudhisthira,

948\. Danga, Bhuya, Visakha, Soma, Reva, Mahodara, Makara, Makaraksa,
Nadbala,  
Balavan, Sikhi,

949\. Candapatanaka, Kaka, Kebuka, Brahmanapriya, Karavira,
Jarasandha,  
Nisacara, Divacara,

950\. Patanjali, Vatsa, Mathara, Vithara, Vida, Hocara, Karavala,
Tapanogha,  
Siras,

951\. Karkara, Karavata, Varaghosa, Sumangala, Gullaka, Sambhara, Sami,
Paya,  
Mahanihasaja,

952\. Karahala, Kusuratra, Dhaumya, Galava, Ukhola, Sikhola,
Vahnirupa,  
Hiranyaya,

953\. Satyakula, Kulusa, Krpana, Kutaka, Hari, Kumuda, Salabha,
Kimsuka,  
Priyasaraka,

954\. Marakula, Abhrasikhara, Vasistha, Savanamukha, two Nagas Raja
and  
Maharaja, Subhadra, Bhadravalisa,

955\. two Nagas Vira and Brahmana, two Nagas Sarasa and Pukkaka,
Dakkaka,  
Cakka, Gosa, Vamsanaga,

956\. Vidyadhara, Yaksa, Virasa, Sasyavardhana, Bhadrasva, Gajanetra,
Kanara,  
Kumuda,

957\. Anaka, Kanava, Camba, Sanda, Marka, Giripriya, Ugrayudha,
Abhimanyu,  
Amara, Amrtasana,

958\. Ajakarna, Gonasa, Sagala, Valakanana, Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya,
Sudra,  
Dipta, Vihangama,

959\. Sankhaksa, Kamalaksa, Maninaga, Bahecaka, Jayanta, Kopana,
Visva,  
Sakhamukha, Suvarcala,

960\. Guha, Sumali, Mali, Malyavan, Anrta, Para, Ksattra, Mabyanaka,
Bhisma,  
Kasmira, Madhu, Valisa,

961\. Bhimaksa, Bhimanada, two Nagas Halusa and Kalusa, Mahendra,
Indra,  
Sudhama, Saliya, Maliya,

962\. Sahasradhara, Dyutiman, Vibhuti, Kavad, Asvara, Savala,
Bahurupa,  
Bhadrasva, Uttariyasa,

963\. Manikantha, Kalola, Suravala, Nupura, Kusakunda, Atulyasa, Ata,
Svabhra,  
Vitarana,

964\. Aravinda, Kalhara, Binduman, Dramita, Vata, two Sagaras, two
Gangas,  
Vaitasta, two Yamunas,

965\. Citra, Upacitra, Surabhi, Bhutalacari, Ambaracari, Upacitra,
Kankata, two  
Nagas Narada and Parvata,

966\. Visvavasu, Parijata, Gallululla, Jalalusa, Maksikasvami,
Bhurjila,  
Cikura,

967\. Akadra, Bahukesa, Kesapingala, Dhusara, Lambakarna, Gandala,
Naga  
Srimadhaka,

968\. Avartaksa, Candrasara, Karhasura, Lambaka, Caturveda, three
Puskaras,

969\. Aksotanaga, Tanka, Syena, Vattila, Kacara, Ksirakumbha,
Nikumbha,  
Vikumbha, Samarapriya,

970\. Elighana, Vighana, Canda, Bhogi, Jvaranvita, Bhoga, Bhagavata,
Raudra,  
Rudra, Bhojaka, Dehila,

971\. Rohina, Bharadvaja, Dadhinakra, Pratardana, two Nagas Januva and
Reva,  
Satru, Mitra, Kardama,

972\. Panka, Kindama, Rambha, Bahubhoga, Bahudara, Matsya, Bhita,
Bahutsaha,  
Karadi, Vinatapriya,

973\. Tamrakara, Rajata, Vamana, Bhavaka, the Naga Jyotisyaka, Vedya,  
Dhaurasara, Janardana,

974\. Nyagrodha, Dambara, Asvattha, Balipuspa, Balipriya, Angaraka,
Sanaiscari,  
the Naga Kunjaraka, Budha,

975\. Kali, Grtsa, Kutilaka, two Nagas Rahu and Brhaspati, Cauraka,
Taskara,  
Kelu, and two Nagas Suta and Paurogava,

976\. Ajakarna, Asvakarna, Vidyunmali, Darimukha, Orana, Rocana, Hasi,
Nartana,  
Gayana,

977\. Kambhata, Subhata, Bahuputra, Nisacara, Mayura, Kokila, Trata,
Malaya,  
Yavanapriya,

978\. Kotapala, Mahipala, Gopala, Patalasuci, Rajadhiraja, Vinata,
Svarga,  
Vimalaka, Mani,

979\. Cakrahasta, Gadahasta, Suli, Pasi, Saga, the Naga Citrakara,
Vatsa,  
Bakapati,

980\. Sitarta, Yavamali, Ravana, Raksasakrti, Yajva, Data, Hota Bhokta
and  
Bhogapati.

981-82. O king, these prominent Naga-chiefs have been mentioned by me.
As  
regards their family comprising of sons and grandsons, that cannot be
narrated  
by me even in hundreds of years and so also (cannot be narrated) the
holy  
abodes of all the Nagas.

983\. All the Nagas are boon-givers, all are obedient to Nila and all
are great  
favourites of the high-minded Vasuki.

984-85. Now, I will relate to you (the names of) the guardians of
directions,  
in Kasmira. Know them, O chief of the kings. The Naga Bindusara is
regarded to  
be in the eastern direction, the Naga named Srimadhaka in the southern
one,  
and in the northern direction is stated to be the Naga Uttaramanasa…

986-87. Thus, devoid of grief, thousands, millions and hundred millions
of the  
Nagas dwell here, leaving aside the fear of Tarksya. Amongst the Nagas
who  
have been mentioned by me, one (Naga) Sadangula was banished by Nila –  
possessed of unlimited lustre.

988-89. The place of Sadangula which was given away to third Mahapadma –
the  
wise one – was turned into a lake, one Yojana long and one Yojana wide,
a  
second ocean as it were.

990\. (It was the place) which was taken over formerly by Mahapadma in
a  
disguised way, in accordance with the instruction of Nila, from the
king  
Visvagasva.”

991-92. Gonanda spoke: “Why was Sadangula exiled from this (place)? How
did  
the territory of Visvagasva turn into a lake? O pious one, explain all
this,  
as you are talented.”

993\. Brhadsava (said): Having come to know that the Naga Mahapadma had
made  
his abode in the country of Sati, the son of Vinata used to oppress
him,  
formerly.

994\. The bird (i. e. Garuda) used to attack and eat up hundreds and
thousands  
of his sons, dependents and dependents of his dependents.

995\. When his people were being thus devoured, the Naga Mahapadma came
quickly  
to the refuge of the great Naga Nila.

996\. He asked, O king, for a habitation in Kasmira. Then Nila spoke
thus to  
the Naga Mahapadma.

997\. “O best among the Bhujagas, all the Nagas have made their abodes
here.  
There is no place (left) where you may dwell, O best among the
Naga-chiefs.

998\. O Naga, the lord of undying ones, I do not see even a little space
which  
has not been thus fully occupied by the Nagas.

999\. Moreover, you are surrounded by a big family But at this time,
the  
beautiful territory of Sadangula is vacant.

1000\. The Naga Sadangula has been banished by me from that place,
because he,  
formerly, used to carry away the wives of men, daily.

1001\. O best among the Nagas, having banished him from here, I allotted
to him  
a place on Usiraka – the best of the mountains – in Darva.

1002\. Through a device I appointed him there as a guardian of the
territory  
and won over the people of Kasmira through affection.

1003\. Sadangula – the lord of the Nagas – has been settled by me on an
even  
road. Honoured by the people, he lives there happily.

1004-5. At my request, Hari himself has given him protection there. Here
I  
allot to you, as your habitation, the beautiful city named Candrapura,
of the  
king Visvagasva, in the beautiful territory which belonged to Sadangula.
Turn  
that into a lake.

1006\. Disguised as a madman, once, Durvasa – the best of the sages –
did not  
get proper reception at the beautiful habitation of Sadangula.

1007\. Filled with rage, he pronounced the curse: “It shall turn into a
lake.”  
O Naga, this saying of the sage is not known to anyone.

1008\. I alone know it due to the favour of that sage. Hence, O Naga,
make your  
abode there. Do not delay.

1009\. But (you should) importune the king Visvagasva – the protector of
the  
earth. You should make request to that king, in disguise.

1010\. If due to greed, he would not give when requested to give, in
disguise,  
he as a king, would be disgraced for not doing that which be must do.”

1011\. Brhadahra (spoke): Addressed thus by Nila, the Naga Mahapadma
assumed  
the form of an old Brahmana and went to the city (named) Candrapura.

1012\. He looked at the compassionate king Visvagasva. Then, having seen
him,  
he made request (to him) as Visnu had made to Bali.

1013\. Brahmana (said): ‘\~O compassionate king, give me that much
dwelling  
place at Candrapura, which may be sufficient for my big family.”

1014\. Visvagasva (replied): “O chief of the Brahmanas, I give you a
beautiful  
place in Candrapura. O twice-born, occupy that much (space) which may
be  
enough for you along with your family.”

1015\. Brhadasva (said): Having accepted the water of gift and having  
pronounced the benedictory formula, he – in the form of a Naga – spoke
to the  
king in the midst of ministers.

1016\. “Go away from this city, along with your collection of money and
other  
things, accompanied by your cavalry, elephants and chariots and
surrounded by  
your own men.

1017\. O Lord of men, the city is sufficient for me along with my
family. It  
will turn into an extensive lake, very soon.”

1018-19. Then, that pious king went away along with his citizens,
horses,  
elephants and host of ministers, and constructed another beautiful town
at a  
distance of two Yojanas to the west of his own city. That is famous on
the  
earth under the name Visvagasvapura.

1020\. Worshipping the Brahmanas, the king lived there happily. The
Naga  
Mahapadma flooded the city.

1021-24. The best of the Nagas lives there happily, along with his
family.

And that Mahapadma lake, one Yojana long and one Yojana wide, is holy,  
beautiful and pleasing to the hearts of the good.

Due to the influence of Mahapadma, (that lake is) devoid of wicked
crocodiles.  
The Naga, surrounded by his family, lives there happily.

This birth (story) of the lake Mahapadma has been related by me. What
else, O  
king, should I relate to you? Tell that.”

1025\. Gonanda (spoke): “O Venerable one, I want to hear about the holy
places  
in the countries of Kasmira. Tell the glorification of seeing them.”

1026\. Brhadasva (said): (There is) Vinayaka, the son of Ganga descended
from  
Vardhanadruma. Having seen him, a man obtains success which brings all
sorts  
of welfare.

1027\. By seeing Kamyavara of similar type, at a distance of one Krosa
to its  
south-west, one obtains success in one’s undertakings.

1028-30. By seeing with concentrated mind, each and every Ganesa of all
these,  
namely, Bhurjasvami, Hidimbesa, Lovara, Srivinayaka, Utankesa,
Guhavasi,  
Bhimesa, Saumukha, Bhadresvara, Mahasya, Mahasana, Gavesana,
Paulastya,  
Girivasi, Jayesvara and Mahesvara, one obtains accomplishment one’s
doings and  
enjoys holy merit.

1031\. O Lord of men, after taking bath in Patrakunda one obtains the
world of  
Kumara by seeing Skanda, erected by Pulastya near (the lake of) Saci.

1032-33. By the sight of each and every Kumara namely, Malivana,
Gautarnesa,  
Visvamitresa. Saunasika, Vasisthesa, Makharesa, Suresvara,
Skandesvara,  
Visakhesa and another erected by Pulastya, one obtains the merit which
accrues  
from the gift of cow.

1034-35. Having seen (the images of) Sakra – the performer of hundred  
sacrifices – erected by Pulastya, Bharadvaja, Kasyapa, Kanva, Agastya
and  
Vasistha, one obtains heaven and the merit of giving thousand cows in
charity.  
A sight of the image of Agni erected by Angira gives heaven.

1036\. By seeing Yama – the lord of the Pretas – after having taken bath
in  
Taijasa, one gets heaven as well as the merit accruing from the gift of
a cow  
and sesame.

1037\. By seeing the son of the Sun god, after having taken bath in
Puskara  
Tirtha, one is freed from all the sins and is honoured in heaven.

1038\. The sight of every one of these viz., Yama, Sutankesa and the
lord of  
the Pretas erected by Vasistha, releases one from all the sins.

1039-42. These highly strong ones should be specially seen in a night
full of  
stars. By the sight of that worshipped god known as Virupaksa, one does
not  
get, at all times, the fear born of the Raksasas. O king, after seeing
the  
(images of the) god erected by Varuna and Bali, one is freed from all
the sins  
and enjoys in the world of Varuna. After a bath in the lake of Mahapadma
and  
on the northern bank of Manasa lake, a mere sight of the temple erected
by  
Pulastya, gives one the merit of the gift of cows and also releases
(one) from  
the diseases.

1043-44. One becomes rich by the sight of everyone of these, namely, the
god  
Dhanesvara near Vitastaksa, (the image of the god) erected by Agastya
near  
Kapotesvara, Setara, Gotamasvami, Saurnukha and one erected by Surabhi.

1045\. After seeing (the image of) Sasanka erected by king Sucandra, a
man  
obtains the world of the Moon. There is no doubt about this.

1046\. By seeing Manibhadra, one becomes possessed of wealth.

1047\. One obtains happiness and becomes beautiful after seeing
Kamadeva  
erected by Agastya on the mountain.

1048\. The (image of the) goddess erected by Pulastya is known as Bheda
on the  
earth.

1049\. By seeing the goddess erected by Pulastya and accompanied by
Kesava, one  
is freed from all the sins and gets highest knowledge.

1050\. One is honoured in the world of Visnu, by seeing Visoka in
Kasmira,  
accompanied by Kesava and erected by Him.

1051-53. By a sight of the goddess Bhima, one gets the best wealth and
by  
seeing the goddess Kapinjali, the goddess Suresvari. (the goddesses)  
Bhadresvari, Gautamesi, the goddess Kalasila, (the goddess) named
Udyogasri,  
(the goddesses) Gavaksi, Candika, Durga, Gauri, Suvijaya, Sakuni,
Brahmacarini  
and Cakresvari, one gets one’s desire fulfilled.

1054\. After seeing near Cakrasvami, the goddess sitting in the lap of
Hara,  
one is freed from all the sins and is honoured in the world of Rudra.

1055-56. By seeing that (image of) Divakara called
Kartaviryrarjunasvami,  
(that of) Martanda called Kasyapasvami, (that of) Ravi erected by
Visvagasva  
and everyone of these, namely, (the images called) Sucandresa,
Sucakresa, and  
Surabhisvami, one obtains the merit of the gift of horses.

1057-1064. O king, one obtains heaven for one’s ancestors, by seeing
the  
boon-giver Brahma in the form of a hill, a form which he himself has
assumed,  
and also (his images called) Visnusvami, Harasvami and Kasyapasvami.

O great king, one is released from all the sins by seeing everyone of
these  
viz., Sudarsana Hara near Cakrasvami, Svayambhu, (Hara’s image) erected
by  
the: Fire-god, (Hara’s images called) Pingalesvara, the god
Bindunadesvara,  
the god Bhadresvara, Candresvara along with Jyesthesa, Valakhilyesvara,
Hari,  
Kesavesa, Samesa, Dhaumyesa, Varunesvara, Cakresvara along with
Candresa,  
Kasyapesa, Vilohita, Kamada along with Vasisthesa, Bhutesa along with  
Ganesvara, Suryesvara, Bhasmesa and Vimalesvara; (so also) the
boon-giver god  
(called) Himacalesa, Sankhesa, Vaivartilesvara, Mahanadisvara, Sambhu,  
Kasyapesvara, Rajesvara, Nrsimhesa, Bhavesa and Dhanadesvara. O king,
the god  
Hara – the lord of the Bhutas – is always present (in all these images).

1065-66. By merely seeing Nandi there, one is freed from all sins.
Nandisvara  
is always pleased and so also is Bhutesvara. O tiger among kings,
(their)  
presence is due to their desire for doing good to the worlds. Nandi is
always  
present there due to devotion for Hara.

1067\. By seeing Kapotesvara who appears in the midst of waters, one
obtains  
thousand cows and by worshipping (him) one gets desired refuge.

1068\. Gonanda said: “O best of the speakers, how did Nandi propitiate
the god,  
by which he – present in Bhutesvara – is always near him?”

1069\. Brhadasva (replied): “O king, the protector of the earth, listen
to the  
account as it happened with reference to Nandi, the account which is
divine,  
heart-enchanting and remover of all sins.

1070-72a. In former times, there was a Brahmana named Silada who had no
son. O  
king, he went to Nandi mountain and in order to get a son (he)
propitiated the  
Great God, by eating the powder of rocks for one hundred years. Due to  
compassion, the God of the gods, gave to him as a son, his own Ganesa
Nandi  
possessed of great strength.

1072b-73. While being given as a son, Nandi spoke to Sankara thus: “O
lord,  
due to (your) favour, I shall become the son of this Brahmana, but O
god, let  
me be his son, not born from the womb.

1074-76. Moreover, separated from you, I would not stay for long in the
human  
(world). Smiling with compassion, the god Hara said to him: “O best of
the  
ganas, you have been cursed by Bhrgu not honoured (by you) in the
marriage of  
Uma. So (you) shall surely be born in the human form. With that very
body, you  
shall come near me.

O best of the ganas, thenceforward you shall live in the human world.

1077-78. At your will, you shall live near me, as may give you
happiness. You  
shall live in the human world, compelled by the curse of Bhrgu, but O
lord of  
the ganas, there too I shall live according to your desire.”

1079\. O king, thus Nandi always lives at Bhutesvara and so also the god
Hara  
(lives) willingly, due to favour upon him.

1080\. Gonanda (said): “How did Nandi – born (in the human world) –
become a  
son of Silada. How did he attain ganapatihood with his body.”

1081\. Brhadasva (said): Then, while grinding a rock, Silada found in
the midst  
of the rock, the son Nandi not born from the womb and possessed of the
lustre  
of the moon.

1082\. Having got that son, the Brahmana Silada became pleased and
thereafter  
performed all the ceremonies with reference to the son.

1083\. When the ceremonies of the son were being performed, the
twice-born  
(Silada) heard from the Brahmana that the son was to be short-lived.

1084-1085. Having heard (this), the pious Silada – full of affection for
the  
son – started weeping. Nandi – the knower of Dharma – consoled him who
was  
weeping, thus: “Father, do not weep today. For your favourite desire, I
shall  
obtain long life by propitiating the god Sankara.

1086-87. Saying so to his father and after getting his permission,
Nandi  
himself – determined to perform penance – went to the auspicious peak of
the  
Himalaya, known as Haramukuta.

1088\. In the eastern half of that peak, there is a laks of clear water
called  
Kalodaka, the destroyer of all sins.

1089\. Placing a big rock on his head and unweariedly engaged in
muttering the  
name of Rudra in that water, Nandi propitiated Hara.

1090\. One hundred years passed away while he was muttering the name of
Rudra,  
in the water. After the completion of a hundred years the goddess spoke
(thus)  
to the god:

1091\. “O venerable one, my son Nandi is performing austerities at
Kaloda.  
Endow him, quickly, with a boon. Be not late, O lord!”

1092.93a. O lord of men, thus was the god addressed by the goddess at  
Varanasi. Then mounted on the bull and (going) by land-route, the god,
along  
with the goddess, was not seen by anyone in that area.

1093b-1094. After crossing Prayaga and the great city of Ayodhya, (he
crossed)  
the holy Naimisa forest and beyond that Gangadvara. From Sthanesvala (he
went)  
to Kuruksetra and holy Visnupada.

1095-96. Having crossed all these, viz. the Satadru, the Vipasa and
the  
Iravati, possessed of holy water, the Devika, the Candrabhaga, the
auspicious  
Visnupada the Visoka, Vijayesa and the confluence of the Vitasta and
the  
Sindhu, he went to the mountain Bharata.

1097-98. Having reached the foot of that (mountain), he said to the
goddess:  
“O divine lady, stay here along with the bull, while I shall go
further.  
Whosoever climbs up this mountain by this way, obtains high merit.

1099\. You being tender, are not able to climb up (the mountain) by this
way,  
so I shall go alone quickly, today,

1100\. From that place, the best of the gods began to climb up the way,
and  
there came into existence a temple of the god called Istapathesvara.

1101-2. As the god Mahesvara climbed the mountain by that way, the
excessively  
clever mountain became higher and higher. Mahesvara was tired and being
angry  
to know that the hill was increasing in height, he assumed a terrible
form and  
gave him with his foot, a stroke on the head.

1103-5. Since then, that mountain is called Mundaprstha. By touching  
Mundaprstha with whole of the body, a man is freed from the sin of
saying  
something unauspicious. Kicked by the god, the mountain assumed a human
form  
and with both hands joined together, he said to the lord of the gods of
gods.  
“I am miserable.” Then pleased and full of compassion the lord of the
gods  
said to the mountain:

1106\. “O mountain, your water which has come out by the stroke of my
foot,  
shall be known as Krpanitirtha on the earth.”

1107\. After naming the mountain as Mundaprstha he assumed a beautiful
form.  
That place inhabited by the nymphs is Apsarastirtha.

1108\. Then, having seen the heart-fascinating sacred place known as  
Brahmasara, (he) assumed the form of a swan and broke forth the mountain
in no  
time.

1109\. The opening in the mountain, which was made by the high-minded
(god in  
the form of a swan, is known as Hamsadvara – the destroyer of all sins.

1110-11. Then, having seen the sacred places Vatika and Sandika, the
great god  
reached Kapila Tirtha and saw the highly fortunate Brahmana surrounded
by the  
gods and performing sacrifice in the company of sages.

1112\. Seeing the god Mahesvara in the form of a swan Brahma kneeled
down on  
the earth and saluted the high god.

1113\. O lord of the earth, listen to what Sakra spoke, saluting Brahma
– the  
lord of the world – when he saw him prostrated.

1114\. Sakra said “Salutation to you, O lord of the gods of the gods,
the cause  
of the cause of the world, the lord of the three worlds, the omniscient,
the  
lord of all!

1115\. I do not see in this world, any cause other than your-self. By
you are  
pervaded all the three worlds including movable and immovable objects.

1116-17. O lord, you are the progenitor, protector and destroyer of all
this.  
The three worlds are born, when you open your eyes and when, O lord of
the  
worlds, you go to sleep, all these three worlds are destroyed.

1118\. Supported by you, this earth supports all this movable and
immovable  
(creation). Upheld by you, the waters hold this whole world.

1119\. O lord, it is due to your lustre that the fire bears this whole
world  
and it is due to your energy that the wind sustains this whole world.

1120\. O lord, it is due to your strength that the ether – the birth
place of  
sound – bears the whole world. O highly gifted one, you are said to be
the  
Supreme Spirit.

1121\. You are glorified as intellect and the as soul of all this
(creation).  
You are Indefinable Purusa and also (the constituent elements called)
raja,  
sattva and tama.

1122-24. You are the senses and the objects of the senses. You are
called the  
gross physical elements (Bhuta) and the subtle physical essences
(Tanmatra).  
You are the knower (Jnata) and the thing to be known (Jneya), the body  
(Ksetra) and the soul (Ksetrajna) and the highest lord. You are the
meditator,  
the object of meditation, the meditation itself and various types of  
sacrifices. You alone are all this, O lord! What else is there than your
own  
self? O highly gifted one as you are prostrated, a great doubt has
arisen in  
me.”

1125-26. Brhadasva (said): Addressed thus by Sakra, Brahma spoke these
words:  
“This is my second form, Sarvi, the most purifying one and possessed of
high  
penance – before which I am prostrated. Please it by making salutations
along  
with all the gods.”

1127-28. Addressed so, then, Indra – surrounded by all the hosts of the
gods –  
praised, with the favour of Brahma, Hara, the destroyer of Tripura, the
lord  
of the gods of the gods and Sankara in the true sense of the word.

1129-32. Sakra said: “Salutation to you, O lord of the gods,
encompassing the  
three worlds with magical power! The sacrificer, the earth, the sky,
the  
water, the fire, the moon, the sun and the wind are stated to be your
bodies  
which pervade the three worlds. O preceptor of the world, after assuming
the  
Brahmi form which is rajasi, you create the worlds (but) you are not
created,  
O soul of the beings! O Mahesvara, you – standing (apart) like a witness
–  
sustain the three worlds and O god, after assuming Kala form which is
tamasi,  
you destroy the world.

1133\. Dharma – assuming the form of a bull – serves as (your) mount.
You are  
always celibate though left half of your body is female.

1134\. The mass of your matted hair is marked with the lunar crescent
and  
stirred by the waves of Ganga. O Mahesvara, salutation to you!

1135\. Salutation to you, O enemy of Tripura and destroyer of Andhaka!  
Salutation to you who became immersed in the blood of the demon Amsa
rent  
asunder with the front pan of the spear!

1136\. (Salutation to you) O Parvati’s lover, wearing a garland of
skulls,  
possessing powerful weapons, terrifying one and holding dreadful arms.

1137-38. (Salutation to you) O Urdhvalinga, Sighra, Kratha, Krathana,  
auspicious, excellent, bountiful, the Great Swan, possessed of a
terrifying  
eye, Bhusunda, wearing a serpent as the sacred thread.

1139\. Forgive me, O chief of the gods and lord of the world, as it was
due to  
being overwhelmed at first by your magical power that I did not worship
you.

1140\. O Sambhu, you are pleased indeed, as you have been recognised by
me. O  
lord of the gods, you are possessed of good favour. O Mahesvara, I am  
prostrated before you.

1141-42. Brhadasva (said) : “Praised thus by Indra, Brahma, sages and
gods,  
Sankara gave up the form of a swan and having assumed his own form, went
to  
the sacrifice of Brahma and appeared before the gods. Thereafter, the
God  
brought the goddess and also the bull.

1143\. At the completion of the sacrifice of Brahma, lord of the gods of
the  
gods went to Kalodaka lake along with the hosts of the gods.

1144\. There, he saw Nandi, weakened due to hunger and cold and followed
by  
death, as if by a relative.

1145\. Seeing Nandi – the best amongst the reciters of the god’s name
–  
Mahadeva exclaimed, “O child, rise up, rise up. Ask for a boon as
pleases  
you!”

1146\. Having seen the god Hara standing along with the goddess Parvati
and  
accompanied by all the host of the gods, (Nandi) relinquished the fear
of  
death.

1147\. Leaving the rock aside, he stood up excitedly from the midst of
waters  
and worshipped the lord of the gods with (laudatory) speeches and
(offerings  
of) water.

1148-49. Worshipped by him, Sankara said smilingly: “Dear child, I am  
satisfied with your recital (of the name) of Rudra and your penance, You
shall  
dwell near me, as pleases you, with this very body. There is no fear to
you  
from death.

1150\. Remember your previous birth when you were my door-keeper. After
that,  
Silada – the chief of the twice-borns – obtained you through penance.

1151-52. O son, by you as a son, Silada has been carried across (the
world).  
Having obtained predominance among the ganas, you shall live in my
company in  
a place at a distance of one yojana from here towards the east. O best
of the  
ganas, I, in the form of Hara Bhutesvara, shall dwell in your company.

1153\. O Nandi, the gifted sage Vasistha on the earth shall erect your
image  
and also mine at that holy place.

1154-59. We shall always be present there, O twice-born! My linga
called  
Jyesthesa, originated formerly, is there. O twice-born, you should know
my  
continuous presence at that place also. O best among the twice-borns,
devoted  
to me, thousands and crores of sages used to bathe that linga (called)  
Jyesthesa with the holy and celestial water (brought) from Uttaramanasa.
O  
Parsada, due to the influence of their penance and devotion towards me,
you  
yourself shall reach Uttaramanasa – the abode of Sodara Naga – and
live  
continuously at that place to the south of which flows the great river  
Hiranyini, possessed of holy water and known as Kanakavahini. The Bhutas
dwell  
at Jyesthesa. O twice-born, live (there) at your will.

1160-62. Then, approach me with another body, O son!” Having spoken thus
to  
Nandi who lay prostrated, the lord of the gods – destroyer of the
enemies of  
the enemies of the gods – sent away death after consoling him. Taking
Nandi  
along with him, He saw Uttaramanasa and happily climbed up the peak
called  
Haramukuta, famous in the three worlds, in the vicinity of that very
lake.

1163-64. Mahesvara, the god of the gods is always present there. The  
high-famed Vasistha also, along with all the hosts of the gods, erected
(the  
image of) Hara – the lord of the Bhutas. To the west of that, he erected
the  
image of Nandi.

1165\. O controller of the enemies, having done this, the gods went
whence they  
had come and so also the sages whose wealth is penance. The sacred
waters also  
flowed.

1166\. Thus, due to the curse of Bhrgu and due to the favour of Hara,
Nandi is  
always present there and for his pleasure (is present) Mahesvara too.

1167\. The image of Nandisvara cannot be seen by the evil-doers. By
seeing  
Bhutesvara, one is freed from all the sins.

1168\. By seeing Hara Bhutesvara, Jyesthesvara and Nandi after taking
bath in  
the holy Sodara, one may obtain prominence amongst the ganas.”

1169\. Gonanda (said): “There is the holy abode of Suli – the god of the
gods –  
which goes by the name Kapotesvara. Tell me the origin of that.

1170\. I am put in great doubt due to the name Kapotesvara, O Brahman,
why is  
the venerable Sambhu called Kapotesvara?”

1171-73. Brhadasva (replied): “O king, on the sacred bank of Drsadvati
in  
Kuruksetra, there stood in great penance, crores of sages to have a
sight of  
Rudra – the lord of the gods. Due to their devotion the venerable
highest lord  
told them in dream: “O quick-going ones, go soon to Kasmira where there
is a  
spacious and immaculate abode of the Naga. There, I shall be visible
in  
disguise.”

1174 Having heard this in dream, they told one another (about it) early
in the  
morning and desirous of seeing god Sambhu, all of them went together
to  
Kasmira.

1175\. Having reached that abode of the Naga, they could not see even a
little  
water, for the water was all over covered with pieces of wood.

1176\. Moving the wooden logs with their hands, the best sages
obtained  
Rudrahood with their bodies by merely taking bath (therein).

1177-78. There was one Vasistha Brahmana named Gauraparasara who did not
take  
bath and did not, even out of curiosity, touch the wooden log. Staying
there,  
he made his body decay through fasting. Hara spoke to him in dream: “Why
are  
you suffering, O twice-born?”

1179-81 “Obtain Rudrahood quickly by taking bath and touching the wooden
logs  
!” The twice-born stood in submission and with folded hands, spoke to
Rudra:  
“That you can be visible after the attainment of Rudrahood is a fact, O
father  
of the world! But my mind is not satisfied without the sight of the lord
of  
the gods. You had said that you would be visible in disguise in the
abode (of  
the Naga).

1182-84. Without getting that (sight), O Sankara, I would neither go nor
eat  
(anything).” Smiling a bit, Sankara said to him again: “I have already  
provided to them, my manifestation in the form of wooden log. Merely by
seeing  
me, they attained Rudrahood, O twice-born! Now, due to your penance
which is  
greater, I give you the desired boon. Ask for what you desire and
obtain  
Rudrahood.”

1185-86. Gauraparasara (spoke): “O god, destroyer of the body of Kama,
O  
Mahesvara, if you are to give me a boon, then manifest yourself in the
form of  
a wooden log, to all the human beings, as you did to the sages. O lord
of the  
world, the world is suffering perpetually due to sin.”

1187\. Mahesvara said: “O best among the twice-borns, all those people
who will  
see (the god) standing in the form of wood, (will see the god) not
always but  
only occasionally.

1188\. With a desire to do favour to them, my gana – this Nandi in the
form of  
wooden log – shall always be visible to the human beings.

1189-90. And having seen (him) they would attain Rudrahood with their
bodies.  
As I shall appear in disguise before men, so I shall obtain the name,  
Kapalesvara. O best among the Brahmanas, there is plenty of water in
this  
country.

1191\. My manifestation will be in the previous form.” Thus has been
related to  
you, the origin of Kapotesvara.

1192\. Gonanda (spoke): “O venerable one! I have a desire to hear about
Visnu’s  
abodes in Kasmira, and also the merit of those (places) where Hari is  
present.”

1193\. Brhadasva (said) : “O king, the god is always present (in the
form of)  
discus-wielder Hari. Having seen him who has lotus-like eyes, one
obtains the  
merit of (giving) ten cows.

1194\. God Janardana is always present (in the form of) Narasimha.
Seeing him –  
the lord of the gods of the gods – one obtains the merit of
(performing)  
Horse-sacrifice.

1195\. 0 King, the god Bahusara is always present in the holy and
auspicious  
Devasara.

1196-97. 0 best among the kings, (the god lives) in the images erected
by  
Vasistha, Kadru; Vinata., and Gautama. By seeing these images of Kesava,
one  
obtains the merit (of the performance) of Agnistoma.

1198\. By the sight of another Nrsimha on the holy northern bank of
Mahapadma  
lake, one obtains the merit of (performing) Agnistoma.

1199-1207. By seeing (the images of) the god erected by Sakra, Varuna,
Brahma,  
Dhanesa, Yama, Hara, Divakara, Soma, Vahni, Pavana, Kasyapa, Bhrgu,
Pulastya  
and Atri, and by seeing anyone of these, namely, Bhurjasvami,
Mahasvami  
Satasrnga, Gadadhara, Janardana-Bhrgusvami near the abode of Meru, the
god  
Taittiriyesvara, the god Dandakasvami, Janardana-Ramasvami near Bhava,
the  
boon-giver god Narayanasthana towards west, the god Gajendramoksana
near  
Varaha, Varaha, Nrsimha, the boon-giver Bahurupa, the images of seven
sages  
near Sumukha, the boon-giver Turigavasa, the boon-giver Svayambhu,
Guhavasa,  
Yogisa, Ananta, the sage Kapila, Asvasirsa, Matsya, Hamsa, Kurma,  
Uttankasvami, the god erected by Valakhilyas, Garuda, Jalavasa and the
god  
possessed of hoods, one gets the merit of (the gift of) ten cows.

1208\. Seeing the image erected formerly in Magadha by Prthu – the son
of Vena  
– a man obtains the merit of (performing) Pundarika.

1209-10. And by seeing the auspicious image called Asramasvami, erected
by  
Bhrgu on Grdhrakuta and brought down from the hill to the vicinity of
his  
place, by the high- minded Rama – the son of Bhrgu – one is freed from
all  
sins. There is no doubt herein.

1211\. Gonanda(asked): “Why was the image constructed by Bhrgu, brought
down  
from Grdhrakuta – the best of the mountains – to the vicinity of his
own  
hermitage?”

1212\. On account of the murder of his father (committed by Haihaya
Ksatriyas),  
Rama – the oppressor of the Ksatriyas – made the earth devoid of
Ksatriyas for  
twenty- one times.

1213\. O best of the kings, at the time of the 21st massacre, some
Ksatriyas  
reached the hilly fort in Kasmira.

1214-16. O lord of the earth, being excessively angry, Rama pursued and
killed  
them. From amongst them also, a few Ksatriyas escaped death and
leaving  
Kasmira due to his fear, reached where there is the river Madhumati and
the  
other Rajanirmala. Even then Rama overtook them and angrily pulled them
down.

1217-18. Having killed all the Ksatriyas, he,with his hands drenched in
blood,  
erected an image of the high-souled Kesava. (That image) called Rajavasa
is  
famous in all the worlds. By seeing that, a king quickly obtains success
in  
his undertakings.

1219\. As Rama had erected that image in a mood of violence so Hari is
always  
present there in a fierce mood.

1220\. Human beings also worship Him with a feeling of violence and as a
result  
of this feeling (they worship Him) daily with such actions as the
killing of  
animals.

1221\. O lord of the earth, having excavated, at first, pits (filled)
with the  
blood of Ksatriyas, the pious Rama also went to Kuruksetra.

1222-24. That destroyer of the royal enemies obtained pleasure after  
worshipping the forefathers in those (pits). The pleased forefathers
addressed  
him thus: “O long- armed Rama, deviate yourself from this act and go on
a holy  
pilgrimage. As you have killed the kings who were frightened and had
taken  
flight, your body has become sinful with that sin. Hence, O son, go to
the  
holy places for purifying yourself.

1225-26. Till you become possessed of a purified body, O son, the fast  
sticking blood would not disappear from your hands. When both your
hands  
become free from blood, then having become purified, you should
practice  
penance as may please you.

1227\. O king, addressed thus and honoured by the forefathers, Rama went
then,  
as a pilgrim, to all the holy places.

1228\. Then, he went to Kasmira and having bathed in all the holy
places, he  
reached near Grdhrakuta.

1229\. After a bath at the place where the Suddha and the Sarasvati
meet, the  
hands of Rama became purified.

1230-31. Rama also gave to that place, a boon, viz. “After taking bath
at this  
holy spot, a man will give up all his sins. With his body purified, he
shall  
attain the world as is accessible to the Bhrgus.” Thus the tormentor of
the  
armies of the enemies purged of sin.

1232\. He practiced hard penance after arriving at Pathesvara and
thereafter  
arrived as the river Punyoda which had originated from the Brahmasara.

1233\. When the high-minded Rama performed austerities there, the river
became  
famous on the earth, by the name Ramahrada.

1234\. Having performed austerities there, for a year, Rama went for
penance to  
the foot of Grhrakuta.

1235-36, Not far from the place where his hands had attained purity and
not  
far from the Punyoda, there is the abode of the high-souled Naga king
Ananta.  
(Rama) performed hard penance there and erected the image of the god
Sarngi.

1237-38. While Rama of unwearied activity was staying there, a good
Brahmana  
went to see Asramasvami. He took a cow along with him to offer to that
god.  
She breathed her last there on the hard way on that mountain.

1239\. O lord of the earth, the Brahmana also – immersed in repentance –
came  
back with a mind full of grief and sorrow, after leaving the cow.

1240-41. Persistent in piety, that Vasistha (Brahmana) went to the
hermitage  
of Rama and related all that bad happened, to the high-souled Rama. Then
Rama,  
seeing with his celestial sight, said to him.

1242\. “O best among the twice-borns, this charming celestial woman born
in  
heaven deceived, in the guise of a cow, Narada – the heavenly sage.
1243-44.  
Having come to know this, he cursed her and she became your cow.
Further, he  
pronounced the end of the curse thus: “While being carried by the
cow-owner,  
to the mountain Grdhrakuta, you shall give up the body and again turn
into a  
nice fairy.

1145\. O twice-born, she has been freed from the curse by you, so no
sin  
accrues to you. By my favour you shall be endowed with the merit of the
gift  
of a cow.

1146\. Go and see your own lord of the gods living in Asrama. By his
sight you  
shall be freed from all the sins.

1247\. I, too, with a desire to do good to the world, shall bring that
image  
here, by propitiating Madhusudana – the best among the gods.

1248\. O Brahmana, people often worship that Hari with the gift of cow
and the  
cows suffer a lot while climbing up the hill.

1249\. O chief among the twice-borns, there would not be (any
suffering), when  
the image is brought here.” Then, that descendant of Bhrgu practiced
penance  
at that very place.

1250-1252. Then, O king, at the end of the year, he saw with his
celestial  
sight, pleased Madhusudana, standing in front, resembling a heap of snow
(due  
to being) adorned with white clothes, decorated with a crown of the hue
of the  
sun and with earrings, four-faced, four-armed, accompanied by the abode
of the  
four Vedas, and with cries of victory pronounced by weapons endowed with
human  
bodies. Seeing Madhusudana, O king, he praised him thus.

1253\. Salutation to you, O lord of the gods of the gods, destroyer of
the  
sufferings of those who prostrate (before you).

1254\. Salutation to you who are possessed of four forms, endowed with a
bulky  
body, abode of four Vedas, long-armed, finder of the cow, (earth),
lotus-eyed  
and having Varaha and other incarnations.

1255\. Bearing the earth on the front part of the jaws, crushing the
mountains  
into pieces, you are Varaha by whom this world is held constantly.

1256\. Salutation to you, O Man-lion – surrounded by garlands of flames
– who  
broke forth the chest of Hiranyakasipu with the tips of nails.

1257\. Salutation to you – the god who took three steps – desirous of
victory.  
Salutation to you, O lord, possessed of the head of a horse and with
face  
embellished with Soma.

1258-60. O god, you are the final resort of all the gods when they are
in  
suffering. The senses, the objects of of senses, the gross physical
elements,  
the mind, the intellect, the soul, avyakta born of Purusa, sattva,
rajas,  
tamas, Brahma, Visnu, Mahesvara, the three worlds including movables
and  
immovables, all this is pervaded by you. I do not see anything else
than  
yourself in the three worlds.

1261\. O god, it was through your strength that I killed, on the earth,
the  
Ksatriyas and one crore highly strong Saimhikeyas.

1262\. Obeisance to you, O lord of the gods, O minutest among the minute
and  
the greatest among the great, O lover of the daughter of the ocean, O
assumer  
of forms at your own will!

1263-64. O giver of desired wishes, O destroyer of sins, honoured by the
enemy  
of Kama, praised continually by the lotus-born (Brahma) by means of
four  
mouths, cause of the causes of the world, how should I praise you? O
praised  
one, O lord of the three worlds, O master, salutation to you by all
means!

1265-66. 0 god, salutation to you on sides; O lord, salutation to you
all  
around i.e. on the mountains, in the seas, in the worlds and in the
sky.  
Salutation to you, salutation to you, salutation to you everywhere.”

1267\. Eulogized thus by Rama, Janardana said to him: “O long-armed Rama
–  
possessed of good vow – ask for a boon.

1268\. O child possessed of a good vow, with your valour, penance and
this hymn  
of praise, I am pleased as much as of none else.”

1269\. Rama (spoke): “O lord, I want to bring here, the image erected by
Bhrgu,  
from the peak of Grdhrakuta Your honour may permit me for that.”

1270\. The god spoke: O best among the Bhrgus, I have bestowed a favour
upon  
you. Do as you like, so that the people may be freed from sin without
any  
suffering.

1271\. Brhadasva (said): Having spoken thus, the lord Visnu disappeared.
Rama  
also brought down that image from Grdhrakuta.

1272\. He erected with devotion that image which belonged to him,
midway  
between Ananta and Kuta. By seeing that, a man obtains the merit of  
(performing) Pundarika.

1273\. Shining with austerities, Rama also went to Mahendra Mountain,
after  
giving the earth to Kasyapa, in the great sacrifice (called) Vajimedha.

1274\. O well-versed in piety, thus was the auspicious image brought by
Rama,  
from Grdhrakuta – the best of the mountains – to the vicinity of his  
hermitage.

1275\. Gonanda (said): “O best among the narrators and possessed of
unlimited  
intelligence, tell me (about) the sacred places situated near this
country and  
also the merit which accrues from each.”

1276-77. Brhadasva (spoke): “By climbing up the Grdhrakuta one gets the
merit  
of (the gift of) one thousand cows and goes to heaven (by bathing) in
the  
confluence of the Vitasta and the Madhumati.

By climbing up the Indranila, one obtains the merit of (the gift of)
one  
thousand cows. Having reached the river Kumunari, one is freed from all
sins  
by taking bath therein.

1278-79. One gets the merit of (the gift of) one thousand cows (by
bathing in)  
the confluence of the Krsna and the Vitasta and gets the merit of
performing  
Vahnistoma by seeing Cakresa erected by Sandilya on the bank of the
Madhumati.

One gets the fulfillment of one’s cherished desire by seeing Durga.

1280\. There flows also the river named Sandili – the destroyer of sins.
By  
taking bath in that, one becomes free from sins and goes to heaven.

1281\. The man who takes bath in the confluence of the Sandili and the  
Madhumati, is freed from all sins and goes to heaven.

1282\. Through a sight of Hari (called) Rajavasa, one obtains one’s
desired  
object and after reaching Rajovinirmala, one is freed from sins by
taking bath  
(therein).

1283\. Uma, in her monthly course for the 1st time, took bath therein.
Through  
a sight of Gaurisikhara one obtains the world of the Moon.

1284\. O king, at first her hue was like that of a blue lotus but by
performing  
penance there, she obtained heart- enchanting fair complexion.

1285\. O giver of honour, it is highly strange indeed that even in the
dark  
half (of the month), the human beings continually see that hill endowed
as it  
were with moonlight.

1286\. By plunging separately in the Telala and in the holy Bhurjala,
one gets  
the merit equal to that of (the gift of) hundred cows.

1287-88a. By taking bath in the confluence of these two, one obtains the
merit  
of (performing) Vajapeya. O king, it is stated by the sages that for him
who  
bathes in the confluence of these two and the Madhumati, there accrues
the  
holy merit of the gift of an elephant.

1288b-89. Having reached the charming source of the Madhumati, one is
freed  
from all the sins and is honoured in the world of Rudra.

By bathing in Uttaramanasa, one gets the merit of (the gift of) thousand
cows.

1290\. The forefathers who are satiated at that place have fulfillment
of  
cherished desires. By bathing in the (lake of) Haramunda, one gets the
merit  
of (the gift of) ten cows.

1291-92. By climbing up Haramunda, a man obtains the merit of
(performing)  
Rajasuya sacrifice.

Fallen from the moon, Ganga – the best of the rivers – is situated
there, by  
taking bath in which, all sins are certainly washed away.

At the confluence of Ganga and Manasa, one acquires the merit of
(performing)  
Rajasuya.

1293\. By taking bath in Devatirtha, a man reaches Uttaramanasa.

In the Agastya (lake) constructed by the Valakhilyas, one becomes equal
to the  
sages, in lustre.

1294-95. Having reached Kalodaka, Nandikunda, Sankha, Cakra, Gada,
Padma,  
Kapilatirtha, the holy places of Vatika and Sandika, the holy places of
the  
nymphs and the highest Brahma and Krpanitirtha, one gets at each, the
merit of  
(the gift of) hundred cows.

1296\. All the sins are completely washed away by bathing at the place
where  
the river originated from Manasa meets Kalodaka.

1297\. Holy are the wives of the gods. Suryasara is remembered to be
holy;  
Tarasara, Candrasara and the great Kalusaka are holy.

1298-99. O lord of the earth, there is the holy place of the sacrifice
of  
Brahma. By seeing every one of these, namely, Sakratirtha, Devatirtha
and  
Brahmanakundikatirtha, one obtains the merit of (the gift of) a hundred
cows.  
Having reached Hamsadvara, one certainly attains heaven.

1300\. Having arrived at the source of the Sindhu, one gets the merit
of  
(performing) Rajasuya, and by bathing in Bindusara one gets that of  
(performing) Pundarika.

1301\. By taking bath in the Madava, one gets the merit of (the gift
of)  
thousand cows and by seeing the river named Sandhya, one is freed from
all  
sins.

1302\. Not going to the unfaithful, she approaches nicely one who is
possessed  
of unfailing vow. By merely seeing there the holy place of Agni, one
is  
honoured in the world of Agni.

1303-4. Holy is the river Citrapatha and so also Mrgananda and Mrga. One
gets  
the merit of (the gift of) a hundred cows through every one of these,
namely,  
Godavari, Vaitarani, auspicious Mandakini, Candrabhaga and Gomati, the
remover  
of all sins and fears.

1305-6. The sins of a person who bathes at the place where the holy
Citrapatha  
and the great river Madava meet, are destroyed. Moreover, he attains
heaven  
and purifies his family. O king, these great rivers have been described
to  
you.

1307\. Their confluences are sacred and give heaven as award. Sacred is
the  
mountain Citrakuta where Uma was married.

1308\. There is the celestial ointment by anointing the body with which,
a mall  
becomes possessed of a beautiful form and good gifts.

1309-11. There is Gavyasara and Pancagavyasara. O king, there are five
other  
(lakes) and also the sacred Tailasara, the sacred Udvartanasara, the
sacred  
Atasisara, Siddharthakasara and the (lake filled with the) water of
the  
Myrobalan fruit (amalakavari). There is the holy Madhuparkasara and the
holy  
Usnodaka. One obtains heaven by seeing every one of these.

1312\. One is honoured in heaven by climbing up the Citrakuta. There is
a holy  
place named Saptarsi which gives the fruit of all desires.

1313\. The offering of boiled rice to Saptarsi is more efficacious than
(the  
performance of) one thousand Asvamedhas, one hundred Rajasuyas and (the
gift  
of) one lac cows.

1314\. O king, funeral ceremonies, charity, recital of the name of the
God,  
bath, sacrifice and worship, all these become imperishable when
performed at  
that place.

1315\. Having arrived at Vastrapada, one is honoured in the world of
Rudra and  
after reaching Chagalesvara, one gets one’s desire fulfilled.

1316\. Having become an attendant of Rudra, one enjoys oneself in His
company.  
By reaching the source of Parosni, one obtains the merit of (the gift
of) one  
thousand cows.

1317\. After bathing in Usnodaka one gets the merit of giving one
thousand cows  
in charity and having reached Sahasradhara, one is honoured in the world
of  
Visnu.

1318-1320. Visnu, while stepping over the worlds, created that lake by
means  
of his foot, so it is called Kramasara as is the other place Visnupada.
When  
the god Brahma performed Vedic sacrifices there, then that Kramasara
came to  
be spoken of as the destroyer of all sins. When there was the abode of
the  
Naga Kaundinya, then that place became famous by the name Kaundinyasara
only.

1321-22a. By worshipping the gods and the manes, by seeing three
beautiful  
peaks (named) Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara, and after having taken bath  
therein, one certainly obtains the three worlds of those (gods).

1222b-23. O lord of the earth, one attains heaven a saves one’s family
by  
seeing the sacrificial place of Brahma there. By seeing there the
beautiful  
Ksirasara, one is released from sins.

1324\. By bathing on the dark 14th after reaching the source of the
Samara, one  
is freed from all the sins and is honoured in the world of Rudra.

1325\. I have narrated to you the sacred places which are near and which
remove  
the sins of all. What else should I tell you?”

1326\. Gonanda (spoke): “O twice-born, with (your) sins burnt by
austerities,  
tell me about the prominent tirthas in Kasmira and about the merit which
can  
be obtained by taking bath in them.”

1327-28. Brhadasva (said): “The sacred great river named Kaundinya
originating  
from the lake Kramasara gives, through bath, the merit of (performing)  
Pundarika. And the holy river Ksira is the giver of the merit of (the
gift of)  
a hundred cows. One gets the merit of (giving) one thousand cows by
bathing in  
the confluence of both of them.

1329\. A man becomes devoid of grief and possessed of wealth, by taking
bath in  
the Visoka and obtains the holy merit of (performing) Devasattra.

1330\. O chief of the kings, one gets the merit of (performing)
Vajapeya, by  
taking bath at the place where the Kaundini meets the Visoka.

1331\. A man gets (the merit of performing) the sacrifice Gosava, by
taking  
bath at Vrddhatirtha. Vasuki – the lord of the Bhujagas – is always
present  
there.

1332\. By bathing in Devasara, a man obtains the world of gods and by
bathing  
at Agnitirtha he obtains the world of Agni.

1333\. In the south-eastern portion of Devasara is present the river
named  
Sarasvati, by bathing in which, a man goes to heaven.

1334\. A man obtains the merit of (the gift of) a hundred cows by
bathing in  
two tirthas, one in front of Vinatasvami and the other near Kadrusvami.

1335\. O giver of honour, there is the goddess Samdhya, the holy river,
by  
bathing in which, sin is removed from the body and one goes to heaven.

1336-37. Samdhya Puskarini is another (holy place) which gives the merit
equal  
to that of the previous one. One is honoured in heaven after plunging
with  
devotion into the holy Brahmanakundika and after seeing the holy place
bearing  
three names Nilakunda, Vitastakhya and Sulaghata.

1338-39. Having reached Vinasana, one gets the merit of (the performance
of)  
Vajapeya. Charity, funeral ceremonies and penance (performed) at  
Brahmanakundika and Nilakunda, are stated to be imperishable. By bathing
in  
Vitastonmajjana, one obtains the merit of (giving) one thousand cows.

1340\. 0 lord of the earth, by bathing in Pancahastaka, one obtains the
(merit  
of performing) five sacrifices which a householder is required to
perform  
daily.

1341\. Lokapunya is, verily, the remover of all sins. By bathing in
Kapotaka, a  
man gets the merit of giving a cow.

1342\. O best of the kings, Vitastonmajjana in the hermitage of Visnu in
front  
of Nrsimha is holy. One is honoured in the world of Visnu (by bathing
in  
that).

1343-44. The merit of (the gift of) one thousand cows accrues for him
who  
bathes in the Dhyanadharini, and by bathing in the sin-destroying
confluence  
of the Vitasta and the Dhyanadharini, a man obtains the holy merit of  
(performing) Vajapeya. Having entered the Dhyanadharini, the Vitasta  
disappeared at that place.

1345\. The river Visoka, concealing herself, reached that place soon.
The merit  
of (performing) Rajasuya is considered to accrue at the confluence of
these  
two at Dhaumyasrama.

1346\. By seeing Caturvedi, a man gets the merit of giving a daughter
(in  
marriage).

Having arrived at the Harsapatha, a human being obtains much gold.

1347\. By reaching the source of Trikoti, one is freed from all sins and
having  
reached the source of the Candravati, one is honoured in the world of
the  
Moon.

1348\. By bathing in Devatirtha one becomes a god and gets a son. And
by  
bathing in Trikoti, a man is honoured in the world of the gods.

1349\. By bathing in Harsapatha, one is honoured in the world of Sakra
and by  
bathing in Candravati one gets the merit of (giving) ten cows.

1350\. Holy is the river Harsapatha and so also is Candravati. The wise
say  
that there accrues (the merit of the performance of) Rajasuya at the  
confluence of these two.

1351\. The area beginning from the confluence of Trikoti up to
Raupyesvara Hara  
should be regarded equal (in merit) to Varanasi or even more powerful.

1352\. One attains the world of Rudra by taking bath in Kapotesvara and
is  
honoured in the world of Rudra (by taking bath) in the holy
Visalingahrada.

1353\. O lord of the earth, one attains the world of Rudra and saves
one’s  
family by taking bath in the Vitasta in front of Vijayesvara.

1354\. One is honoured in the world of Visnu by taking bath in front
of  
Pingalesa and the same merit is stated to accrue from a bath at the
hermitage  
of Khandapuccha.

1355\. By taking bath in Pundarika, a man gets the merit of
(performing)  
Pundarika sacrifice and by bathing in Surparka, one obtains the merit of
the  
gift of cows.

1356\. One who gives food in charity at the confluence of the Vitasta
and the  
Dhyanadharini, gets merit which remains imperishable so long as there
are the  
fourteen Indras.

1357-58. All the sacred places are present, at that time, in the
hermitage of  
Narasimha. O lord of men, the area beginning from the confluence of
the  
Vitasta and the Dhyanadharini up to the worthy abode of the Naga
Kalpasodasa  
is as holy as Prayaga.

1359\. By taking bath in Gangodbheda near Bhedadevi, a man obtains the
merit of  
bathing in the Ganga and is honoured in heaven.

1360-61. By plunging in the holy Katha, one gets the merit of the gift
of ten  
cows and by bathing in Aujasa in front of Dharmaraja, one does not reach
the  
state of misery and obtains the merit of (performing) Vajapeya.

1362\. O king, one enjoys endlessly, the meals offered after death at
that holy  
place, specially on the dark fifteenth of the month Asvayuj.

1363\. One is honoured in the world of Visnu by taking bath at
Narayanasthana  
and a similar merit is stated to accrue at Ramatirtha and Bhavotsa.

1364\. By taking bath at Sailaprstha and the holy place of Vaisravana,
one is  
sure to possess wealth, wherever he may be born.

1365\. Having bathed at Kamatirtha, a man obtains the fulfillment of
his  
desires and having bathed at Apasarastirtha, he becomes possessed of
beauty.

1366\. By bathing at Rsitirtha, one becomes pure like a sage and by
bathing in  
Vaitarani, one does not reach the state of misery.

1367-68. One gets the merit of the gift of cows by arriving at
Rsikulya,  
Devakulya, Asvatirtha, Prabhasa, Varuna, Vahnitirtha, Candratirtha,  
Nagatirtha, Cakratirtha and Vamana.

1369\. A man is honoured in heaven after having bathed at Madatirtha,  
Skandatirtha and Suresvaritirtha.

1370\. Having arrived at Madhuri, one gets the merit of giving one
prastha of  
sesame in charity and by bathing in her confluence with Vitasta, one
is  
removed from sins.

1371\. One is honoured in the world of Rudra by seeing the mountain
Mahadeva  
after having a plunge in the Madhuri in front of Tripuresa.

1372\. By bathing at Amaresa, a man may get the merit of (the gift of)
a  
hundred cows and by bathing in the Malini, one may get the merit of
giving ten  
cows.

1373\. Having bathed at Pandavatirtha, one enjoys the merit of
(performing) the  
five sacrifices and having arrived at Uccesatirtha, one is honoured in
the  
world of Rudra.

1374-75. One gets much gold by bathing in the water of the Ramahrada. O
king,  
the merit of (bathing) both at the confluence of the Malini with the
Sindhu  
and at the place where the Ramahrada meets the Sindhu is stated to be
equal to  
(that of the performance of) Rajasuya and Asvamedha.

1376\. One gets one thousand cows and becomes rich by taking bath at the
place  
where the Kanakavahini joins the Sindhu.

1377-79. Holy is the river Pavana. (There is also) the
Rajobinduvinirmala, by  
taking bath in which a man obtains the merit of performing) Pundarika.
The  
merit of (performing Rajasuya is considered to be accruing at the holy  
confluence of these two rivers). The area, beginning from that place
and  
extending up to Ciramocana is regarded as sacred as that of Varanasi.

1380\. The sacred place Cirapramocana is stated to be the provider of
the way  
to heaven. The presence of all the tirthas at that place has been
mentioned by  
me.

1381\. Leaving their clothes there, the seven sages went to heaven. By
bathing  
there, even those who are sinners, go to heaven.

1382-83. One gets the merit of (the gift of) one thousand cows by taking
bath  
in Sodara. The merit of (the performance of) Rajasuya and Asvamedha is
stated  
to accrue from both (the places), for a person who visits the confluence
of  
the Kanakavahini where meets also the holy river Kalodaka.

1384\. The wise say that by bathing in the confluence of the Sindhu and
the  
Vitasta, specially on the full-moon day of the month Prausthapada, one
obtains  
the merit of (the performance of) Asvamedha.

1385\. One gets the merit of (performing) Pundarika by taking bath in  
Patratirtha and saves one’s family through bath in the Apaga.

1386\. By taking bath in the lake Manasa, especially on the full-moon
day of  
the month of Asadha, one gets the merit of (performing) Agnistoma. There
is no  
need to doubt this.

1387-88. One obtains the merit of (performing) Vajapeya, (by bathing) in
the  
lake Mahapadma. A man gets the merit of (performing) Agnistoma by
bathing in  
the holy river Hiranya which takes rise from the Haramunda.

1389\. One gets the merit of (performing) Asvamedha, especially on
full-moon  
day, (by bathing) at the place where Hiranya meets the holy lake
Mahapadma.

1390\. By bathing at Bahurupa, one is honoured in the world of Visnu.
This, O  
best among men, is stated to be the merit at Bahurupa.

1391-93. O king, the lord of men, it is stated by the sages – perceivers
of  
true essence – that the merit of the gift of ten cows accrues separately
at  
each sacred place, namely, the good sacred place Satasrnga, the sacred
place  
of Vaisravana, the sacred place near Bhurjasvami, the places sacred to
the  
Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Maruts, all the gods, the Bhrgus and
the  
Angiras.

1394\. The merit of (the gift of) a hundred cows has been formerly
stated for  
each of the (two) places where the Bilasa and the Silama meet the
Vitasta.

1395\. The best amongst men immediately purifies his family by taking
bath at  
the place where the river Kularani meets the Vitasta.

1396\. One gets the merit of (performing) Atiratra by having a plunge
in  
Puskara and that of Agnistoma by bathing at the holy place of the seven
sages.

1397\. A man attains the world of Visnu and saves his family by reaching
the  
sacred place Varaha in the water of Vitasta.

1398\. A man surely obtains the world of Visnu by bathing in the water
of the  
Vitasta at Narayanasthana.

1399\. For one who is bathed in both (the rivers) at the place where the
river  
Gotranadi approaches the Vitasta, the merit of (the gift of) one
thousand cows  
is pronounced.

1400-1403. The river Madhuri is specially holy like Mathura. One obtains
the  
merit arising from the gift of a cow by taking bath in every one of
these viz.  
the Satanila, the Samala, the river Vimalodaka, the holy river Rahula;
the  
great river Srimadhya, the second Suddha, the Samula, the Surasa. A man
gets  
the merit of giving ten cows by plunging in the confluences of all
these  
(rivers) separately. Having bathed in Anantatirtha, one is honoured in
the  
world of the Nagas.

1404-1405. One obtains the merit of giving ten cows by seeing every one
of  
these, namely, Bindunadesvaratirtha, Somatirtha, Prthudaka,  
Tungesatirthaksetra, Utankasvami, Ramatirtha, Bhrgutirtha and the holy
place  
of Angiras.

1406\. O king, all the good rivers and the fountains are sacred and all
these  
mountains are also sacred.

1407\. O lord of the earth, all the images erected by the sages, and all
the  
great lakes (are holy) everywhere but specially so in Kasmira.

1408\. Holy are all the confluences and the pools of the Nagas. One
surely  
obtains the merit of the gift of hundred Suvarnas (by bathing in them).

1409\. Holy are these sacred places and specially so is the Vitasta. O
king,  
the goddess Vitasta is stated to be purifying everywhere.

1410\. Even those men who are sinners go to heaven by bathing in that. O
lord  
of men, one gets the merit of (performing) Vahnistoma by bathing in
that.

1411-1413. One, with one’s forehead anointed with goraja, is freed from
all  
sins, by seeing (the river Vitasta) and by bathing in the Vitasta on
the  
bright thirteenth, at the places where the Vitasta is holy always but
is  
specially so on the bright thirteenth of a month. (The places are) the  
hermitage Vitastakhya, Dhaumyesa, the confluence of (the Vitasta and)
the  
Sindhu, and Varahatirtha which destroys the sins and gives (the merit
of  
performing) Rajasuya.

1414\. A man who has committed any invisible sin except the five (great
sins),  
removes (that sin) away by one bath in the cold water.

1415\. O king, a man gets his desired objects if he takes bath there,
before  
sun-rise, for the whole winter.

1416-1417. One attains heaven so long as there are the fourteen Indras,
by  
bathing properly, worshipping the fire in the right procedure and then  
offering boiled rice and pulses mixed with purified butter to the
Brahmanas.

1418\. O lord of men, a person who takes bath daily thus for the whole
year  
will obtain the means of getting salvation and then will obtain
salvation.

1419\. I have narrated to you, all the sayings of Nila and the merit of
all the  
sacred places of Kasmira. I am going. May you be happy.

1420\. Whatever has been narrated by me to you, should be remembered
with  
effort. By listening to this, a man obtains the merit of the gift of
ten  
cows.”

1421\. Vaisampayana said: “Having spoken thus to the king Gonanda, the  
pious-minded Brhadasva took his desired route for holy pilgrimage.

1422\. The militant Gonanda also thought highly himself and ruled over
the  
earth, in accordance with the instructions of the Sastras.

1423\. Janamejaya (said): “O best among the twice- borns, tell me again
the  
glorification of the Vitasta. I shall go after being free from sins by  
listening to that.

1424\. Vaisampayana (said) ;”O king, it was beautiful Sati, the daughter
of  
Daksa and the beloved wife of Hara, who was called Uma in Vaivasvata
Antara.

1425\. The same daughter of the Himadri was the sin- destroying Yamuna
and the  
same was spoken of as the greatest boat in the three worlds, at the end
of  
Manvantara.

1426\. The (same) goddess is called Kasmira and the same is the river
Vitasta.  
The river goddess arose from the Nether world, by means of the stroke of
the  
spear.

1427\. On account of the destruction of all sins after bathing in the
water of  
the Vitasta, one by one’s own self knows oneself to be possessed of
the  
quality of lightness.

1428-29. O lord of men, the Ganga does not excel the Vitasta. The on\]y
thing  
which the water of the Ganga has more than that of the Vitasta, is the
heap of  
the bones of men. Bath and other things are equal.

1430-31. O king, this Ganga was brought down formerly by the king
Bhagiratha  
desirous of deluging the bones of the high-minded Sagaras, so she is
stated to  
be famous in that act. The auspicious Vitasta is verily the holy
river,  
remover of all sins.

1432\. All those who died with the water of the Vitasta in their
bellies,  
reached heaven like the soma-drinkers.

1433\. The gods are satisfied not so much with the sacrifices
accompanied by  
sacrificial fees as they are with those waters (of the Vitasta).

1434\. The Fathers are satisfied just as with various sorts of offerings
of  
sweet food given to proper persons in proper time at holy place, so with
those  
clean waters (of the Vitasta).

1435-36. The Nagas of various forms, the rivers, the holy places, the
gods,  
the sages, the Gandharvas, the Yaksas and the Raksasas constantly
approach  
her. The wise (man) should go to her to make his birth a success.

1437\. Varuna knows the man who merely bathes in the Vitasta and how can
he,  
who is known by the lord of the waters, fall in hell?

1438\. The goddess Vitasta – destroyer of sins- gives protection with
her hand,  
to the evil-doing sinners falling into hell.

1439-1441a. Those who will go to the Vitasta, the staircase for climbing
up to  
heaven and the giver of the fulfillment of desires, shall go to
Amaravati, by  
means of a sky- chariot containing the swans and the aquatic birds
(Sarasa),  
decorated by the Cakravakas, having a colour like that of the sun,
garlanded  
with a net-work of small bells, swarming with a host of heavenly maidens
and  
resounding with the sounds of the Vina and the Muraja.

1441b-1444. O chief of the kings, those men obtain fame on the earth,
who go  
to the goddess Vitasta, endowed with various bridges, decorated with
blue and  
red lotuses, filled with the sounds of the herds of the cows, resounding
with  
the bellowing-sounds, full of fish and tortoises, possessed of good
bathing  
places, giver of the desired objects, possessed of the water which
tastes like  
nectar, charming to the eyes of men and boon-giver like a mother.

1445\. 0 king, pay obeisance to her, the purifying one praised by the
high  
sages, possessed of tasty water, daughter of the Himalaya who is the
king of  
the mountains, and the wife of Hara in the form of the sea.

1446-47. The Sindhu, the Trikoti, the Visoka, the holy and auspicious
river  
Harsapatha, the holy Sukha, the Candravati, the Sugandha, the
sin-destroying  
Punyodaka, the Kularani, the sin-removing Krsna, the holy Madhumati and
the  
holy river Parosni go to the boon-giver and celestial Vitasta.

1448\. O king, the river Ganga on the matted hair of Sambhu – torn forth
by the  
god Moon and hence called Candrabhaga in the human world – comes to the
sacred  
and extensive Vitasta.

1449\. O king, the sacred places, the lakes, the rivers, the tanks, the
various  
types of wells, all these come to the boon- giver Vitasta, on the
bright  
thirteenth of Bhadrapada.

1450\. Who can be able, O king, to describe to you the merits of the
goddess  
even in several hundred years? Having heard a little which has been
narrated  
by me with devotion, you should be always devoted (to her).

1451\. Having listened to the glorification of the Vitasta, one is freed
from  
all sins and having heard the whole of the Nilamata, one gets the merit
of  
(the gift of) ten cows.

1452-53. Narrated thus to Janamejaya by Vyasa’s pupil who had undertaken
a  
great vow, this was not included in the Bharata lest that should
become  
exhaustive with the inclusion of all the treatises. As it was not
useful  
everywhere, so the high-souled venerable (Vyasa) did not include it in
the  
most interesting though highly exhaustive Bharata – dear to the people
like  
the full moon.

This is Vitasta Mahatmya. This (treatise) named the

Animesh’s Blog

