+++
title = "Origins"
full_title = "Origins"
date = "2015-02-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/02/12/origins/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/02/12/origins/).

Origins

It looks as if the people that founded the Corded Ware culture, largely
eliminating the previous LBK-like farmers, were the Yamnaya, themselves
a mixed population, approximately half some kind of eastern
hunter-gatherer and half some farming populations genetically similar to
Armenians.

In which of those two populations did primitive Indo-European – the
language – originate? I’m betting on the hunters. I suspect that they’re
the ones that domesticated the horse: horses weren’t very common south
of the Caucasus, and it doesn’t look as if they were domesticated there.

It’s not easy for farmers to conquer horsemen: easy the other way
around.

The dominant Y-chromosome lineages among the Yamnaya (and later, most of
Europe and India) originated in those hunters, not in a Middle Eastern
population. It is hard to believe in a scenario in which the farmers
conquered the hunters and then forced their women on them (Take my wife,
please!).

Analyzing old myths and legends, various people smoking superior kinds
of dope have argued that there was a ‘war of the functions” – formation
wars – at the beginning of the Indo-Europeans, where a group of warriors
and priest/magicians/judges conquered farmers. Two estates absorbed the
third. Possibly referenced in those sobbin’ women, the Aesir-Vanir war,
the Mahabharata, etc.

Moreover, something relevant happened earlier, before the Yamnaya made
their big move. Somebody – pastoralists – smashed Old Europe in the
Balkans a good deal earlier, and someone (maybe the same people) brought
a very early branch of Indo-European into Anatolia ( Hittite, Luwian,
Palaic, Carian, etc. ) Then there are the Indo-Aryan languages, and
Tocharian: looking at those branches, and the genetics of early
speakers, should resolve this problem. For example, if you find a
population of Indo-European speakers that has that eastern
hunter-gatherer genetic signature, without the Armenian-like signature,
probably the language originated in the hunters. Or vice versa.

