+++
title = "AND THEN, DEVAS SMILED ON MADURAI…"
date = "2020-08-14"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/14/and-then-the-devas-smiled-on-madurai/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/14/and-then-the-devas-smiled-on-madurai/).

#### **( How Sultanate of Madurai was finished by the valorous, Kumara Kampana)**

*“The main shrine of the Shrirangam temple, including the
superstructure, has pathetically fallen apart…the only roof which covers
the image of Shriranganatha, …is the hood of Adishesha.”*

*“The **garbhagrihas**…of many other temples there are also crumbling,
their mandapas are now overgrown with jungle leaves; their solemn wooden
doors are honeycombed by white ant holes.”*

If the sight of the ruins of the ancient temples of India is not
pricking enough for anyone with even a semblance of pride in the culture
of this glorious civilization, then reading about how it came to be in
such a state is even more jarring. Countless temples of India have
suffered this brutal fate, with the only saving grace sometimes,
fortunately or unfortunately, is broken artifacts in the museums. Many
temples weren’t even that lucky. The only fate left for them is being
under Archaeological Survey of India and that by a long shot, is not
something that can be envied.

But some temples were genuinely lucky. Not because they didn’t face the
Islamic barbarians, that they did valiantly. But lucky because they
survived, in whatever form, but they did. And then, the *Devas* smiled
on them.

They sent their most illustrious sons of the soil, to the rescue of the
temples. As if consoling them that they would be magnificent again, the
*vigraha* would be worshipped again, their pavillions would be filled by
devotees again, by the chants of the pious *brahmans* again.

The temple of Shriranganatha was one of such magnificent temples. One of
the most revered temples in India, it was pillaged many a times by the
minions of the Delhi Sultanate in early part of 14^(th) century like
Malik Kafur.

![** Sriranganathaswamy Temple in 1870 (Credit: Wikimedia
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/ranganatha_temple_complex_.jpg?w=765)

After the invasion by Sultanate under Ulugh Khan (Muhammad bin Tughlaq)
in 1323 C.E, the devotees were able to save the *vigrahas* of *Vishnu*
and *Lakshmi*. Tradition says that many thousands of devotees defended
the temple with indomitable courage. The land came under the Delhi
Sultanate after this invasion.

The destruction of a temple is never just that, but always is
accompanied by the destruction of an entire society which depends on
that temple. The destruction of livelihoods, of patronage, of an entire
cultural environment, which sustained itself through centuries around
that temple.

The pillage of Shriranganatha and many other magnificent temples of
Madurai like the Meenakshi Temple meant subversion of the entire
culture.

The territory was now under the Sultanate. The governor of the
territory, the governor of Ma’bar, Jalaluddin Ahsan Khan/ Hasan Khan
declared the independence of Sultanate of Madurai in 1335 C.E. from the
Delhi Sultanate. The country just passed from one barbarian to the
other.

If it was possible, the Sultanate of Madurai exceeded the Delhi
Sultanate in persecuting the local populace, the *infidels*.

It proved itself to be a true successor of the Delhi Sultanate in every
sense of the word.The rulers were almost always assasinated during
infighting. Most of them were debauch and many showed cruelty which
shocked sometimes even their co-religionists. Ibn Batuta, the Moroccan
traveller was an eye witness to some of the inhuman cruelty of one of
the Sultan of Madurai, Ghiyasuddin Muhammad Damghani in 1340s. He gave
his account in these words:

> *“the Hindu prisoners were divided into four sections and taken to
> each of the four gates of the great catcar. There, on the stakes they
> had carried, the prisoners were impaled. Afterwards their wives were
> killed and tied by their hair to these pales. Little children were
> massacred on the bosoms of their mothers and their corpses left there.
> Then, the camp was raised, and they started cutting down the trees of
> another forest. In the same manner did they treat their later Hindu
> prisoners. This is shameful conduct such as I have not known any other
> sovereign guilty of. It is for this that God hastened the death of
> Ghiyath-eddin.”*

The rule of the traditional kings of Madurai, the Pandyas – was finished
off. The traditional rulers who had nurtured this land for centuries
were violently ousted. But,who were the Pandyas ? Some concise
background for the readers is needed.

The Pandyas had ruled the southern most area of *Tamilakam* since time
immemorial. We find them ruling along with the other two traditional
rulers; the Cholas and the Cheras even in the earliest Tamil poetry
*i*.*e*. the vast corpus of Sangam Literature. Almost all of the usual
foreign sources of the ancient Indian history – the Greek, the Roman,
even the Latin mention them. Emperor Ashoka’s edicts also refer to the
Pandyas. The history of this kingdom goes back to at the least, fourth
century B.C. The ancient city of Madurai is almost as old as the kingdom
of Pandyas.

After an interregnum of a few centuries, when the territory passed into
the hands of Kalabhras, the Pandyas under Kadungon revived the Pandya
power by the end of 6^(th) century C.E. The rise of the Cholas in the
10^(th) century C.E. again sent them in decline but they were once again
able to revive the Pandya dynasty by the end of 13^(th) century C.E.

This very ancient and sacred territory was now under Islamic barbarians.
But fortunately, not for long! Kumara Kampana Udaiyar, prince of the
Vijayanagar Empire, second son of the king, Bukka I who ruled the Empire
for almost twenty years, was the one chosen by the *Devas*.

The overthrow of the Sultanate of Madurai is very underrated, but
extremely important event in the history of India. This sole event saved
the southern part of Indian civilization from going under the deep
slumber of foreign Islamic rule, unlike the less fortunate northern
India.For this very reason Kumara Kampana in particular and Vijaynagar
in general needs to be given more credit, more weightage in the annals
of Indian history.

Unfortunately, the details of this campaign “are not forthcoming, but an
epic version of it is to be found in the exquisite Sanskrit poem
*Madhura* *Vijayam* (‘The conquest of Madura’) by Kampana’s wife Ganga
Devi.” The poem narrates the birth of Kampana and covers the events of
his youth in embellished words.

The poem narrates how the Empire of Vijaynagar received the news of
Kampana’s birth :

*“The prince was born on an auspicious day at the time astrologers had
determined was most auspicious, and happiness spread all over the
kingdom , because everyone felt sure that the child would grow up to
become a famous king able to be a great guardian of the Earth, a
protector of Brahmin sacrifices and a generous giver of gifts.”*

Bukka I was so happy with the news that he wanted “to give away
evreything he owned, even himself to the messengers who came with such a
joyous announcement. By royal command the prisoners were unlocked and
the inmates were freed.”

*“Ganga Devi says that Bukka let the prisoners loose, as if anticipating
the need that would soon arise for new space to hold the many Muslim
prisoners who would be captured during the frays in the times to come.”*

According to the poem, Kampana with age, goes on to become a fine prince
of exeeding valour and one day, he goes to fight the country of Champa,
seizes their hill fortress and the braveheart is able to overcome their
army, thus winning the war. He begins ruling very wisely and is
savouring the fruits of his labour by enjoying the culture, poetry etc.

This calm is interrupted by a “figure with the magic sword from the
Pandyan Dynasty” whose lament of the condition of the southern lands and
their misfortune at the hands of the *mlecchas* (Turushka/Islamic
rulers) compels Kumara Kampana to come out to reestablish the rule of
*Dharma*.

The poem has beautifully depicted the woeful desolation in southern
lands under *mlecchas*. It is poignantly very metaphoric sometimes and
sometimes feels very literal. Readers can see for themselves in these
excerpts how this mystical lady describes the condition of the sacred
land :

*“O Raja, Vyaghrapuri has reverted to its namesake! Yes, now it’s
literally a ‘town’ where ‘tigers’ roam! And Chidambaram, and
Perumparrapuliya! The whole region is truly becoming a wilderness again.
Long ago people civilized that land, but wild beasts run free again
there now.”*

*“In temples where the joyous drumbeat rhythms of the mridangam drums
echoed resonantly, now there’s just the desolate sickening howl of the
scavenging jackals who’ve moved in and taken over the dilapidated
buildings.”*

*“Even in the agraharas, where smoke used to rise from their Vedic rites
(yagadhuma), now people gag from the stench of the Muslim fires roasting
flesh; solemn Vedic chants have been replaced by the foreign invader’s
gruff voices.”*

*“The Tamraparni river, which used to run bright with sandalwood paste
rinsed from the breasts of young women bathing there, now flows red with
cow blood as the invaders slaughter herds of cattle.”*

The mysterious woman then draws a brilliant sword from her belt and says
that the sword is the one whose blade was forged by Vishwakarma himself
by gathering particles from all Gods. The sword was given to
Parameshwara to conquer the *daityas*. Then, the Parameshwara gave this
sword as a boon to one Pandya king after a long *tapasya*, and since
then the sword has been in the posession of the illustrious Pandyas. But
with time, the Pandya Kingdom came under some weaklings. Sage Agastya
saw everything and gave the sword to her, to give the same to Kampana.

*“Just as Krishna went to Mathura and killed wicked Kamsa long ago, so
too, O King, must you now go to the southern town of Madhurai, and kill
the Muslim ruler, the enemy of the world and set up victory pillars
along the bridge of Ram (in the water by Rameshvaram).”*

The king in the poem then goes on to have a duel with the Sultan and
beheads him but the headless body of Sultan is able to strike Kampana
before dying. “The intention of the poem is a celebration of the kings’s
greatness, through lyrical bursts of poetic images.”

The story of the magical and powerful sword given by a Godess to Kampana
to cleanse the *adharmic* forces from this sacred land is very powerful.
The importance of the sword can be gauged from the fact that it was a
part of the emblem of the Vijayanagar Empire along with the boar
*(varaha)*, sun and moon.

![**Emblem of Vijaynagar Empire (Credit: Wikimedia
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/emblem_of_vijayanagar.jpg?w=530)

“The sword and the boar emblem impressed its meaning: power and rescue,
the strength of protection,fighting non-phantom occupiers of a
traditionally Hindu India.” It also has resemblance to the famous story
of how “Bhavani gives a blessed sword to Shivaji.”

This was the poetic depiction of how Madurai was freed. Historically,
Kampana from the very start of the rule of Bukka I, had been ruling the
southern part of the Empire as his viceroy. He was “ably assisted in
this work by such famous generals as Gopana and Saluva Mangu.”

Shambuvarayas of North and South Arcot had already been subjugated by
Kampana. He later even got the Shambuvarayas to co-operate in his
campaign against the Sultanate of Madurai. Kampana was residing at
Kanchipuram when he decided to mop up the Islamic rule in the South.

*“The Pandya’s failure to recover Madura is the historic justificaion
for Kampana’s campaign against the Madura sultan which history places in
the years from 1365 to 1370.”*

The south was now freed from the *mlecchas* by this able prince of the
Vijaynagar Empire . The temple of Shriranganatha could again be its
splendid self. “The image of the Ranganatha, which had been carried away
from Srirangam for safety during the time of Muslim inroads, was
restored to its original place in 1371.” Doors of the sacred Meenakshi
temple were also reopened.

Unfortunately, Kampana died few years later in 1374. Although,
Vijayanagar certainly didn’t have any dearth of strong rulers, one
wonders, what could have been the course of history if he was alive.

Nonetheless, his legacy was carried forward by Harihara II whose long
rule of 27 years “consolidated the supremacy of Vijayanagar all over
southern India.” The pinacle of the glory of the Vijayanagar Empire was
reached under the reign of the great, Krishnadeva Raya.

I hope this history of a successful retaliation, of Hindu dominance, of
sheer strength and valour shown by the prince and viceroy of Vijayanagar
Empire becomes a known fact, worthy of celebration.

**References and Quoted Excerpts:**

-   Vijayanagara Voices: Exploring South Indian History and Hindu
    Literature by William J.Jackson.
-   A History of South India : From Prehistoric times to the fall of
    Vijayanagar by K.A. Nilakantha Sastri.
-   South India and her Mohammedan Invaders by S.K. Aiyangar

This piece was originally published on Indic Today as [And Then, The
Devas Smiled On
Madurai](https://www.indictoday.com/quick-reads/devas-smiled-madurai/)

