+++
title = "Who were the Brahmadattas of Kāśi?"
date = "2020-08-08"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/08/who-were-the-brahmadattas-of-kasi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/08/who-were-the-brahmadattas-of-kasi/).

There are many ancient Indian dynasties, particularly of the time before
the birth of Buddha which are astonishingly under studied and
comparatively unknown in the history of Indian civilization. Various
figures and dynasties of that time which are famous, are mostly due to
the general popularity of the Itihāsas *i.e.* Rāmāyaṇa & Mahābhārata.

![**Painting by Edward Lord Weeks of Varanasi, 1883 viewed from Ganga
(Wikipedia)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/on_the_river_benares_ca_1883-1.jpg?w=590)

The huge corpus of Vedic literature and early Puraṇas like Matsya, Vāyu
etc. also shed light on the political landscape of pre-600 BCE India
along with many early Jātakas but even they are not as used as they
should be for that time period. Though, some scholars, both Indian and
foreign certainly have delved deep into this fascinating exercise but
it’s still not the usual method. This could be because they are
considered by some as only legends not worth considering serious
research as a source of genuine history. While it is true that there is
a lot of overlapping and vagueness along with their legendary style but
they certainly contain a lot of information which can be of immense use
in creating a decent genuine sketch of the political atmosphere for that
time.

This post is a small step towards learning about one such dynasty; the
Brahmadattas of Kāśi, a dynasty which ruled during a lesser delved upon
time of our history, a dynasty that was important enough to frequently
find their place in early Jātakas & Purāṇas and even Mahābhārata.

**Background**

According to H. C. Raychaudhuri, Atharva Veda gives us the first glimpse
of the Kāśis – the people of Kāśi in the “Paipallād recension of the
Atharva Veda”₁. The history of Kāśi of early period seems to have been
greatly connected with that of contemporary Kosala and Videha. “Jala
Jātūkarṇya is mentioned in the Śānkhāyan Śrauta Sūtra (XVI 29. 5.) as
having obtained the position of Purohita of the three people of Kāśi,
Videha and Kosala in the life time of Śvetaketu, a contemporary of
Janaka”₂ of Videha. Over the period, political struggle between Kosala
and Kāśi becomes a regular feature for some time with one state humbling
the other before being finally overshadowed by the rise of a bigger
power, Magadh.

The dynasty which seemed to have ruled before the ascendance of the
Brahmadattas is the Bharata dynasty. “The Purāṇas represent the Kāśi
family as branch of the house of Purūravas the great ancestor of the
Bharatas.”₃ One of the known kings of this dynasty was Dhṛitrāśṭra of
Kāśi mentioned in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, according to which
Dhṛitrāśṭra, a king of Kāśi was was “defeated by Śatāṇîka Sātrājita with
the result that the Kāśis down to the time of Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa gave up
the kindling of the sacred fire.”₄ Dhṛitrāśṭra being a Bharata scion is
also confirmed by a Buddhist source – the Mahāgovind Suttanta. It
mentions a king named Dhataratṭha, evidently Dhṛitrāśṭra mentioned
earlier, as a Bharata prince.₅

**The Brahmadattas**

Coming towards the core of the topic – the dynasty of the Brahmadattas,
the origin story of this dynasty is lacking. Although, there is evidence
as to the place from which Brahmadattas emerged which we will discuss
later. But still the reason of Brahmadatta being a title of the dynasty
rather than just being a personal name has been speculated by some
scholars like Bhandarkar. He thinks that Brahmadatta was probably name
of a king and an entire family of rulers who ruled Kāśi was named as
Brahmadattas after him.₆ The Jātakas and Purāṇas, both mention
Brahmadatta of Kāśi and after him, many more kings are mentioned.
Similarity of names in the list of both Jātakas and Purāṇas help to
corroborate the theory. Bhandarkar thus explains in his lectures:

*“In Jātakas no less than six kings of Bārāṇasi have been mentioned
besides Brahmadatta. They are Uggasena, Dhanañjaya, Mahāsīlava,
Saṁayama, Vissasena, and Udaybhadda. In the Purāṇas, Brahmadatta is
represented to have been followed in succession by Yogasena,
Vishvakasena, Udaksena and Bhallāta. There can be no doubt that
Vishvaksena and Udaksena of the Purāṇas are the same as Vissasena and
Udaybhadda of Jātakas. Bhallāta of the Purāṇas, again is most probably,
Bhallātiya of the Bhallātiya Jātaka.”₇*

The fact that Brahmadatta was a family name is confirmed by a very
interesting anecdote from Matsya Purāṇa ₈:

***“Śataṃ vai Brahmadattānām  
Vîranāṁ Kuruvaḥ śatam”***

This is also confirmed by the mention of “hundred Brahmadattas” by the
Mahābhārata ₉ (Mbh 2. 8. 349). The Jātakas especially, Dummedha Jātaka
mention not just a reigning king but even his son as a Brahmadatta.
Another example is from a Gangamāla Jātaka where Uday, king of Benaras
is addressed as a Brahmadatta.

As mentioned above, there is very convincing evidence for confirming the
place of the origin of the Brahmadattas. The origin of this family seems
to have been from the neighbouring Videha. There are many kings from the
dynasty of the Brahmadattas of Kāśi, which are mentioned with the word
like *videhaputta*. For example, Sambula Jātakas introduces us to a
Sotthisena, son of a Brahmadatta king of Kāśi as:

***“Yo putto Kāsirājassa Sotthiseno ti tam vidū  
tassāham Sambulā bhariyā, evaṁ jānāhi dānava,  
Vedehaputto bhaddan te vane basati āturo.”***₉

One Mātiposaka Jātaka also has a line which gives us this connection:

***“mutto’ mhi Kāsirājena Vedehena yasassināti.”***₁₀

A king named Ajātaśatru of Kāśi (not to be confused with the famous
Haryanka ruler of Magadha) who is referred in Kauśîtaki Upaniśad as a
king who was “jealous of Janaka’s fame as a patron of learning” ₁₁ is
probably the same as a king of Benaras also mentioned in Uddālaka Jātaka
as a Brahmadatta. If the number of a hundred Brahmadattas frequently
mentioned earlier is even taken as an exaggeration, which it mostly is,
then also it is for certain that many rulers of this dynasty reigned at
Kāśi.

An interesting family drama also seems to emerge from this jealousy. A
Bhadrasena Âjātaśatrava, according to Macdonell and Keith whom
Rayachaudhuri mentions in his work as a king of Kāśi, son and successor
of Ajātaśatru, has been introduced in Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa as being
bewitched by Uddālaka Āruṇi.

There is one problem though. Most of the time, the sources we are
referring to, do not provide us any detailed description of this
dynasty. Whenever the kings of this dynasty have been mentioned, nothing
is more revealed other than there names, especially in Jātakas . “We are
told nothing further of them than that they reigned at Benaras at the
time of the incidents related in the story.”₁₂

**Struggle between Kasi and Kosala**

Many a times kings of Kāśi are said to have conquered Kosala. A very
intriguing tale of struggle of power between Kāśi and Kosala is
contained in Mahāvagga and various Jātakas like the Brahāchatta, Sona
Nanda, Kunāla and Kosambî Jātaka which involves another Brahmadatta of
Kāśi.

It needs to be clarified that we cannot be sure whether Brahmadatta of
this story belonged to the dynasty in discussion. Afterall there had
been many kings and even commoners named Brahmadattas. But, at places
like Kāmpilya or Anga etc, Brahmadatta is usually a personal name of the
king or of a commoner at other places and no dynasty with that
nomenclature had existed in any other part of ancient India. At Kāśi
however, Brahmadatta was a famous family and therefore even later kings
of Kāśi bearing the same name have the possibility of belonging to that
dynasty. So, one is inclined to think that some connection must have
existed and it therefore can be a plausible conclusion. After all, this
family probably ruled Kāśi for a long time as the number “hundred
Brahmadatta” suggests.

The story remains more or less the same in some Jātakas. According to
them, when a Brahmadatta was king of Kāśi, he went to attack the kingdom
of Kosala which was ruled by a king named Dîghati. Brahmadatta killed
Dîghati and emerged victorious. Sometimes, it is mentioned that
Brahmadatta even took the chief queen of Kosala to Kāśi and made her his
consort. ₁₃Later he made peace with Dîghati’s son, Dîghāvu and restored
him his kingdom.

But Kosala finally emerged victorious in this struggle. Jātakas suggest
that Vaṅka and Dabbasena overpowered Kāśi and later Kaṁsa, king of
Kosala finally conquered the kingdom for good suggested by his epithet;
*Bārānasiggaho*, conquerer of Benaras ₁₄. We already know that during
the time of king Mahākosala of Kosala, Kāśi was an integral part of his
kingdom and also when his daughter Kosalādevî was married to Bimbisāra
of Magadha.

Whenever a king of Kāśi has been mentioned with this name of
Brahmadatta, the importance of Kāśi as a kingdom has been emphasised. It
seems Kosala wasn’t the only kingdom in a powerplay with Kāśi. Vatsa
kingdom also had a role. Kathāsaritasāgara has a story in which
Yaugandharāyaṇa, prime minister of king Udayana asks him to conquer king
Brahmadatta of Kāśi first..this king of Banaras named Brahmadatta is
always your enemy, therefore conquer him first ; when he is conquered,
conquer the eastern quarter and gradually all the quarters.”₁₅ This
story gives us some perspective as to the importance of Kāśi as a state
involving another king named Brahmadatta of Kāśi.

**Conclusion**

Hopefully more evidence emerges so that some more clarity is available
on the subject. But even with the current study, this much is certain
from the sources that an imposing family called the Brahmadattas of Kāśi
ruled the Kāśiraṭṭha or the Kāśirāśṭra for decent amount of time which
had it’s origins in the neighbouring Videha. Kāśi for sure under the
Brahmadattas was a strong power which made it’s neighbours like Kosala
covet the control of such illustrious territory.

**References and quoted excerpts**

1.  [Political History of Ancient India from the accession of Parikshit
    to Extinction of the Gupta Dynasty by H. C.
    Raychaudhuri](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)
2.  *ibid*
3.  *ibid*
4.  *ibid*
5.  *ibid*
6.  Lectures on the Ancient History of India on the period from 650 to
    325 BC by D. R. Bhandarkar.
7.  *ibid*
8.  [Raychaudhuri, H.
    C.](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)
9.  *ibid*
10. *ibid*
11. ibid
12. [palikanon.com](http://www.palikanon.com/english/pali_names/b/brahmadatta.htm)
13. ibid
14. [Raychaudhuri, H. C.Raychaudhuri, H.
    C.](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)
15. Kathasaritasagara, Chapter 19

This post has also been published on [Indic
Today](https://www.indictoday.com/quick-reads/who-were-brahmadattas-kasi/).

