+++
title = "Bakhtíyár Khiljí - priyA"
date = "2020-08-29"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/29/the-downfall-of-bakhtiyar-khilji-rout-of-his-force-by-tibet-and-kamarupa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/29/the-downfall-of-bakhtiyar-khilji-rout-of-his-force-by-tibet-and-kamarupa/).

The Downfall of Bakhtíyár Khiljí : Rout of his Force by Tibet and Kámarúpa"

A man who is sickened with grief, surrounded by depression, a man who is
languishing in his own pathetic misery. A man who is too ashamed to come
out of his room! Surely, one should feel sorry for any such creature and
pity his situation, right? But that doesn’t always happen. For empathy
is an emotion that is not absolute. It is relative and it corresponds to
what we know about that person, what he had done to evoke those pathos.

Do we feel sympathy for a person who has been an underling of those who
invaded our motherland, has contributed to the establishment of one of
the most cruel and barbaric state ever to have existed in India, nay the
world – the Delhi Sultanate. His own contribution includes violent
extermination of many temples of wisdom, many ancient universities of
our country, turning centuries of knowledge to ashes, massacre of the
innocents, slaying of the monks, uprooting our native kingdoms and
butchering the general population whose only fault was their sheer
existence. What we then feel is nothing but a sense of content, albeit a
hollow one, for those who had perished – be it the monuments or our
fellow countrymen, would never come back.

Who was this man and how he came to be in such a situation? And how his
end came to be? The man was **Ikhtiyáru-d dín Muhammad Bakhtíyár
Khiljí** and this is the account of his foolhardy campaign to conquer
**Tibet** and the courageous reprisal by the Tibetans. This is the
account of an attack by our own countrymen from the land of **Kámarúpa**
*i.e.* Assam that ultimately became the end of Bakhtíyár’s army.

## Background

Bakhtíyár Khiljí of Ghor, of the province of Garmsír had first got into
the service of the Court of Sultan Mu’ izzu-d dín, at Ghazní,
Afghánistán in *diwán-í ‘arz*, the office of petitions but got removed
from there and therefore came to India proper in late 12th century and
tried to get work in *diwán-í ‘arz* of Court of Delhi where he was again
rejected for his “ungainly figure”. He kept persisting and was thus
assigned the *jagír* of the villages of Sahlat and Sahlí (Bhagwat and
Bhiuli). The income of these villages allowed him to collect a band of
Khiljí tribesman who had been freeloading into India from eastern
Afghánistán. The marauders were ready and much to our dismay, also
fortunate. The Magadhan territory had become very vulnerable after the
fall of the Gāhadavālas and the timing for a raider could not have been
better.

Every new raid particularly into the district of Maner (Munír or
Monghír), allowed him to gain more resources and “wealth to augment his
military resources”. His plundering activities for a couple of years
resulted in an ultimate full scale invasion of the country. In about
1200 C.E., with his party which included cavalry of two hundred, he
invaded the Behár and caught everyone in the town off guard. The
university town was ravaged, books burnt to ashes, the *Śramaṇas* and
*Brāhmaṇas* were put to sword.+++(4)+++

> ***“According to the 15th century Tibetan chronicler Taranath, Bakhtiyar
on this occassion also captured the monastery towns of Vikramasila and
Nalanda and erected a fortress on the site of Uddantapur.”***

He then went to the Court of Delhi, where Sultán Qutubuddín Aibak
showered him with gifts, “but evidently no material reinforcements”.
Next year, he planned to attack the kingdom of Senas, the territory of
Gaud. Though a full scale invasion of the entire kingdom was not
possible, what was possible for Bakhtíyár was the lightning raid on the
residence of Sena king Lakśmaṇa Sena – Navadvípa *i.e.* Nadiya.

In around 1203/1204 C.E, he surprised the king and reached Nadiya with
barely two hundred cavalrymen. But this was just an advanced party of
much larger force of ten thousand. The city was finally occupied after
the entire force reached there. The town of Nadiya (Navadvípa) was
destroyed and Khiljí established his government at Lakhnauti, not
Nadiya. The city was destroyed and mosques and Islamic monasteries were
raised.

***“He brought the surrounding places into his possession, and caused
his name to be read in the Khutba and struck on the coins.”***

As to why Lakhnauti and not Nadiya? Well he knew his limitations – the
Sena army and power was still intact and there also existed in the
southwest of Bengal, the strong kingdom of Orissa. He knew it would be
strain on his resources. His territory for now, only included a small
portion of north Bengal. Lakśmaṇa Sena retired to Sanknat (probably
Sanknat/Sankakot) not far from Ballalsena’s capital Vikrampur in Eastern
Bengal and soon died but the Senas ruled there for at least, three more
generations.

> ***“Over the Rahr country (the districts west of Bhagirathi river) as
well as Nadia, Hindu rule continued for the next fifty years.”***

## The Idea

Ambitions though very important in the life of any upstart, can also be
their undoing. Bakhtíyár Khiljí got to know about the territories of
Turkistán and Tibet. After making his hold strong in Bengal, within two
years, his mind had started to wander around the idea to conquer Tibet.
But what was the reason and motive for this sudden burst of desire to
conquer such a vast land. Was it religious, pure ambition or megalomania
of an invader or was the motive financial?

Perhaps it was all of it. We are talking about Islamic fanatics, so the
religious angle is always there. The desire to bring these lands under
the sword of Islam had to be attractive. But scratch the surface and
another quite lucrative reason emerges. Along with the plunder of
treasures of the Buddhist monasteries, the traditional trade route of
Bengal that lead to the South East Asia’s gold and silver mines must
have been very attractive.

> ***“The ambition of seizing the country of Turkistán and Tibet began to
torment his brain.”***

Another very important lure was the trade of horses – the trade mart
called Karambattan in Assam (Kumrikotah in Bhutan?) says Minháju-s
Siráj, was a bustling centre of trade in horses where at the least
“fifteen hundred horses were sold everyday… and all the Tangan horses
which came to Lakhnauti were from here.” Karambatan was reportedly a
large city with ramparts of stone and its inhabitants says Minháj were
Buddhists. He also informs us that “between Kámrúpa and Tibet there are
thirty five mountain passes through which horses are brought to
Lakhnauti.” The connection of Tangan horses with Bengal has also been
alluded by Abul Fazl. Therefore, there was quite a variety of reasons
for Bakhtíyár to commence this campaign.

![**A view of Gyantse, Tibet (WikiMedia
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/1024px-gyantse.jpg?w=1024)

## En route to Tibet

According to Minháju-s Siráj there were three kinds of tribes in the
hills between Tibet and Lakhnauti – Kúch, Mích and Tiháru. The chief of
one of the tribe, Ali Mích was evidently converted by Bakhtíyár to Islam
and the chief had agreed to help him in this campaign to get to the
hills. Khiljí had also asked his lieutenant Mohammad Shiran to proceed
to the frontier at Lakhnor bordering the kingdom of Orissa and himself
got his force ready. He thus, collected an army of almost ten thousand
horses.

From Lakhnauti, the guide took him to a city called Mardhan-kot or
Bardhankuti / Bardhankot and before the town, was an extremely large
stream called Bangamati/ Barkandi. Minháj says that it was “three times
greater than the Ganges”; some identify it with the Brahmaputra. But
this river has been a little difficult to identify conclusively.

As Habibullah writes, “no Bengal river bears that name.” He however
suggests that Minháj erroneously might have “transferred the name of
Rangmati (Bangmati being a likely clerical slip), an ancient place on
the bend of Brahmaputra, to the Karatoya.” He goes on to say, “a recent
suggestion is that Nepal river Bangmati may once have flowed as did
Kosi, into Bengal and joined Karatoya.”

Some scholars with good evidence support the view of Major Raverty who
had lead an expedition through Sikkim into Darjeeling. He was of the
opinion that the route ascended the Tista Valley and the Islamic force
crossed a bridge on the Tista. After reaching this river, the army
marched northwards for nearly ten days along the river, following which
they crossed a stone bridge.

> ***“For ten days, they marched on until he led them along the upper
> course of the river into the hills, to a place where from old times, a
> bridge had stood over the water having about twenty arches of stone.
> When army reached the bridge, Bakhtiyar posted there two officers, one
> a Turk, and the other a Khilji, with a large force to secure the place
> till his return. With the remainder of the army he then went over the
> bridge.”***
>
> **Account of Minháju-s Siráj in The History of India as told by its
> Own Historians, Volume II by Elliot and Dawson**

The bridge has been identified as Silsake (Silhako) bridge, “a stone
dyke over the river Barnadi in the Assam Valley.” Now the Muhammadan
army was in the territory of the king of Kámrúpa. He got to know through
intelligence about the Tibet campaign. He sent his emissaries to inform
and give a friendly warning against such a campaign. He told that they
should make a retreat for now and that he himself was planning such an
expedition next year in which he would even accompany them. “He would
muster his forces and precede the Muhammadan Army to secure the
country.”

But, Muhammad ibn Bakhtíyár was in no mood to wait. He ignored all these
warnings which must have been a big irritant and also an insult to the
king of Kámrúpa. His guide left him on this bridge, and Bakhtíyár then
proceeded towards the hills. On the bridge he had left behind a small
detachment of troops along with two officers to guard it.

## Reaching the Destination

After travelling for fifteen days through the defiles and various
mountain passes, finally on the sixteenth day, they reached an open land
– Tibet, according to some writers it was Chumbi Valley. There they
found the land with flourishing villages and it was well populated. The
territory also had a strong fort. The invaders quite true their
character quickly started plundering the villages.

The local population obviously was outraged and when the Muhammadan
forces attacked the fort, they joined their hands with the defenders of
the fort to give a proper retaliation to the invaders, and “inflicting
heavy casualties on Bakhtíyár’s forces” in the process. The battle that
ensued raged for an entire day and many of the invaders were “slain and
wounded”. The defenders were lightly armed; the only weapon they used
were bamboo spears and for shield, armour and helmet, they only used
“raw silk strongly fastened and sewed together.” Yet, they completely
overwhelmed the Islamic army.+++(4)+++

The same evening, Bakhtíyár got the information from a captive that the
very next day, they would be facing the local army heavily reinforced
with a highly trained cavalry force from the city of Karambatan which
included almost “three hundred and fifty thousand brave Turks, armed
with bows.” The figure told at some other places is fifty thousand.

Whatever be the exact strength of the incoming force, but it certainly
further dampened the morale of already demoralised and defeated
Mohammadan army. Bakhtíyár immediately decided to make a retreat. He had
decided after consultation that they might return next year after being
much more prepared. They had no idea that this campaign was to be the
indirect and direct reason for the end of many amongst the invaders.

## The Retreat

Bakhtíyár Khiljí was unaware that the retreat was going to be a bigger
disaster than what the campaign had been until now. On their way back,
the army was completely routed. Any kind of food or forage was
destroyed, even the wood. Hunger was staring them in the face. The
invaders had not even in thier nightmares could have thought about such
an ending to a campaign, much less of an army which was led by Bakhtíyár
Khiljí, who hadn’t until now, tasted defeat.

> ***“The inhabitants of the valleys and passes had all removed far away
> from the road, and for a space of fifteen days, not a sir of food nor
> a blade of grass or fodder was to be found, and they were compelled to
> kill and eat their horses.”***
>
> **Account of Minháju-s Siráj in The History of India as told by its
> Own Historians, Volume II by Elliot and Dawson**

## Attack by the Forces of Kamarup

The king of Kámarúpa at this time reportedly was Vishwasunder Deva
(1185-1228 C.E.) alias Prithu of the Khen dynasty of Assam. He was later
killed in a battle with Iltutmish’s son Nasiruddin in 1228 C.E. He was
the same king who had advised to not go ahead with the campaign. As can
be expected, the refusal by Bakhtíyár Khiljí was not taken lightly and
therefore, when the already emaciated Islamic force reached the bridge,
they found that many of its arches had been broken by the Kámarúpa
forces. The officers he had left to protect the bridge probably had
either quarreled amongst themselves and left or had been killed by the
soldiers of Kámarúpa. There was no way that they were going to cross the
river.

Bakhtíyár decided to halt for sometime and by some means prepare few
boats or rafts, at least something so that they can cross the river
later. They decided to stay inside a temple nearby. Minháj tells us that
the temple was a beautiful structure, “very lofty and strong.” When the
king got know about the situation, he quickly ordered to block the way
of the Mohammadan forces out of the temple.

> ***“He issued orders to all the Hindus of his territory to come up, levy
after levy, and all around the temple they were to stick their bamboo
spears in the ground and to plait them together so as to form a kind of
a wall. “***

The “bamboo stockade” left no means to go forward. The Islamic force
still found a way out of the place but the Hindu forces pursued them to
the river and covered the banks. The force of Bakhtíyár had to find a
way out there to cross the river. A mounted soldier urged his horse and
found it to be fordable and the entire force of the invaders followed
the course. But to their dismay, the water in the stream was way too
deep and almost everyone perished. From almost ten thousand strong
cavalry, the strength of the force that managed to cross was too little.
They were able “reach the opposite bank with only a hundred followers.”+++(5)+++

We find the evidence of this defeat of Bakhtiýar’s forces in a rock
inscription dated 1127 Saka or 1206 C.E. The spot where the inscription
is found is called *Kanaibadasibana* or *Kanai Barashi Bowa Sil*. It
says:

> ***“sāke turaga-yugamase madhumāsa trayodase  
Kāmarupam samāgatya turuskāh ksayam āyayuh.”***

The news of this reached Ali Mích and he sent his relatives to receive
the utterly defeated Bakhtiýar Khiljí- “a man crushed by the weight of
the disaster.” He reached Devkot, an ancient town known as Bangarh,
south west of Dinajpur. This place was to be his grave.

## Bakhtiyar Khilji After His Return

We come to same place now where we commenced this account in the year
1206 C.E; we come to a man sickened with grief, surrounded by
depression, languishing in his own misery, who never comes out of his
room lest he has to face the relatives of those who had perished. Minháj
tells us that he (Bakhtiýar) used to say:

> ***“Has any misfortune befallen Sultán Ghází Mu’ izzu-d dín Muhammad Sám
that my fortune has turned so bad?”***

Apparently, the Sultan was killed around the same time. It is suggested
that Bakhtiýar went from bad to worse and later died from sever grief
and depression but some also suggest that he was murdered. The murder
story puts the blame on one Alí Mardán Khiljí who had been a chief under
Bakhtiýar and had been given the district of Kuní. When Bakhtiýar was in
Devkot and hadn’t seen anyone for almost three days due to his illness,
Alí Mardán got to his room and killed him with a knife. Either way, the
culprit of Nālandā, Vikramśilā & Uddantapurî was dead.

## Conclusion

This was a man who was disheartened with a gargantuan failure – a huge
dent in his image and a sorry climax to the story of his “victories” and
nothing more than that. The same man had gloated on his “conquests” in
the past. He had taken immense pride on invading a country, on
committing wanton destruction of its monuments and its population,
ravaging a flourishing civilization and had been showered with gifts and
praise by his overlords for being the conqueror of the *infidels.* He
had planned on doing something similar to another civilization across
the frontiers of India in the East but its end wasn’t something he had
expected. He met with strong Tibetan resistance and retreated in order
to save himself and his force from even stronger defeat in their hands.
But he met with even daunting prospect of hunger and the Mohammadan
force was utterly routed by tour de force – the soldiers of Kámarúpa.
This entire campaign became his undoing – the downfall of Ikhtiyáru-d
dín Muhammad Bakhtíyár Khiljí.

## References

1.  The History of India as Told by its Own Historians by Elliot and
    Dawson, Volume II.
2.  The Foundation of Muslim Rule in India by A. B. M. Habibullah.
3.  [Political Relations of Kamarupa with Muhammadan Conquerors of India
    in Early 13th
    Century.](http://14.139.13.47:8080/jspui/bitstream/10603/68466/6/06_chapter%203.pdf)
4.  Studies in Hindu and Buddhist Art, Edited by P. K. Mishra.
5.  The Rise of Islam and The Bengal Frontier, 1204-1760 by Richard M.
    Eaton.
6.  A Comprehensive History of Medieval India by Salma Ahmed Farooqui.
7.  The River of Golden Sand by William John Gill.
8.  The Land of Two Rivers: A History of Bengal from Mahabharata to
    Mujib by Nitish Sengupta.

