+++
title = "A Cashless Economy"
full_title = "A Cashless Economy"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/11/17/a-cashmoney-less-economy/"
date = "2016-11-17"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/11/17/a-cashmoney-less-economy/).

A Cash(money?)-less Economy

While the world has spent the last seven days adjusting – or not adjusting – to the idea of a Trump presidency, we have had our own momentous week in India. The night before the election result, Prime Minister Modi announced that Rs 500 and Rs 1000 notes were no longer legal tender.

For those of you who are not in India, and who are probably thus thinking, ‘so what?’, imagine that £10, £20 and £50 notes (£50 too because there is currently no higher demonination in India than the Rs 1000 note) were suddenly declared null and void. You would be forced to pay for everything either in the coppers and fivers you already had in your wallet – because banks and ATMs were closed – or by some other non-cash means.

Now in the UK, I’m guessing almost everyone has a bank account and thus cheque books and debit and credit cards. Most shops, restaurants, petrol stations, hospitals and doctors, plumbers and so on accept cards or cheques. And the rest is online: utility and phone bills, car insurance, train, bus and flight tickets, the weekly supermarket shop, school fees. There are few places and situations you can only pay by cash, unless it’s below the minimum amount required for a card – normally £5. Rewind several decades though to the time when most of the population did not have a bank account and there was no internet. When most transactions were still done by cash. When people were paid a daily, weekly or monthly wage and used that money – all in cash – to fund everything they needed.

This of course is the situation in India, where 96% of all transactions are still cash and many if not most don’t have bank accounts and internet access. Modi’s surprise move is in one sense brilliant. It aims to force all that black money of the parallel economy – worth almost quarter of India’s GDP – into the banking system and thus into the light. Suddenly all of the cash that real estate magnates, politicians and corrupt officials have stashed under their bed is almost useless – they can either deposit it with a severe penalty for anything over Rs 250,000, or they may as well give it to the kabbadi wala along with the month’s old newspapers.

\[It is hard to avoid black money if you live here, especially if you want to buy a house or some land. Most sellers don’t accept a fully ‘white’ deal, you have to pay some part in unaccounted-for cash so that the property can be registered at a lower value, thus attracting less tax. And also because the seller wants some black so he can use it for the next deal. Bribes and unofficial fines are commonplace – pay me Rs 100 and I won’t book you for speeding; you’ll need a few extra thousands to get your file back from the registrar. And the figures are staggering. A friend’s father was called up by someone in a panic. Could he help him get rid of 300? Rs 300 lakhs (Rs 30 million), he asked? No, Rs 300 crores (Rs 3 billion). He must have a very large mattress.\]

For the junta, it has been a week of chaos and frustration. Every day people have started queuing up outside the State Bank of India branch opposite our flat before daybreak. By mid-morning there are hundreds of people and fights start to break out. Daily wage earners are having to take a whole day off work to try and exchange their now defunct bank notes for valid ones, only to find the bank has run out of money by the time their turn comes. People who are normally comfortably well off – maids, drivers, small business owners – are struggling to get enough food for their families. Most don’t have bank accounts, or at least not functioning modern ones. They certainly don’t have debit or credit cards and nor do they have any means of making online payments. And then there are the fruit sellers, coconut water hawkers, small shops and auto drivers all of whom have seen a massive drop in business because no one, rich or poor, has any cash.

As ever in India tragedy is not far off. The newspapers have been carrying reports almost daily of the elderly or infirm who have died while waiting in the serpentine lines, and, even sadder, a few cases of men and women who have committed suicide because they were not able to get the cash they needed for a daughter’s wedding or to plant their crop. The popular mood is turning against Modi even as he pleads for more time, while his administration continues to mishandle this transition time.

All this has made me think of Mark Boyle’s book about a moneyless economy. It is scary to find that a piece of paper which a second ago could buy you several meals, a pair of shoes or a train ticket to the other side of the country, is now invalid. That all of the rupees we possess – whether in cash or in our bank accounts – are ultimately at the mercy of the government. Right now we, the middle class, have not been badly affected because we have bank accounts and can make online payments. We can buy our food at supermarkets that accept cards, and we can travel by cash-less Ubers. If there was a banking crisis though, or if the internet went down, we would be as helpless as our cash-dependent compatriots are now. Or rather more helpless because we tend to be overly reliant on others to meet our basic needs. If we couldn’t pay for our food, clothing and shelter, what would we do? How many can grow their own food, make their own clothes (from growing the cotton or hemp to sewing them together) or build and maintain their own house? What about schools, hospitals, travel? How many don’t rely on doctors and medicine? How many could get by without petrol or diesel? We are (dangerously?) dependent on all of these things, and the money that buys them for us.

So two wake up calls, for me at least:

First, money is just a mutually-agreed way of trading goods and services and has no intrinsic value. If one party reneges on the agreement, or if circumstances so conspire, it becomes worthless. Others might say, then buy gold, or buy property – that will always have some value. Will it? Gold right now is soaring, and property crashing. It is all too linked to money.

And second, we are probably the least self-reliant humans in the history of our species. That doesn’t necessarily mean that we need to become a farmer, builder, teacher, doctor all bundled into one. Yes we should be better at meeting our own basic needs but we should also, as Boyle discusses, focus on our relationships with others. Instead of basing every relationship on paying or being paid money, we should try to move beyond that, and ideally not to a barter system (please fix my puncture and I will help your son with his homework) but to a community where we happily give our time and expertise and excess produce to others and they to us.
