+++
title = "The origins of language"
full_title = "The origins of language Akhaṇḍakhaṇḍanam"
date = "2015-11-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/11/16/the-origins-of-language-akha%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8dakha%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8danam/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/11/16/the-origins-of-language-akha%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8dakha%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8danam/).

The origins of language: Akhaṇḍakhaṇḍanam

My title refers to a recent
[post](http://languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/nll/?p=22011) on [Language
Log](http://languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu) by Herb Terrace, which is a
response to an [article by Hauser et
al.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4019876/) that appeared
in *Frontiers in Psychology* last year. To review briefly: Hauser et al.
argue that, despite claims to the contrary, we simply have no idea how
human language originated. They define language as “abstract units of
information that are organized and combined following specific
computational procedures,” and thus putting those procedures into
evidence is necessary for any account of human language evolution. As it
turns out, this is really hard: none of the most recent evidence from
comparative animal behavior, paleontology and archaeology, and molecular
biology brings us any closer to understanding the origins of language in
this strict sense, which appears only with anatomically modern humans
(and evidently not *Homo neanderthalensis*). Terrace characterized
Hauser et al.’s position as “syntactocentric,” and that there are many
other behaviors besides the computational procedures of syntax that are
implicated in, and accompany, language use: for example, mutual eye gaze
(whether “dyadic,” i.e. between the mother and child, or “triadic,” i.e.
the mother and child’s gaze is jointly directed toward objects of
events), and along with it, the use of visual cues to express and
interpret emotional states. The ability to “infer referential intent” is
presupposed by the use of “declarative vocabulary,” and this in turn is
presupposed by the combination of words into complex units; these are
logical presuppositions (I think), but Terrace suggests that the
evolution of language had to retrace these steps.

What does any of this have to do with Indian Philosophy? The
“syntactocentric” view represents a kind of *akhaṇḍapakṣa*, in a limited
sense: there is no linguistic unit that is not composed of smaller parts
arranged according to computational rules; a linguistic unit consists,
above all, in the *way* that its constituent parts are put together, and
not in the parts themselves; thus it is *akhaṇḍa*, indivisible. Terrace
represents a *khaṇḍapakṣa*, according to which language requires
discrete units, namely words, that can be used *apart from* the rules
that generate units of greater complexity; language is thus *khaṇḍa*,
divisible. These map onto two opposed views regarding human language
origins: a punctuated, “all-or-nothing” position that identifies the
origins of language with the evolution of a “Faculty for Language in the
Strict Sense” in *Homo sapiens*, and a gradualist position that has the
“Faculty for Language in the Strict Sense” follow upon other, more basic
and more widely shared, social and cognitive behaviors.

It’s worth thinking about how these positions might have sounded to
participants in premodern Indian debates about the meaning (and
compositionality) of linguistic units. There was widespread agreement
that *language acquisition* (*vyutpatti*) has to follow a bootstrapping,
gradualist path: the child learns the meaning of the linguistic unit
“bring the cow” by comparing and contrasting his observations with
observations in other cases (e.g., “bring the horse”), in a process
called *anvayavyatireka*. And I think Hauser et al. would have to agree
with this, too. The disagreement relates to how we human beings ever
found ourselves in the position of saying “bring the cow” at all: the
production of such sentences requires the use of the complex syntactic
rules that Chomsky (one of Hauser’s co-authors) has detailed, and the
speed of language acquisition suggests that these rules in some form
actually *guide* the acquisition process and aren’t completely induced
from examples, somewhat in contrast to the Indian model. While Buddhists
were generally content to say that language was conventional,
Brahmanical authors were generally skeptical about the possibility of
humans collectively establishing language conventions on their own. Thus
Mīmāṃsakas argued that language does not have origins, and Naiyāyikas
argued that it originated with God. Although these positions aren’t
likely to appeal to us, I think they share a lot of motivation with
people who have the “syntactocentric” view of language sketched above
(mostly linguists as opposed to psychologists): without complex
syntactic rules, we have no language, but individual-level language
acquisition in some sense presupposes those rules, and perhaps
species-level language development does too, something akin to flipping
an evolutionary switch. The *khaṇḍapakṣa*, with its declarative use of
words (“horse!”), gets us part of the way there, but Indian thinkers
generally did not give much credence to these declarative functions,
given the widely-acknowledged constraint that language use needs to be
purposeful (most prominently among the Prābhākara Mīmāṃsakas).
