+++
title = "IdiotProof"
full_title = "IdiotProof"
date = "2016-01-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/07/idiot-proof/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/07/idiot-proof/).

Idiot-Proof

I was looking at a recent survey of current knowledge in psychological
genetics. The [gist](https://twitter.com/LarsPenke) is that common
variants – which can’t have decreased fitness much in the average past,
since they’re common – are the main story in the genetic architecture of
intelligence. Genetic load doesn’t seem very important, except at the
low end. Big-effect deleterious mutations can certainly leave you
retarded, but moderate differences in the number of slightly-deleterious
mutations don’t have any observable effect – except possibly in the
extremely intelligent, but that’s uncertain at this point. Not what I
expected, but that’s how things look right now. It would seem that brain
development is robust to small tweaks, although there must be some
limit. The results with older fathers apparently fit this pattern: they
have more kids with something seriously wrong, but although there should
be extra mild mutations in their kids as well as the occasional serious
one, the kids without obvious serious problems don’t have depressed IQ.

Selection still acts on really nasty mutations affecting the brain, even
today: people that are crazy or retarded have low fitness. We’re better
at preventing early deaths from infectious disease than we used to be,
but they were never super-related to IQ in the first place. Selection
can change the frequency of those common variants, so differential
reproduction with IQ could have happened and had consequences, probably
bad ones. But how bad? I doubt if within-population selection decreased
IQ by as much as a point a generation. That makes it hard to see how IQ
could have declined by a standard deviation (15 points) since the
Victorian era – there is no available genetic mechanism. Since it is
also obvious (to anyone who has eyes) that no such change occurred, the
lack of a feasible mechanism is not really a problem.

