+++
title = "Perils of Incorrect"
full_title = "Perils of Incorrect Thought"
date = "2016-01-23"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/23/perils-of-incorrect-thought/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/23/perils-of-incorrect-thought/).

Perils of Incorrect Thought

A colleague pointed me to
[this](http://www.popecenter.org/commentaries/article.html?id=3318)essay
by an academic who mentioned in a submitted paper that the possibility
of biological differences among human groups ought to be considered.
His submission was firmly rejected in the face of “… expletives and
exclamation points to give the most venomous and dismissive feedback I
have ever encountered” from the reviewers. This essay ought to be read
by anyone concerned about the sorry state of our social and behavioral
sciences. The author also points us to a website at[Heterodox
Academy](http://heterodoxacademy.org/ "http://heterodoxacademy.org/")with
useful comments and discussion.

Long ago when I was in graduate school I attended a “workshop” sponsored
by an outfit called the “[Foundations’ Fund for Research in
Psychiatry](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6336636).” The attendees
were mostly chairs of Psychiatry at US and Canadian medical schools.
Each had been invited to bring along a promising graduate student or
postdoc, hence my presence. The meeting, to my innocent eyes, was
hilarious. The opening session led by David Hamburg outlined the theme
of the meeting, the movement to rid psychiatric education of analysis
and all its baggage and to replace all of it with biological psychiatry.
It was a carefully thought out session with a lot of emphasis on
evidence and the scientific method.

The afternoon session featured the analysts and they completely
torpedoed the meeting without providing a trace of substance. The talks
were variants of “let us think about why you feel this way and
understand the source of your antagonism”. They were a smooth talking
lot and, sure enough, nothing at all was accomplished. I didn’t know
much at that time but I knew enough to recognize a faith-based cult of
true believers.

Our social and educational sciences are, much of them, in the hands of a
cult like this, devout creationists all with their heads in the sand of
social science as it was envisioned half a century ago. We recently had
an experience much like Anomaly’s. Over a year ago Mike Weight (an
undergraduate) and I
[posted](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/10/draft-of-paper-about-amish/)
a draft of a manuscript about using quantitative genetic theory to
evaluate changes over time in traits. We had in mind a technology useful
for distinguishing cultural from genetic transmission. Many readers of
our blog made helpful comments and, to our shame, found a large number
of typos. I shudder when I reread that old post. It was written
shortly after I had my temporal lobe bleed and the whole part of my
brain that was capable of proofreading seems to have been knocked out.

We thought we should submit it somewhere where social scientists would
read it. We got back, from a succession of three journals, a stunning
set of ignorant and irrelevant reviews. For example the first sentence
of the first one we read said “this is really about race and it ought to
be made clear”. Another said “they are trying to push genetics where it
has no place”. The tone of all of them was like this, angry and
scornful. One reviewer told us that our views were outdated and
discredited since epigenetics had swept the field!

We had two and one half mildly sensible reviews, one about technical
aspects of quantitative genetic theory and another by a reviewer unhappy
with the level of detail and statistical aspects of the treatment of
Amish test results. Since we regarded the Amish data as a toy set of
data, we made no changes. The other reviewers were all hostile and angry
at what we had written, several convinced that the paper must be racist
but they didn’t quite understand how or why. We could only laugh at the
collection of reviews because none of them had any idea what they were
talking about. None made it so far as to read and understand the
central point of the paper. With the exceptions mentioned above, they
were pig ignorant and proud of it.

In a recent
[post](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/10/02/the-wrong-guys/) here,
Greg’s conclusion about the social sciences was that “they’re just no
damn good”. It is easy to come up with social scientists who are
excellent— Steve Pinker and Charles Murray and Dalton Conley and
Jonathan Haidt pop to mind — but my sample of reviewers suggests that
for most of them Greg is right on the money. We surrendered to the
collective social science wisdom and submitted the paper to our friends
at the [Journal of Biosocial
Science](http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayJournal?jid=JBS)where
it is in press, out any day now, as an open access article.









