+++
title = "The Third Sex"
full_title = "The Third Sex"
date = "2016-10-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/10/26/the-third-sex/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/10/26/the-third-sex/).

The Third Sex

There isn’t one. But you have to admit that it would be interesting if
there were.

There are all kinds of different twists on basic biology that would make
for a different kind of society, if they only existed in humans. Some of
these have been talked about a lot, served as the framework of various
science fiction novels, etc. Most have not, because not many people know
the biology – including most biologists.

Bees, wasps, termites, aphids, ambrosia beetles, naked mole rats, and a
few species of parasitic shrimp are eusocial. That is, they cooperate in
taking care of the young, overlapping generations live within a colony,
and there are reproductive and non-reproductive castes. Usually, there
is a single shared living space which is protected by some of the
non-reproductive castes – the Place That Must be Defended.

Are humans eusocial? They do cooperate, sometimes – but in truth they’re
not at all like the social insects. E. O. Wilson thought so, but then
he’s kind of dim. No castes, no reproductive division of labor, while
most cooperation is with non-relatives. I’ve certainly seen SF stories
with this theme – Big Sword, Rogue Queen

Some pinheads have suggested that male homosexuals are a kind of caste,
one that pays its genetic way by helping their sibs raise more kids. As
far as I can tell, this idea originated with a student of E.O. Wilson.
Since homosexual men do not actually support their sibs noticeably more
than straight men, this is silly. If you’re going to invoke a behavior
in support of some evolutionary hypothesis, the behavior has to actually
exist. I shouldn’t have to say this. I could say that you expect mothers
to work hard to take care of their offspring, because of kin selection,
and because basic biology in mammals already requires that a female
invest heavily in every offspring (not the case for males), etc, etc:
but mother love ACTUALLY EXISTS.

One might as well talk about homosexual men as a natural soldier caste,
born to die defending the nest. But they aren’t like that, don’t act
like that, even counting the Sacred Band. And humans, especially in the
old hunter-gatherer phase, didn’t usually have fortress-nests.

There are a lot of interesting twists in eusocial species that would
make for even more interesting societies. There are harvester ants with
two kinds of reproductives: females are AA or BB, males are A or B, but
workers are all AB. It looks as if this is the residual of hybridization
of two species. Apparently these ants have harnessed hybrid vigor, way
before we invented mules.

There are cytoplasmically-transmitted thingies (microorganisms and rogue
DNA) that distort sex ratios. Wolbachia infects many insects, and causes
weird shit like male killing, parthenogenesis (curable by antibiotics),
cytoplasmic incompatibility, and sometimes turning genetic males into
functional females. Anything like this in humans? No, but it sure would
be interesting if there were. Actually, cytoplasmic
maternally-transmitted thingies might exist (they would probably be
mutualistic), but if they do, they they don’t cause sex ratio distortion
or parthenogenesis – we would have noticed.

Wood lemmings have two kinds of X chromosomes, X and X\*. X\*
chromosomes ensure that the embryo is functionally female, whether the
other chromosome is an X or a Y. So XX, X\*X, and X\*Y individuals are
female, while only XY individuals are male – and are about 25% of the
population. Sounds like a Beach Boys tune.

Some hybrid creatures, like our state lizard, are completely
parthenogenetic. Again, that would make for a wildly different society.
Virgin Planet, by Poul Anderson.

Many species have several different kinds of males (a few have different
kinds of females as well). For example, a lizard species in California
has three different kinds of males – aggressive orange-throated guys
that successfully dominate blue males, sneaky yellow guys that get past
orange males guarding a big territory, and blue mate-guarding males
(that are also cooperative – possibly a green-beard gene) that
successful guard females from sneaky yellows. The population frequencies
oscillate: scissors, paper, rock.

Ruffs (birds) have three kind of males: territorial males, satellite
males (literally ‘wingmen”, about 16% of males), and sneaker males (
\~1% ) that look very much like females. If we were like that, life
would be complicated, but at least you’d know where you stand. I don’t
think that anything similar exists in humans, though: right now there
isn’t really any evidence that variation in human personality traits is
adaptive, although it might be. Even if nonadaptive, it can be useful:
you hire OCD guys for security and quality assurance, nymphomaniac
receptionists, etc.

It’s not impossible that different Y-chromosomes have some effect on
fitness in humans – they can influence behavior in mice – but again, no
evidence for it right now. Never seen a story based on male morphs, but
I haven’t read everything.

Green-beard-genes, originally suggested by Bill Hamilton, would modify
appearance in a specific way and cause bearers to cooperate with others
that bore the same allele. something like this occurs in fire ants:
those with one version of a supergene have single-queen colonies that
are hostile to each other, like Greek city-states, while those with the
other version have multiple-queen colonies that extend indefinitely,
rather like Los Angeles. In humans, a green-beard would probably rapidly
lead to world conquest: perfect asabiya would be unstoppable. One more
interesting application of CRISPR.

A species can have a weird genetic substructure, which may be hidden.
Mice mate with mice that have dissimilar MHC alleles. Do people? Since
it is a really fun idea, while the results of studies are mixed –
probably not. Likely it’s all wishful thinking. It could be true though,
or might be true in some populations.

White-throated sparrows fall into white and tan morphs with different
behaviors. White males are highly promiscuous, while tan morph males are
monogamous and contributed more to caring for offspring. The pattern is
similar in females. In practice, practically all mating involves a male
from one color morph and a female of the other color morph: effectively,
this sparrow has four sexes. A similar pattern in humans would, I think,
drive us all crazy.

