+++
title = "Economists and biology"
full_title = "Economists and biology"
date = "2016-05-16"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/16/economists-and-biology/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/16/economists-and-biology/).

Economists and biology

Naturally, economists know a lot about human biology and evolution, just
as civil engineers have to know about the properties of timber, concrete
and steel. They have a good grounding in psychometrics, behavioral
genetics, and quantitative genetics – how else could they do their job?
Populations vary in traits that play key roles in economic activity and
growth – in intelligence, asabiya, savings propensity, etc – you have to
be aware of that variation, else whole continents would be economic
mysteries. In the same way they know that those observed differences are
a product of selection – which means economic historians think seriously
about psychometric changes over time and their consequences, such as the
Industrial Revolution. That kind of analysis helps predict where modern
economic institutions can be successfully introduced, and where they
cannot.

Yet even Jove nods. Sometimes even tenured professors make serious
errors on fairly elementary topics. Like anyone else who has made a
mental typo, they welcome polite correction.

Deirdre McCloskey has a new book out: Bourgeois Equality: How Ideas, Not
Capital or Institutions, Enriched the World. I’m sure that there are
many good things in it. But McCloskey makes a significant error in
talking about genetics. “Know also a remarkable likelihood in our
future. Begin with the sober scientific fact that sub-Saharan Africa has
great genetic diversity, at any rate by the standard of the narrow
genetic endowment of the ancestors of the rest of us, the small part of
of the race of Homo sapiens that left Mother Africa in dribs and drabs
after about 70,000 BCE…. Any gene-influenced activity is therefore going
to have more African extremes. The naturally tallest people and the
naturally shortest people, for example, are in sub-Saharan Africa. The
naturally quickest long-distance runners are in East Africa. The best
basketball players descend from West Africans. In other words, below the
Sahara the top end of the distribution of human abilities – physical and
intellectual and artistic – is unusually thick. …

The upshot? Genetic diversity in a rich Africa will yield a crop of
geniuses unprecedented in world history. In a century or so the leading
scientists and artists in the world will be black – at any rate if the
diversity is as large in gene expression and social relevance as it is
in, say, height or running ability. ”

So by this argument that the most cold-tolerant Africans must be more
cold-tolerant than Eskimos: but they’re not. The most altitude-tolerant
Africans must be more altitude-tolerant than Tibetans – but they’re not.
McCloskey is thinking that a turn to free markets will make Africa rich,
and that will give educational opportunities to Africans now denied them
– but a fair-sized mostly-African population already lives in the United
States, a population that is already much more prosperous than
sub-Saharan Africans. How are they doing? How many geniuses are they
producing?

The whole argument is flawed. Overall genetic variation is mostly in
neutral loci. By itself it tells you nothing about any particular trait.
Europeans do have less overall genetic variation than sub-Saharan
Africans (\~20% less), but they show more variation in hair color and
eye color than Africans.

Essentially every domesticated species has less genetic variation than
its wild progenitor. Dogs have less genetic variation than wolves. So,
does this mean that the tallest wolf is taller than any dog? No – the
tallest Great Danes are taller than any wolf. The heaviest mastiffs are
heavier than any wolf. Chihuahua are the smallest. Greyhounds are faster
than wolves (by a little).

Thoroughbred horses have little genetic variation – their effective
population size is under 100. Tarpans, the wild ancestor of domesticated
horses, are extinct, but there certainly are horse breeds with much more
genetic variation than Thoroughbreds. But they’re slower.

What matters is the frequency of alleles that influence a trait, not
overall genetic diversity. If, for example, the variants that tend to
boost educational achievement (some of which were found in the
just-released Nature study) were on average less common in sub-Saharan
Africans than in Europeans – says 5% less common – Africans would tend
to do less well in school. Like they actually do. Now Africa is a big
place, and some groups are genetically quite distinct from others.
Bushmen are genetically more distant from the Bantu than the Bantu are
from Chinese. Some African populations might have experienced selective
pressures that were more (or less) favorable for intelligence than
others. Is there evidence, either in test scores or cultural
accomplishment (better than any test), that some African populations may
have smarts comparable with, or better than, people in Switzerland or
Holland or Scotland?

No. There is no such evidence.

How many real geniuses out of African populations – people like Fermat,
or Riemann, or Gauss, or Laplace? Newton? Maxwell? Gibbs? None. How many
of the top 1000 mathematicians in the 20th century were of sub-Saharan
ancestry? One, perhaps?

McCloskey’s prediction of an efflorescence of African genius is based on
an incorrect understanding of how quantitative traits work. It’s also in
that interesting, ever-popular class of theories that are contradicted
by everything that has ever happened in the history of the world.

