+++
title = "You don’t need a"
full_title = "You don’t need a weatherman"
date = "2016-05-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/08/you-dont-need-a-weatherman/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/08/you-dont-need-a-weatherman/).

You don’t need a weatherman

This is very nice, very interesting new
[paper](http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/052084) out by Yair Field, Evan Boyle
et al: they present a new method that can detect human adaptation over
the past couple of thousand years. And there is some, of course. They
found strong signs of selection at lactase and HLA, and in favor of
blond hair and blue eyes. This new method (SDS, Singleton Density Score)
can also detect signs of polygenic selection, and they found that
selection for increased height ‘has driven allele frequency shifts
across most of the genome’.

They found evidence for selection acting on other polygenic traits:
favoring increased infant head circumference, increased female hip size,
and later sexual maturation in women.

You can do a million cool things with this method. Since the effective
time scale goes inversely with sample size, you could look at evolution
in England over the past 1000 years or the past 500. Differencing, over
the period 1-1000 AD. Since you can look at polygenic traits, you can
see whether the alleles favoring higher IQs have increased or decreased
in frequency over various stretches of time. You can see if Greg Clark’s
proposed mechanism really happened. You can (soon) tell if creeping
Pinkerization is genetic, or partly genetic.

You could probably find out if the Middle Easterners really have gotten
slower, and when it happened.

Looking at IQ alleles, you could not only show whether the Ashkenazi
Jews really are biologically smarter but if so, when it happened, which
would give you strong hints as to how it happened.

We [know](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/05/05/037929) that
IQ-favoring alleles are going down (slowly) right now (not counting
immigration, which of course drastically speeds it up). Soon we will
know if this was true while Russia was under the Mongol yoke – we’ll
know how smart Periclean Athenians were and when that boost occurred.
And so on. And on!

Feel free to mention some of the theories (distilled horseshit, mostly)
that are likely to bite the dust, between SDS and aDNA.

“The pace has been so rapid that humans have changed significantly in
body and mind over recorded history.”

