+++
title = "Alzheimers"
full_title = "Alzheimers"
date = "2016-05-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/29/alzheimers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/29/alzheimers/).

Alzheimers

The amyloid-beta peptide forms insoluble clumps in the brains of
patients with AD, and may be responsible for neuronal death (the amyloid
hypothesis) . There have been many efforts to treat Alzheimers, most
based on the dominant amyloid hypotheses. None have worked.

For quite a while, some have suspected that pathogens might be the
primary cause of AD, but the idea has never been very popular with the
funding agencies, or with most medical researchers. For example, there
was some evidence that HSV-I increases Alzheimers risk, but there was a
common objection: since healthy oldsters often have HSV-I in the brain,
it can’t be the cause. In much the same way, many MDs said that h.
pylori couldn’t be the cause of duodenal ulcers or stomach cancer, since
it is found in large numbers of healthy people. It *is* the cause,
though. Most people carrying the tuberculosis germ don’t get sick either
– but nobody gets tuberculosis without it. In recent decades I think
that few MDs say that therefore Mycobacterium tuberculosis is not really
the cause of tuberculosis. Why don’t they? – the ‘logic’ is the same. I
leave that as an exercise for my readers.

Some disease syndromes almost have to be caused by pathogens – for
example, any with a fitness impact (prevalence x fitness reduction) \>
2% or so, too big to be caused by mutational pressure. I don’t think
that this is the case for AD: it hits so late in life that the fitness
impact is minimal. However, that hardly means that it *can’t* be caused
by a pathogen or pathogens – a big fraction of all disease syndromes
are, including many that strike in old age. That possibility is always
worth checking out, not least because infectious diseases are generally
easier to prevent and/or treat.

There is new
[work](http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/8/340/340ra72?version=meter%20at%2033&module=meter-Links&pgtype=article&contentId=&mediaId=&referrer=https%3A//t.co/Eksr7GkC8n&priority=true&action=click&contentCollection=meter-links-click)
that strongly suggests that pathogens are the root cause. It appears
that the amyloid is an antimicrobial peptide. amyloid-beta binds to
invading microbes and then surrounds and entraps them. ‘When researchers
injected Salmonella into mice’s hippocampi, a brain area damaged in
Alzheimer’s, A-beta quickly sprang into action. It swarmed the bugs and
formed aggregates called fibrils and plaques. “Overnight you see the
plaques throughout the hippocampus where the bugs were, and then in each
single plaque is a single bacterium,” Tanzi says. ‘

If this new picture turns to to be correct, some combination of fighting
& preventing the relevant pathogens, perhaps combined with methods of
removing excessive amyloid buildup, would probably be fruitful.

