+++
title = "The Inexorable Progress"
full_title = "The Inexorable Progress of Science Archaeology"
date = "2014-11-01"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/11/01/the-inexorable-progress-of-science-archaeology/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/11/01/the-inexorable-progress-of-science-archaeology/).

The Inexorable Progress of Science: Archaeology

In 1939, archeologists and prehistorians seem to have thought that
agriculture was brought to Europe by a gracile Mediterranean people, and
was in large part spread by their expansion. They thought that the
Corded Ware culture was Indo-European and probably originated in South
Russia. Here’s an example, from Carleton Coon’s *The Races of Europe*
(1939):

“We shall see, in our survey of prehistoric European racial movements, ⁸
that the Danubian agriculturalists of the Early Neolithic brought a food
producing economy into central Europe from the East. They perpetuated in
the new European setting a physical type which was later supplanted in
their original home. Several centuries later the Corded people, in the
same way, came from southern Russia (i.e.Ukraine) ”

“There has been much discussion over the origin of the Corded people,
and many cradle areas have been proposed. Childe, despite several
objections which he himself raises, prefers to derive them from southern
Russia , where the typical cultural elements of the Corded people are
found mixed with other factors. The so-called boat-axe, the typical
battleaxe form which they used, has relatives all the way to the
Caucasus and beyond. And the horse, their use of which in the domestic
form is not fully confirmed, since the grave examples might conceivably
have been wild ones, was first tamed in Asia or in southern Russia.”

A lot of this stems from Gordon Childe’s work – for example *The
Aryans*, published in 1926. Understand that this was all before carbon
dating, and before a tremendous amount of modern archaeological work,
including much of the work in the Balkans.

Archaeology took a different path in the 1960s and later. Archaeologists
became very uncomfortable with the idea of migration, colonization,
conquest, and prehistoric violence. I say this without really
understanding its inner nature: I personally am made quite uncomfortable
by the thought of dinosaur-killing asteroids or Yellowstone-scale
megavolcanoes showing up in my neighborhood, but that doesn’t stop me
from thinking that they occurred. I don’t get it.

The low point in acceptance of the reality of prehistoric violence seems
to have occurred in the 1970s, according to Lawrence Keeley (*War before
Civilization*). In those days, a log palisade with a 9-foot-deep ditch
surrounding a frontier Neolithic village was explained as expressing the
“symbolism of exclusion.”

Theories that disallowed migration (let alone conquest) became more and
more popular with time. I can find examples of grown human beings
suggesting that the Anglo-Saxonization of England need not have required
*any* actual Anglo-Saxon immigrants at all. Grahame Clark didn’t rule
out all migrations, but he and his immediate followers were definitely
against the idea of a “vast Kulturkreise covering large portions of the
Continent which gave rise to entirely hypothetical‘ethnic groups’ such
as the Kurgans and the Beaker People, often identified, on the flimsiest
of grounds, with the large ethno-linguistic groups observable a
millennium or more later such as the Hellenes or the Celts.”

Pots not people rules OK!

Colin Renfrew seems to have been motivated in part by an aversion to
migrationism. That’s too bad. I had thought (not knowing much about
it) that he was primarily motivated by a realization that agriculture is
often spread by a demographic expansion, a most powerful mechanism. And
in fact his model would have been perfectly correct for Europe around
4000 BC. But to the extent that he subscribes to the ideological
prejudice against population movements, he’s a loon. I understand that
an article in British Archaeology claimed that this prejudice had gotten
to the point where some graduate student “would soon come up with a
paper ‘proving’ that the first humans in Britain weren’t immigrants at
all, but purely indigenous, symbolically transformed reindeer.”

The Indo-European linguists seem to have been immune to this nonsense.
All honor to them – although they really should start making use of the
flood of new genetic results. The archaeologists behind the Iron Curtain
also successfully resisted this crap – but then, they were pretty far
from Harvard!

I was noting something from Mario Alinei (an advocate of a model in
which nobody ever invaded Europe, probably including Omaha Beach). He
blames ideology:

” Surprisingly, although the archaeological research of the last few
decennnia has  
provided more and more evidence that no large-scale invasion took place
in  
Europe in the Calcholithic, Indoeuropean linguistics has stubbornly held
to its  
strong invasionist assumption, and has continued to produce more and
more  
variations on the old theme.

Clearly, the answer is ideological. For the invasion model was first
advanced in the nineteenth century, when archaeology and related
sciences were dominated by the ideology of colonialism, as recent
historical research has shown. The successive generations of linguists
and archaeologists have been strongly inspired by the racist views that
stemmed out of colonialism. Historians of archaeology (e.g. Daniel 1962,
Trigger 1989) have repeatedly shown the importance of ideology in
shaping archaeological theories as well as theories of human origins,
while, unfortunately, linguistics has not followed the same course, and
thus strongly believes in its own innocence.”

You know, he may have a point.

With a very limited set of clues, smart guys managed to get key facts
about European prehistory roughly correct almost 90 years ago . With
tremendously better tools, better methods, vastly more money, more data,
etc, archaeologists (most of them) drifted farther and farther from the
truth.

