+++
title = "Various crap"
full_title = "Various crap"
date = "2015-02-13"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/02/13/various-crap/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/02/13/various-crap/).

Various crap

The world is infested by various nutty ideas, and mostly you just have
to ignore them, at least until you become King and release the hounds.
But someone needs to oppose them, else the young and naive may fall
victim. Now and then I get the urge, fortunately not too often.

One busy area is WWII revisionism.

1\. The Roosevelt administration supposedly had prior knowledge of the
attack on Pearl Harbor and deliberately refrained from telling Admiral
Kimmel and General Short. Not true: basically pretty silly. Suppose you
were a Machiavellian willing to take a hit in order to stir up the
public: you might be willing to lose a ship, but not most of the Pacific
fleet! Most expected an attack, but not at Pearl. I could go on with the
details of the JN series codes, the extent to which they were broken:
what we could read, when we could read it, when the Japanese switched
codes, etc. In December ’41 we couldn’t read a thing. The Kidō Butai
avoided the shipping lanes, was radio silent. Radar on Hawaii was a week
old: stealth was easy in those days.

Roosevelt expected that there would probably be a war if we continued to
oppose Japanese expansion in China but he didn’t expect the war that we
got, with a wildly successful first campaign for Japan.

2\. Icebreaker. Victor Suvorov (alias) wrote a book saying that the
Soviets were poised to invade the Nazi-controlled lands in the summer of
41. Silly: the Soviets were desperately afraid of a war with Germany,
because they feared that they’d lose. So afraid they ignored credible
reports of the coming attack from their own intelligence guys, Western
powers, even from the German ambassador! it was too horrible to be true.

The German Army looked damned good in defeating France, while the
Soviets had had a lot of trouble with Finland, caused in part by having
just shot most of the higher officer corps. That and Simo Häyhä.

If the Sovs were within a couple of weeks of launching invasion, you’d
think that they would have called up the deep reserves, bothered to get
all of their tanks working, stockpiled fuel, run recon overflights,
snuck sappers into German-occupied territory (to sabotage bridges and
cut communications lines), finish reorganization of their tank corps,
etc. etc.. – most of which the Germans did do, of course. None of which
the Soviets did. The Soviet high command expressed great concern about
their frontier about not giving Hitler an ‘excuse” for starting a war –
like he needed one! Hitler may be the only person that Stalin really,
truly trusted in his adult life: which must prove something.

3\. Other Losses. No, Eisenhower did not scrag hundreds of thousands of
German POWs. We let a large number of them go as soon as we caught them
: usually with the boys and old men of the Volkssturm, sometimes with
regular army, not with SS. I was just reading some comments from an
uncle who was a company commander: they had zillions of Germans trying
to surrender to his division, rather than the Russians. His division had
65,000 German prisoners: they let most of them walk home, other than the
SS, largely because they couldn’t figure out what else to do with them.

4\. The Werwolf resistance in Germany – how our occupation was (not)
plagued by guerrilla warfare. This one is funnier: theory #1 appealed to
people who were emotionally traumatized by Pearl Harbor (many people)
and/or hated Roosevelt (many people). #2 appeals to Germans, and to
people who hated the Soviets (not without reason) – and, of course, to
people who are just generally goofy. # 3 basically appeals to Nazi
sympathizers, not necessarily German. But this last one started out as a
fairly stupid but innocent satirical article on the Internet, a pretend
Reuters article from 1945 talking about how people in the US were
getting sick of occupying Germany in the face of all that guerrilla
resistance. The satiric article plainly stated that it was not a real
Reuters article – it was satire, in support of the US continuing to
occupy Iraq. People copied the article and left off the bit about it
being satire. Some speechwriter for Rumsfeld used it, presumably without
A. knowing it was not a real Reuters article and B. naturally knowing
nothing about US history (or anything else). Once Rumsfeld had publicly
argued that we had the same problems in Germany (except that it was
deadly blonde Frauleins, rather than IEDs) it became a thing. Nobody in
high office ever admits that they’re wrong: presumably it would leave
little time for anything else. Good Busheviks knew that they should
believe in it – I’m sure that some still do.

Rumsfeld even improved on it, later -talked about all the chaos and
bloodshed after the American revolution (undoubtedly moderated by
American
[near-gunlessness](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arming_America)). Condi
used it, I would guess because she was behind on her idiocy quota.

