+++
title = "Massive Migration"
full_title = "Massive Migration"
date = "2015-02-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/02/11/massive-migration/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/02/11/massive-migration/).

Massive Migration

The big new [paper](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/02/10/013433)
on European origins is out (by Wolfgang Haak, Iosif Lazaridis, Nick
Patterson, David Reich, etc) .

The Corded Ware population is quite different from the preceding
Neolithic farmers: it is about 75% descended from a Yamnaya-like
population (the Yamnaya being steppe herders from the Ukraine and
thereabouts). The Yamnaya themselves are another fusion product: they’re
a mix of farmers from the Middle East (a different population than the
one that originally settled Europe, something like Armenians) and a
population similar to ancient hunter-gatherers from Russia (somewhat
like ancient Karelians). This population also introduced R1a and R1b
chromosomes into Europe, now extremely common.

In northern Europe, the newcomers didn’t tax the neolithic farmers:
mostly, they killed them. Razib Khan compares this to the original
Mongol plan ( kill them, kill them all), before that Khitan bureaucrat
explained the joys of taxation. In the Corded Ware/Single
Grave/Battleaxe culture, there’s no sign that the farmers are around as
serfs: there are almost no buildings, almost no sign of agriculture.
Jim, comment on this.

My guesses:

The Karelian-like population is mostly from further east than Samara:
the guys that domesticated the horse.

The Karelian-like poulation conquered the Armenian-like farmers: they
account for about half the autosomal ancestry of the Yamnaya, but far
more of the Y chromosomes.

it would be interesting to see if the Yamnaya picked up neolithic
farmers ancestry through the female line: could you look at
X-chromosomes?

In places like Italy, people are autosomally mostly neolithic farmers
while the old Neolithic-farmer y-chromsomes are almost gone. Conquest,
rather than extermination: younger sons go forth to conquer again. Some
of the old Y chromosomes lingered in the hills – a bit like Vlachs after
the fall of the Roman Empire.

Did the ur-IndoEuropeans have the European lactose-tolerance mutation?
Probably. And they had the common CF mutations, too.

Archaeologists should read more Conan: Robert E. Howard was way closer
to the mark than they were or are. Even good guys like David Anthony
were influenced: but I’ll bet he’s over that now.

