+++
title = "Disengaged Buddhism in"
full_title = "Disengaged Buddhism in the era of Trump"
date = "2017-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/04/16/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/04/16/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/).

Disengaged Buddhism in the era of Trump

Cross-posted at [Love of All Wisdom](http://wp.me/pxfBj-11h).

[Śāntideva’s anti-political
views](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/)
are very commonly missed by Buddhist scholars today, especially
constructive or theological ones, who are excited by the [Engaged
Buddhist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engaged_Buddhism) embrace of
political action. He is hardly alone among classical Indian Buddhists in
expressing them. So last September I proposed a presentation to the
International Association of Buddhist Studies (IABS), which I intended
to turn into a paper, explaining the importance of these anti-political
views and entitled “Disengaged Buddhism”.

I was expecting Hillary Clinton to win the American election.

Now the IABS itself is taking place in Toronto, under a government far
more benign than that of the Trump Republicans. And the conference
deserves the “international” in its title, with scholars attending from
all over the world. So the [surprise election of Donald
Trump](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/12/happiness-from-politics-or-mourning-in-america/)
will not have quite the same salience to all of the conference’s
attenders, despite the United States’s still-dominant position in the
world. For Canadians and Germans and Japanese, Trump’s election affects
them less than it affects Americans, and there is less they can do about
it. Things in those places proceed much as before.

Yet there will be French people attending, who, as of this writing, have
a significant chance of living under President Marine Le Pen. There will
likely be Indians, living under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, whose
[response to the massacre of hundreds of
Muslims](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/07/narendra-modi-massacre-next-prime-minister-india)
in his state was basically a shrug and a “shit happens”, if not an
outright provocation of further violence. There may be Russians and
Hungarians and Turks and Chinese and
[Thais](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/04/populism-vs-technocracy-in-the-united-states/)
with authoritarian rulers of their own. And, of course, there will be
Americans as well. The present age has taken on a dark, authoritarian
and often racist tenor around the world, and would still have done so
even if 80 000 Midwestern voters had changed their minds and allowed
Clinton to become president. So there is a case to be made that,
internationally speaking, Trump’s election merely made Americans aware
of a larger trend.

But make them aware it did. Since Trump’s election there has been a
widely reported [massive surge of
activism](http://www.freep.com/story/news/politics/2017/02/13/anti-trump-fervor-sparks-new-liberal-kind-tea-party-activism/97754730/),
aimed at resisting every unfortunate aspect of his administration from
its authoritarianism through its anti-immigrant racism through its
corporate cronyism to its environmental destruction. Living in one of
the most left-wing cities in the United States I see this new phenomenon
in action nearly every day. Friends and family members regularly attend
protests. (I have demurred myself for the time being, not out of lack of
interest, but because I am a noncitizen immigrant and therefore make an
easier target in these times. I have nevertheless been contributing
money to left-wing and anti-Trump causes at a much greater rate than I
had before.) I even saw a young student in the stairwell of the Boston
University library on the phone calling his congressional
representative. I’ve never seen that before. And I take it all as
generally a good thing.

The point of saying all this is that I feel some significant qualms
about presenting Buddhist arguments *against* political engagement.
Especially since I won’t only be presenting them at the IABS; I will
shortly be presenting them at [at least one conference in the
US](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/04/13/upcoming-talks-on-buddhism-in-utah/)
as well. I also expect the topic to become a published article, quite
likely in an American journal. Should I be doing any of this at a time
when activism seems more necessary in the United States than ever before
in my lifetime? When activism seems necessary even from a [literally
conservative](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/literal-conservatism/)
perspective, with benign aspects of the old order under attack?

Well… It is true that the Trump presidency is going to cause a great
deal of material suffering. But it is also true that it is [already
causing a great deal of mental
suffering](http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-ln-trump-therapists-20170223-story.html),
even – perhaps even especially – to privileged white people who are
unlikely to be affected by it materially. This isn’t just some vague
feeling of discomfort; they are feeling [insomnia, chest tightness,
panic attacks, even gastrointestinal
distress](http://www.philly.com/philly/health/Trump-anxiety-chest-pains-gastrointestinal-therapy-stress-LGBTQ.html).
This is real, palpable suffering.

And as the young men say today: I know that feel, bro. I remember how in
1997 I had to confront the way I was miserable despite having every
material advantage – and how a politically charged [utilitarian ethics
was part of the
problem](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-a-break-with-utilitarianism/).
I remember how in 2004-5 my consciousness couldn’t get away from the
horror of the Bush reelection, enough that [the 2016 election felt like
an
echo](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/12/happiness-from-politics-or-mourning-in-america/).
I remember how in 2014-15 I [got angry at *my own* side’s
one-sidedness](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/)
– enough to lose a lot of sleep over *that*.

And I remember how in all three of these cases, Buddhism [*saved* me
from
politics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/living-through-the-00s/).
In 1997 the Noble Truths taught me how deeply [the causes of suffering
are
mental](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/).
In 2005 Goenka’s meditations helped me [stop my anger at Bush from
poisoning my
insides](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/wishing-george-w-bush-well/).
In recent years the [comfort I took in Buddhism during cancer
care](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/06/my-buddhist-practices/)
helped calm the political anger as well. This all was *important*. It
was important then and it is important now.

Indeed I think it is now more important than *ever*. For I was never the
only one who needed saving from politics. The reports of psychological
distress indicate to me that more people than ever need it now. Do I
want to tell people to avoid activism? No. I do think [political
engagement can be a great and valuable
thing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/08/love-is-better-than-anger-jack-layton-1950-2011/),
because unlike Śāntideva I do think [external goods
matter](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/).
Activism can be [much more mentally dangerous than it
looks](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/),
but that is not necessarily a reason to stop. It *is* a reason to be
cautious, to look out for one’s own mind and one’s own suffering as well
as the world’s.

Is saying this the luxury of a privileged person? Well, for one thing,
in Trump’s America I am not *that* privileged. I am a brown-skinned
immigrant – in just that category of person that Trump’s speeches rail
against. People who look like me, with my immigration status, were
[recently shot in a Kansas
bar](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2017/02/28/suspect-in-kansas-bar-shooting-of-indians-apparently-thought-they-were-iranians/?utm_term=.d8d701a418b9)
for being exactly that. I am now concerned for my safety, in ways that
recall my earlier fears from the [dark age of
9/12](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-value-of-forgetting/)
– and that age, mercifully, had ended more quickly than this one is
likely to. For all my animus toward George W. Bush, he at least had the
decency to firmly declaim violence against brown people; we didn’t give
him much credit for that at the time, because it seemed like an obvious
bare minimum of behaviour, like declining to spit in people’s faces. As
it turns out, the bar of decency can be set much lower.

But more important than that: it is willful ignorance to say that
[political
quietism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/political-quietism-today/)
is a luxury of the privileged. No one I am aware of contests the
sociological fact that the poor vote in much smaller numbers than the
rich. This is at least as true for [protest and other forms of activism
beyond
voting](http://www.pewinternet.org/2009/09/01/the-demographics-of-online-and-offline-political-participation/):
they are highly positively correlated with income, the rich protest much
*more* than the poor. If anything it is activism, not quietism, that is
a luxury of the privileged. The most marginalized are too concerned with
their own survival to worry about the future of their country, even when
the two are intimately tied up with one another. (And even the modestly
marginalized are at greater risk from the participation they do engage
in. I can get singled out for my skin colour, and could be deported on a
fake criminal charge. White citizens don’t have to worry about that.)

So when Śāntideva and Goenka and the Pali texts tell us that some things
can be more important than politics, that we should be concerned with
the care of our minds and the suffering that comes from within – these
things were true and necessary before the election, and they are true
and necessary now. The mental suffering now felt from politics makes
their message timelier than ever.
