+++
title = "A basic introduction to"
full_title = "A basic introduction to Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta_UPDATED"
date = "2017-04-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/04/12/a-basic-introduction-to-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/04/12/a-basic-introduction-to-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta/).

A basic introduction to Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta_UPDATED

(I have been asked to write a short introduction to Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta and would like to test it on you, dear readers and fellow
bloggers. Any comment or criticism would be more than welcome!)

In its full-fledged form, the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta (henceforth VV) is a
Vedāntic school, thus one which accepts the authority of a given set of
texts (the Upaniṣads, the Brahmasūtra and the Bhagavadgītā) and which
recognises a form of God as brahman (on the various ways of
understanding God in India, see
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2017/03/31/god-and-realism/)). The
full-fledged VV accepts also further groups of texts, namely on the one
hand the Pañcarātra (a group of Vaiṣṇava texts prescribing personal and
temple rituals, see Leach 2012, and,
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/11/18/pancaratra-and-vedanta-a-long-and-complicated-relation/))
and on the other the Tamil devotional poems collected in the
*Divyaprabandham*.

In the following, I will first deal with the tenets of the school in its
mature form, as found in the writings of Veṅkaṭanātha, and then show how
the situation I had just depicted has not been the only one throughout
the complex history of the school.

**Ontology**  
The school’s ontology is perhaps its most distinctive contribution. The
VV accepts both monism and direct realism. The monist aspect has to do
with the fact that the brahman is conceived as the only independent
entity. It exists in a way which even transcends the opposition between
being and non-being (*sat-asatoḥ param*, in the words of one of the main
teachers of the school, Rāmānuja). Conversely, the world as we know it
is, against Advaita Vedānta and Buddhism, real and not illusory, so that
our cognitions of it are epistemologically sound. Yet, the world exists
insofar as it is a specification of the brahman. The brahman is the
whole of which any element of the world, conscious beings and inert
matter, are an attribute. Therefore, the brahman exists in a specified
(*viśiṣṭa*) manner. This ontological Weltanschauung rests on the
negation of a strict distinction between substance and qualities. Unlike
in the school of Nyāya, VV considers qualifications to be qualifiers not
because of their own nature, but only according to the changing point of
view. For instance, a given form qualifies a body, which, in turn,
qualifies a self, which, again, qualifies the brahman. The only thing
which cannot qualify anything else, since it is itself the ultimate
point of rest of all qualifications is the brahman. In this sense, the
bodies of conscious beings are at the same time qualifications of their
selves (which can therefore make them act) but also, ultimately, of the
God-brahman (which can, through them, experience the world).

**Theology**  
The VV’s ontology is distinguished from pantheism because of two
reasons: 1. The brahman goes, as already hinted at, also beyond being.
2. The brahman is conceived not just as an impersonal Being, but rather
as a personal God. In this sense, the VV finds a philosophical way for
incorporating the religious dimension of bhakti into an onto-theology of
Vedāntic type. The brahman is therefore declared to be equivalent not to
a generic omniscient God, but rather with a personal form of God, called
Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa.

God is invariably a cogniser. Knowledge is considered a substance, as in
Vedānta and against Nyāya, but already one of he earliest teachers of
VV, Yāmuna, defines God’s knowledge as *dharmabhūtajñāna* \`knowledge
which has become a characteristic’, thus highlighting how knowledge
behaves as a quality of God. Moreover, the two are said to be
inseparably connected and cannot be known one independently of the
other. In other words, God could never be imagined to be without
cognition, whereas cognition needs a knower. It also invariably needs an
object (i.e., it is intentional), against the Advaita Vedānta idea of a
content-less awareness as the nature of brahman.

Such a personal God can be reached through a personal kind of devotion,
called bhakti, which is the culmination of the previous salvific ways
taught by Pūrva and Uttara Mīmāṃsā, namely *karman* (ritual acts) and
*jñāna* (knowledge of the self).

**Free will**  
Due to the personal nature of God, His co-presence in each body does not
mean that human and other conscious beings are not free. Rather, they
are the ones who carry the moral responsibility of their acts, just like
the co-owner of a field who decides to sell it and just seeks for the
other co-owner’s consent carries the responsibility for the selling (the
simile is Rāmānuja’s). This freedom is the direct result of God’s free
decision to restrict His possibility to hinder or alter their decisions.

**Epistemology**  
The VV school adopts the Mīmāṃsā epistemology. Therefore, it accepts the
intrinsic validity of cognitions as a basis for the reliability of the
Vedas and of other sacred texts and recognises perception, inference and
linguistic communication as the main instruments of knowledge. As for
inference, it denies the possibility of inferring a God, who can only be
known through the sacred texts. The school’s main systematiser,
Veṅkaṭanātha, reframes linguistic communication as the communication
coming from a non-faulty source, thus accommodating both sacred texts
(which have no source at all, since they are not authored) and worldly
communication if coming from reliable speakers.

**History of the school**  
As already hinted at, the school has experienced a complex evolution.
The teachers recognised as its first exponents are Nāthamuni (–970?
according to K. Young) and his grand-son Yāmuna (967–1038 according to
Mesquita 1973). Of the first, no works are extant, but out of their
titles one can speculate that they dealt with Yoga and Nyāya. Later
hagiographical sources credit him with the finding of the
Divyaprabandham. Yāmuna’s works are partly extant and attest of a
complex and brilliant mind, who probably moved from Nyāya (his early
work are open to the possibility of inferring the existence of God) to
Vedānta. The next teacher, Rāmānuja (traditional dates 1017–1137), is
usually considered the founder of the school as it is known today and is
clearly a Vedāntin (his main works are a commentary on the Bhagavadgītā
and his opus magnum, a commentary on the Brahmasūtra called Śrī Bhāṣya).
However, in Rāmānuja’s works there is hardly any mention of Pañcarātra
and no mention at all of the Divyaprabandham and of its contents. The
tradition recognises Pirāṉ Piḷḷāṉ, the author of the first commentaries
(in Tamil) on the Divyaprabandham as Rāmānuja’s direct disciple and he
is surely the first one to introduce Rāmānuja’s theology in the
interpretation of these poems. The confluence of the two Vaiṣṇavisms
(Rāmānuja’s Vedāntic one and the Divyaprabandham’s devotional one) finds
a further point of balance in Veṅkaṭanātha (also known as Vedānta
Deśika, traditional dates (1269–1370), who wrote in both Tamil and
Sanskrit and tried to systematise the school’s various elements. The
later interpreters of the school, however, considered him as the
exponent of one sub-school (the Vaṭakalai) opposed to the other (called
Teṅkalai and whose foundation was later attributed to Piḷḷai Lokācārua,
1205–1311).

UPDATED according to Amod’s suggestions (below). Many thanks!
