+++
title = "Race Potboiler from Ron"
full_title = "Race Potboiler from Ron Unz"
date = "2013-07-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/22/race-potboiler-from-ron-unz/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/22/race-potboiler-from-ron-unz/).

Race Potboiler from Ron Unz

A new [blog
post](http://www.ronunz.org/2013/07/20/race-and-crime-in-america/) from
Ron Unz examines the correlation across large US cities between the
percentage of the population that identifies itself as black and rates
of various violent crimes. The correlations are remarkably stable over
time and run around 80% for measures like homicide and robbery. Unz
remarks that his findings were a surprise to several social scientists
with whom he had discussed them while a few other social scientists were
aware of this relationship.

While he shows graphs of the correlations over time he doesn’t provide
much in the way of detail city by city. Curious, I quickly downloaded
state level statistics for homicide rates and percentage of population
that is black. A quick scatter is here:

![Allstates](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/07/allstates.png?w=600&h=380 "allstates.png")

I don’t know how this will render on the WordPress blog: if there is
interest I will try to put up more legible and focussed versions.
Overall, the correlation between murder rate and percent black in the
state data is 0.82, essentially duplicating Unz’ result for urban areas.

By states (including the District of Columbia as a state) the rate
varies from around 1 per hundred thousand per year in Vermont, New
Hampshire, Hawaii, and Minnesota to nearly 20 in DC. As Unz discusses,
the rates would presumably be much higher and the correlations with
percentage black also much higher is nearly a quarter of the populations
of young black males were not in prison.

For states with very low black populations the range is from 1 to nearly
8 in New Mexico. European national figures are between 1 and 5, so
homicide rates in, say, Vermont, are much like those of European
nations. Why is there so much more homicide in New Mexico? Greg may
suggest that the high percentage of hispanics in the population is
responsible but we must not forget that New Mexico’s Rio Grande valley,
from Los Alamos to White Sands has a remarkable high concentration of
Ph.D. physicists. Hmmmm.

While our nation is obsessed with the Zimmerman-Martin dustup, these
numbers reveal in my opinion the real tragedy of the sociology of our
black population. Zimmerman-Martin is a sordid circus created by
unscrupulous journalists, prosecutors, and race hustlers. These homicide
rates, on the other hand, reflect premature deaths of thousands of our
citizens, year after year.

