+++
title = "Mental Retardation"
full_title = "Mental Retardation"
date = "2013-07-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/02/mental-retardation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/02/mental-retardation/).

Mental Retardation

People working in the field usually divide cases into organic and
familial retardation. Which may not be the best possible categories, but
there you are.

A fair fraction of mental retardation is caused by some kind of
environmental insult: birth trauma, infections such as rubella, iodine
deficiency, fetal alcohol exposure, closed-head injures, etc. I’m not
talking about that.

Probably more than half of all cases have some kind of genetic cause,
although we have a limited understanding of the genetic details. We know
of \> 450 genes that can caused retardation when mutated, but there are
probably many more. They’re being found at a rapid clip.

If retardation is defined as an IQ below 70, most retarded individuals
are only mildly retarded, having IQs between 55 and 70.

People with IQs between 40 and 54 makes up about 10% of the retarded:
this is usually called moderate MR. Between 20 and 39, severe (3-4%).
Lower still, profound: 1-2%

Mild retardation is more common among ‘minorities’ and low SES people,
since those groups have lowmean IQs. A lot more common. The percentage
of people in the US with an IQ below 70 must be at least twice as high
as it is in Finland or Japan. If you look at young people, more like
three times.

As the IQ decreases, the fraction dubbed ‘organic’ increases. At IQ 70,
that fraction is higher for whites than blacks.

People with organic retardation often have other physical anomalies (are
funny-looking). Generally speaking, their siblings do not show
lower-than-average IQ.

The siblings of people with familial retardation show the same sorts of
correlations as the siblings of people with +2sigma IQ: they regress up
just as much as the others regress down.

I think that genetic kinds of ‘organic’ retardation are generally caused
by mutations of major effect, either recessive or de novo. Think of it
as a spanner in the works.

Familial retardation looks to be caused (in part) by differences in the
number of deleterious mutations of small effect. Sand in the gears.
Different mutation rates in different populations would, all else equal,
lead to between-population differences in the average number of
deleterious mutations of small effect. Differences in average IQ between
populations could also be caused by differing selective pressures. Both
effects may contribute.

If genetic differences were the main cause of group differences in
average IQ, how would you tell what kind of genetic factors had caused
this? Well, you could do high accuracy whole-genome sequencing and try
to find out the frequency of busted-up genes in the two populations. You
could calculate the correlation of IQ with load, within-population. This
might be tricky: we can recognize when a coding gene is totally hosed,
but it’s harder to evaluate the effect of less dramatic changes. A
higher genetic load could be generated by relaxed selection, rather than
a higher mutation rate – but a specific mechanism like increased
paternal age would cause an increase in a particular class of mutations
(mostly point mutations), rather than an across-the-board increase.

If extra load was involved, you would probably see elevated rates of
other kinds of brain malfunction, various flavors of crazy. On the other
hand, weaker selective pressure for intelligence might not imply more
insanity: dogs aren’t as smart as humans, which is the fruit of a
different selective history, but they don’t seem particularly crazy.

Are there big differences in the frequency of various kinds of lunacy in
different populations? Sure. Everyone knows that – don’t they?

A single gene variant can contribute to the risk of autism,
manic-depression, depression, and schizophrenia, and having a close
relative with one of those syndromes ups the risk for all of them. I
never thought that DSM categories carved nature at a joint, but they may
be worse than useless.

