+++
title = "Dadly adaptations"
full_title = "Dadly adaptations"
date = "2013-07-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/06/dadly-adaptations/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/06/dadly-adaptations/).

Dadly adaptations

In some species, males help take care of their offspring. This is
common in birds (\~80%); uncommon in mammals (\~6%), but it does occur –
in wolves, for example.

In particular, humans exhibit paternal care, although the extent varies.

There are indications that this behavior is not purely cultural, not
just learned, but has a biological substrate. Married men, and
especially men with children, have lower testosterone levels, and it
seems that this is causal: marriage possibly, and children probably,
drive the reduction. At this point we don’t know the exact triggers, or
the biochemical mechanism. This pattern of testosterone reduction
associating with paternal care is seen in many other species, and it
might be that studying some of those other species would help us figure
this out. However, since gorillas don’t show much paternal care, while
chimpanzees show none at all, it seems likely that paternal care arose
independently in humans. There’s no guarantee that our mechanism is the
same as that in wolves.

If we understood how this works, we might find that individuals and
populations vary in their propensity to show paternal care ( for
genetic reasons). I would guess that paternal care was ancestral in
modern humans, but it’s easy enough to lose something like this when
selective pressures no longer favor it. Wolves have paternal care, but
dogs have lost it.

This could have something to do with better health in married men. High
testosterone levels aren’t cost-free.

It’s possible that various modern environmental factors interfere with
the triggers for dadliness. That would hardly be surprising, since we
don’t really know how they work.

All this has a number of interesting social implications. Let’s see how
many of them you guys can spot.



