+++
title = "Demographic Disaster"
full_title = "Demographic Disaster"
date = "2013-02-17"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/02/17/demographic-disaster/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/02/17/demographic-disaster/).

Demographic Disaster

The numbers of a community translate into its strength in several cases,
esp in the modern world of democracy. Also, higher numbers mean more
number of fit young men available for military at the times of need.
Demographic transition means disaster for the community which is losing
its share in the population. A look at Lebanon teaches us a lot about
this fact.

Indian subcontinent has been under siege from 10^(th) century. The
advent of Muslim and Christian invaders whose aim was to destroy the
indigenous culture and supplant it with their own versions of
eka-rAks.asa religions has resulted in several wounds to this fountain
of ancient civilization.

But the last 130 years have been a massive disaster for our culture.
Muslims formed about 20% of the population of greater India (India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh) in 1881 while Christians accounted for less
than 1%. By 1941, the proportion of Muslim population had increased to
about 24.28%. It has to be noted that Muslim population was greatly
concentrated in certain pockets – in the western states forming present
day Pakistan and eastern Bengal (today’s Bangladesh) where they formed
absolute majority. The result being that in 1947, the country was
partitioned based on religion.

In present day Pakistan, the proportion of Dharmic religionists (Hindu,
Sikh, Bauddha and Jaina) has come down from nearly 20% in 1941 to less
than 2% in 2001. In present day Bangladesh, it has come down from nearly
30% in 1941 to 10% in 2001. During the decade 1991-2001, the decadal
growth rate of the Dharmic religionists in Bangaldesh was only 1.8%
against 18% of Muslims. Taking the entire subcontinent as a whole,
Dharmic religionists have declined from more than 79% in 1881 to less
than 68% in 2001. We are becoming a minority in our homeland; our
ancient great fortress of pagan culture is losing her pagan character
every day.

The proportion of Christians in modern day India has increased less from
fertility and more due to conversions. In 2001, the proportion of
children in 0-6 yr group of their entire population was only 13.45%
(less than 15.55% figure for Dharmikas) but their decadal growth rate
was 23% against 20% of Dharmikas. Thus, conversion is a major
contributor to growth in Christian population.

The result of this demographic downfall will be another partition. It is
to be noted that most of the locations of high Muslim/Christian
populations are located in border areas making their secession from
Indian union very easy.

In the north east, Arunachal, Mizoram, Manipur, Meghalaya, Tripura and
Nagaland have seen vast Christianization. In 1901, the states had very
low Christian and Muslim population. The Dharmikas were formed of
traditional tribal beliefs, Buddhism and Hinduism (mostly of Vais.n.ava
character). The Dharmikas formed more than 91% of the combined
population in these states in 1901. In 2001, they formed less than 50%.
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Mizoram had become Christian majority. About 70%
of population in Meghalaya professed to be Christians in 2001. In
Nagaland and Mizoram, the figure was close to 90%. In Manipur,
Christians formed 37% of population. In Arunachal, proportion of
Christians had doubled within a decade from less than 10% in 1991 to
more than 18% in 2001. Only Inner Manipur region of Manipur state and
Tripura have survived almost intact. Interestingly, these places have a
very strong Vais.n.ava presence and were ruled by Vais.n.ava kings for
some centuries.

On the whole, the situation in north east is terrible. Considering that
the corridor connecting our mainland with our north eastern region is
just 40km wide at its narrowest, the chances of these states to secede
from India are comparatively high. Their position in the border, with a
continuous region of high Christian presence, also makes it easier (just
as partition in 1947).

In Assam, the threat of Muslims taking over the border districts to form
a greater Bangladesh is very high. Lower Assam (eastern districts) and
Cachar are Muslim majority/have substantial Muslim population. Assam
shares border with Bangladesh exactly in these places. The contiguous
regions of northern part of West Bengal, northern Bihar, NE Jharkhand
and NE Uttat Pradesh have proportionately high Muslim presence. This
eastern belt forming a continuous region with Bangladesh is 29% Muslim
(2001). In Assam and West Bengal part of this belt, it is as high as 40%
and 49% respectively (2001). When the numbers for 2011 come out, we can
expect a further deterioration of this situation. A greater Bangladesh
is forming before our very eyes. When it comes into existence, the
connection with our north eastern states will be cut. Thus, the
secession of those states from India will become even easier.

The other regions of concern are western UP and Kerala. In western UP,
Muslim population share has increased from 29% in 1951 to nearly 39% in
2001. In Kerala, Muslim population has increased its share from 17% in
1951 to 25% in 2001. Correspondingly Dharmika population has decreased
from 62% to 56%. Muslim population is concentrated in northern Kerala.
Malappuram is Muslim majority. Wayanad, Thrissur, Kozhikode, Kannur,
Kasargod and Palakkad had significantly large Muslim presence from about
30-40% in general. The only solace is that Kerala has no continuous
border with any Muslim country and is surrounded by Hindu majority
states of TN and Karnataka. Thus, any secession is made tough and a
strong willed government will be able to crush any revolt for secession
with iron hand (though it still requires a strong govt – which we seem
to lack). The same goes for Western UP.

One major factor helping the Muslims is their high fertility. The
difference between dharmika and Muslim decadal growth rates was about 3%
in 1951-1961. It has grown to the level of nearly 10% by 1981-1991 and
1991-2001. Family planning and birth control have led to lower fertility
rates among non-Muslim communities. But fewer Muslims have taken to
these practices, thus resulting in a higher growth rate difference. The
family planning program has become a boon in disguise for the
conservative Muslims as they have managed to increase their share of the
population significantly.

India was not conquered fully by the fire and sword of the eka-rAks.asa
religions. We managed to hold on to our beliefs and showed remarkable
resilience. To be able to survive a tyrannical Muslim rule for several
centuries and still being able to hold on to our traditional beliefs is
no mean achievement. But whatever we managed to save is being washed
away very fast. Lower fertility rates of Dharmikas combined with higher
fertility rates of Muslims and the Christian act of targeting to convert
the vulnerable sections of the Dharmikas (viz. tribals and Harijans) has
led to a steady downfall in the proportion of our population in the
subcontinent. We are heading towards a demographic disaster of our own
making. Our thirst for hedonistic lifestyle has led to lower fertility
rates. Our inability to integrate the Harijans into the mainstream
society has led to them becoming prey to Christian vultures. Remember –
every Dharmika converted is not just a person less but an enemy more in
the long run. Unless, a concerted effort is taken to increase our
fertility levels and integrate all sections of the society into one
strong mass, we will die as an independent community within a century or
two at most. Instead of harping on ‘development’, ‘money’, ‘westernized
lifestyle’ etc., we must concentrate on rebuilding a strong family
system which can increase our numbers. We must bring about an integratin
in the entire society. Japanese managed to integrate their untouchable
castes (burakmin) into the masses. We mut achieve the same here. It is
to be noted that untouchability is not unique to India. It was practiced
in several other places – like France, Japan, Korea etc. These countries
have managed to erase this practice. We must achieve the same in near
future. Caste based discrimination must be put to an end. It will make
us a stronger force.

When we look at the status of Dharmikas in Pakistan and Bangladesh (even
the Kashmir Valley), it can be seen that the intolerance of Islam
towards the pagan religions gives a strong expression in Islamic
countries. The proportion of Dharmikas in Pakistan and Bangladesh have
fallen drastically post 1947 as shown above. Dharmikas are being held to
ransom by the Christians in Nagaland, Mizoram and Manipur. The western
world is still bound by their brain washed state of hating heathens.
Thus, Hindus cannot expect any support from them in case of genocide
against them. When Bangla Hindus were murdered in lakhs by Pakistn
soldiers, the western world turned a blind eye towards it. While they
may not accept it openly, the life of a traditional Indian pagan has
much less value in the eyes of a white beholder.

In the foreseeable near future, we may lose not only Kashmir but also
border districts of West Bengal and entire North east including Assam.
Seeds for further secession are already sown in northern Bihar, NE Uttar
Pradesh etc. With a growing proportion of Muslim and Christian
population everywhere, it will be a fight between the two eka-rAks.asa
religions over the land of the holy BhArata. The traditions of our
ancestors will die an ignoble death if nothing is done to stem this tide
against us. As the holders of last great fortress of ancient pagan
wisdom, it is our duty to hold and save the fort for posterity. It is a
matter of pride as well as a debt to be repaid to our ancestors (pitr.
r.n.a).

P.S. The data are taken from the book ‘Religious Demography of India’
published by Centre for Policy Studies.

