+++
title = "mahāśivarātri Attempt at"
full_title = "mahāśivarātri Attempt at a saṃskṛta verse on śiva"
date = "2019-03-03"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/03/03/attempt-at-a-sa%e1%b9%83sk%e1%b9%9bta-verse-on-siva/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/03/03/attempt-at-a-sa%e1%b9%83sk%e1%b9%9bta-verse-on-siva/).


					mahāśivarātri: Attempt at a saṃskṛta verse on śiva				



[ March 3, 2019 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/03/03/attempt-at-a-sa%e1%b9%83sk%e1%b9%9bta-verse-on-siva/ "Permalink to mahāśivarātri: Attempt at a saṃskṛta verse onśiva")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [1
    Comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/03/03/attempt-at-a-sa%e1%b9%83sk%e1%b9%9bta-verse-on-siva/#comments)

# mahāśivarātri: Attempt at a saṃskṛta verse onśiva

This is just an attempt by someone with zero background in saMskRta
poetry. There is no metre here per se. But may these 4 lines of 28
syllables each be an offering to the god who gave the 28 siddhAnta
Agama-s as the essence of the 4 veda-s for mahāśivarātri

यश्-चिदम्बरपतिस्-स्वरूपविरहकृत-कलङ्कसूदक-सुकार्येण-शोभितो

यो-निध्यम्बरीपति-सुरूपवराहकृत-सपङ्कजोदक-विहारेण-क्षोभितो

यो-विद्याम्बरपतिस्-सूकरसुरदधृत-शिवाङ्कमोदक-कुमारं-लेखयति

सो-विध्याम्बरपतिस्-सूरतसुकरभृत-सटङ्कबोधको-विद्यां-मां-प्रापयति

yaś-cidambarapatis-svarūpavirahakṛta-kalaṅkasūdaka-sukāryeṇa-śobhito

yo-nidhyambarīpati-surūpavarāhakṛta-sapaṅkajodaka-vihāreṇa-kṣobhito

yo-vidyāmbarapatis-sūkarasuradadhṛta-śivāṅkamodaka-kumāraṃ-lekhayati

so-vidhyāmbarapatis-sūratasukarabhṛta-saṭaṅkabodhako-vidyāṃ-māṃ-prāpayati

Notes:

a\. यश्-चिदम्बरपतिस्-स्वरूपविरहकृत-कलङ्कसूदक-सुकार्येण-शोभितो

yaś-cidambarapatis-svarūpavirahakṛta-kalaṅkasūdaka-sukāryeṇa-śobhito

He (yaH) who is the lord of the cidambara (City or inner space of heart
where brahman dwells), the one who is adorned (shobhitaH) by the good
actions (sukAryeNa) of the crushing (sUdaka) of the stain (kalaGka)
caused (kRta) by the seperation (viraha) from the svarUpa

This refers to the siddhAnta doctrine that the primal impurity of ANava
(atomism) or mUla-mala (thus, the filth/stain) falsely makes one think
that he is a finite, embodied soul (atom) when he is reality is as
expansive and blissful as shiva. Shiva removes this filth by means of
dIkSA and anugraha (Grace). He is ornamented by the numerous initiations
and other acts of grace, where he has graced souls with the removal of
mala.



b.यो-निध्यम्बरीपति-सुरूपवराहकृत-सपङ्कजोदक-विहारेण-क्षोभितो

yo-nidhyambarīpati-surūpavarāhakṛta-sapaṅkajodaka-vihāreṇa-kṣobhito

He who is agitated (kSobhitaH) by the \[erotic\] play (vihAreNa) in the
lotus-endowed waters (sapaGkajodaka) by varAha of good form
(surUpavarAha), the lord (pati) of the one who has the oceans (nidhi) as
her garments nidhyambarI–earth)

The idea for this is from shrI sambandhar’s & appar’s old tamizh poems
where he refers to varAha’s tusk on the neck of shiva as an ornament.
varAha after finishing his work is imagined in some purANas as indulging
in erotic sport with bhUdevI. That play has been imagined as a play in
the muddy (paGka) lotus-filled waters….

shiva is apparently upset with that play which causes the cosmos to
tremble and after causing him to leave that body & go back to his
blissful & peaceful station in vaikuNTha, keeps varAha’s tusk as
keepsake. But as we will see in line 3, the tusk comes handy.

Also, the word paGkaja has been chosen for lotus as mud invokes shrI
varAha association very well and sapaGkajodaka rhymes with previous
line’s kalaGkasUdaka & subsequent shivAgkamodaka & saTaGkabodhaka.  
c. यो-विद्याम्बरपतिस्-सूकरसुरदधृत-शिवाङ्कमोदक-कुमारं-लेखयति

yo-vidyāmbarapatis-sūkarasuradadhṛta-śivāṅkamodaka-kumāraṃ-lekhayati

He who is the lord (patiH) with vidyA (knowledge) as his garments
(vidyAmbara), who makes write (lekhayati) kumAra, who, holding (dhRta)
the good tusk (su-rada) of the boar (sUkara), delights (modaka) the lap
of shivA(devI)(shivAGka)

The basic premise for this whole poem was this imagery of baby skanda
doing akSarAbhyAsam with the tusk of his uncle that shiva kept as
souvenir when helping him get out of the avatAra and go back to
vaikuNTha. Since he is too young to do it, shivamakes him write with
that tusk.  
d. सो-विध्याम्बरपतिस्-सूरतसुकरभृत-सटङ्कबोधको-विद्यां-मां-प्रापयति

so-vidhyāmbarapatis-sūratasukarabhṛta-saṭaṅkabodhako-vidyāṃ-māṃ-prāpayati

That one; he, the lord of the cloth to be pierced (vidhya+ambara;
vidhya: to be pierced), the one who supports/carries (bhRta) the
good-natured/compassionate (sUrata) ones of good actions (sukara); the
teacher (bodhakaH) endowed with the axe (saTaGka; referring to the
iconographic axe); he (the one who is all these things described in
these four lines) causes me (mAm) to attain (prApayati) knowledge
(vidyA).

The cloth to be pierced is the tiras of shaivasiddhAnta; the tirodhana
shakti of shiva that veils our consciousness and limits our
self-awareness. It is a cloth/curtain that is to be pierced (vidhya) as
that is the main function of sadAshiva–to pierce through the veil and
free us…..Since shiva/sadAshiva is the lord of this tiras/curtain, the
lord of the tirodhana shakti; he is called vidhyAmbarapati.

He carries and sustains the great sages, gods and bhaktas who have
pleased him with good acts. He causes me to attain knowledge.  
The author of this poem thanks @yaajushi bhagini for her kind assistance
and constructive criticisms, and @rkedar1 and @pinakasena for their
feedback on the poem.

