+++
title = "Bell beakers – or, the"
full_title = "Bell beakers – or, the birth of Britain"
date = "2017-05-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/05/17/bell-beakers-or-the-birth-of-britain/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/05/17/bell-beakers-or-the-birth-of-britain/).

Bell beakers – or, the birth of Britain

The Beaker culture is an archaeological culture that existed in the late
Copper Age and early Bronze age in western Europe, characterized by a
particular style of pottery drinking vessels, but also by developments
in copper metallurgy, archery, etc.

It looks as if the culture – a set of ideas and techniques – originated
in Spain and spread widely – but then, some of its spread happened by
groups that had adopted that culture expanding.

It looks as if people in western Germany picked up these ideas – of
course we have a radically imperfect idea of what those ideas were – and
then settled Britain. Before all this Britain was populated by a
kindof-Sardinian population (with some hunter-gatherer mixed in) that
had probably came from Spain. Afterwards they were almost
indistinguishable from people of that era living in the Netherlands, who
had a lot of steppe ancestry. 93% replacement, minimum. Some Anglo-Saxon
ancestry was added about 1400 years ago but A. they’re not very
different from the Brits B. most British ancestry today still goes back
to the Bell Beaker conquest.

This probably happened through war and massacre. If you think otherwise,
you reject the historical record – have a fundamentally false notion of
human nature. Disease is not too plausible as a causal factor, since the
proto-Brits were not a long-isolated population like the Amerindians or
Polynesians, while for that matter some of the most potent crowd
diseases, smallpox for example, weren’t even around yet.

Pastoralists are usually warlike and they have often supplanted farmers,
even when greatly outnumbered.

I’m wondering if this population replacement was preceded by a long
period of piracy and raids, something like Europe in 900 AD.

For a long time archaeologists, not least British ones, have for some
reason been viscerally uncomfortable with explanations of prehistory
leaning heavily on war & volkerwanderungs. They were wrong: and they
were, are, the sort of people that want to be wrong, *will* be wrong
unless someone holds a gun to their head. They need to be replaced, by
hook or by crook.  
Assuming that we want information.

