+++
title = "Shaker Heights"
full_title = "Shaker Heights"
date = "2013-11-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/11/08/shaker-heights/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/11/08/shaker-heights/).

Shaker Heights

People talking about education often blame poor funding, or crummy
unionized teachers, or low standards/expectations for low achievement
among black and Hispanic students. That happens not to be the case.
Some of the most interesting examples involve schools that are
prosperous, liberal, and have mixed student bodies: the gaps still
exist, even though the kids are exposed to the same teachers, same
curriculum, same funding level, etc. Every now and then you see an
article about these puzzling cases. The articles all sound much the
same: the reporter and the school authorities are always mystified by
the outcomes.  And as far as I can tell, they stay mystified.

Once upon a time, I used to collect those articles. I suppose I was
hoping for a new take on the situation, one in which the blame was
pinned on Trotskyite wreckers or elf-shot, but they’re all pretty much
the same.

The first one I ran into \[in the Washington Post\] was about Shaker
Heights. The people running the school were mystified: “In four recent
high school graduating classes, blacks made up just 7 percent of the
students in the top fifth of their class, while they constituted 90
percent of those in the bottom fifth.”

Then came Cheltenham, Pennsylvania: “Experts have long puzzled over why
the gap exists.” “Children of well-off, college-educated African
Americans tend to do little better on standardized tests than the
children of white high-school dropouts.”

I saw the same article about a school in Denver. Again in Nyack, New
York. Evanston, Illinois. Stamford, Connecticut. Menlo Park, Ca.
Princeton, New Jersey: “If the gap can’t be narrowed in Princeton, then
where can it be narrowed?” Berkeley, CA: “”How could a high school do
so well by one group of students and do so poorly for another?”

I am not the only person that noticed this often-repeated pattern.
Eventually, many of these high schools \[and some similar ones, like
Amherst\] got together and formed a consortium
\[[MSAN](http://msan.wceruw.org/), Minority Student Achievement
Network\] aimed at finding the mysterious cause. I wish them luck in
their search for the real score-killer.

