+++
title = "Majors"
full_title = "Majors"
date = "2013-11-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/11/22/majors/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/11/22/majors/).

Majors

Sometimes we touch upon the question of what people know or don’t know.
Probably this has something to do with what they study, assuming that
they remember any of what they are exposed to in school.

So what do college students major in?

I have national figures, as well as recent numbers for Harvard.

Nationally \[ 2009-2010\], about 21% are business majors, 10% major in
social sciences and history, 8% in “health professions and related
programs”, 7% are educational majors, 6% psych majors, 5% in visual and
performing arts,  5% in biological and biomedical sciences, 5% in
“communication, journalism, and related programs”, 4% in engineering,
3% English and literature, 2% in computer and information sciences, 1.4%
in physical sciences, 1% in mathematics and statistics. I haven’t
mentioned everything.

Harvard \[2009\] is different. They had 758 kids majoring in economics,
495 in government, 306 in social studies, 290 in psychology, 247 in
English, 236 in history, 158 in history and literature, 155 in
neurobiology, 154 in molecular cell biology, 154 in sociology. How many
students in those top ten majors would have a good grasp of quantitative
inheritance, natural selection, biological influences on behavior? None
of them.

Least popular majors at Harvard, 2009: Earth and Planetary Sciences 28,
African and African American studies, 27, Folklore and Mythology, 21,
Studies of Women, Gender, and Sexuality 16, Near Eastern Languages and
Civilizations 14, Slavic Languages and Literature 13, Astronomy and
Astrophysics 5, German Languages and Literature 5, Sanskrit and Indian
studies 3.

Stanford is another story. Here are 2007 numbers:

Human Biology 167  
Biological Sciences 151  
Economics 143  
Political Science 103  
Psychology 102

English 92  
International Relations 87  
History 71  
Computer Science 70  
Engineering 62  
Mechanical Engineering 59

Management Science and Engineering 56  
Electrical Engineering 48  
Mathematics 48  
Symbolic Systems 44

Communication 36  
Public Policy 34  
Physics 30  
American Studies 26

Sociology 26  
Mathematical and Computational Science 24  
Earth Systems 23  
Science, Technology and Society 22  
Art 21  
Chemistry 21

Urban Studies 20  
Chemical Engineering 16  
Music 16  
Anthropological Sciences 15  
Cultural and Social Anthropology 15

Civil Engineering 14  
Film and Media Studies 12  
Spanish 10  
Classics 9

East Asian Studies 9  
Comparative Studies in Race and Ethnicity 8  
Drama 8  
Feminist Studies 8

Geological and Environmental Sciences 8  
Linguistics 8  
Philosophy 8

Religious Studies 8  
Humanities 7  
German Studies 6  
Environmental Engineering 5

Japanese 5  
Asian American Studies 4  
Comparative Literature 4  
French 4

African and African American Studies 3  
Chicana and Chicano Studies 3  
Individually Designed Major 3  
Materials Science and Engineering 3

Slavic Languages and Literature 3  
Archaeology 1  
Chinese 1  
Individually Designed Major in Engineering 1

Italian 1  
Native American Studies 1  
Philosophy and Religious Studies 1

School of Earth Sciences Total: 31

School of Engineering Total: 334

School of Humanities and Sciences Total: 1449

University Total: 1814

