+++
title = "Communication or"
full_title = "Communication or coincidence"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/11/25/communication-or-coincidence/"
date = "2025-11-25"
+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/11/25/communication-or-coincidence/).

Communication or coincidence

The year 1991 flashed in our mind along with the letters S, K, G, K, S. Those were the initials of five of six people who had once mattered to us in life but were now memories from a past world that almost felt like a past life – vāsāṃsi jīrṇāni. 1991 was the year when we saw four of them for the last time. We continued to see S, the first of the five, for a year or two thereafter, but we had diverged so much that those meetings no longer had any special valence for us.

Barbarin lived very far from our regions in the vicinity of a large slum. We do not know if that slum or Barbarin’s decrepit old apartment still exists. Suddenly, out of the blue, after all these decades, we had a vivid feeling as though we were journeying on our bike towards Barbarin’s house. Those visits never gave us any pleasure; hence, we gazed at our unsolicited vision with some trepidation. For reasons unknown to us, in this vivid mental impression, we stopped about 2-3 kilometers from Barbarin’s erstwhile dwelling. It was only a vaguely familiar setting. But here we sensed a faint feeling of pleasure rather than pain that typically accompanied a visit to Barbarin. At our stop, we felt the presence of someone we had known well, but did not realize who it was. Only after we had snapped out of that mental drift did we realize that it was the first S – rather than going to Barbarin’s place, we had stopped in the part of the city where S lived. S came from an ethnic group that was unremarkable until the 1700s; however, thereafter, they experienced a meteoric rise and came to have several plush residences in the city. The British tyranny had come down hard on them, but their human capital had allowed them to weather the storm and continue their dominance. Now they supported many Hindu political causes, but unlike their forbears, had lost most of their understanding of the religion beyond engaging in some laukika rites. At one point, S’s ancestors had been masters of the Taittirīya-śruti, but now they did not even know that it began with “iśe tvorje tvā…” We wondered why we had suddenly thought of S and the remaining four who had passed out of our life so long ago. In any case, this mental drift brought a pleasant flood of memories of particular locales as if the genii of the loci were speaking to us. Those were indeed mostly carefree times, pregnant with the expectation of great acts that were to be performed in the future. Many, though not all, of those acts were performed, and they brought with them a sense of transient pleasures; yet, we felt like the Marahaṭṭa-s bracing for the 26-year jihad after the wondrous acts performed by their founding Mahārāja. Thus, despite the divergence and the distance in time, we took in the strange pleasure like a bird in a heady flight.

Right then, our phone flashed a message from Igul, who was contacting us after an aeon. Just the day before, we had been on our customary walk, when we stopped at a traffic light waiting for our turn to cross the road. Just then, our scopaesthesia was activated, and we looked up to see a woman looking at us half-smiling from a car just beside us. We had then remarked to ourselves that she looked quite like Igul. Hence, when we received that message from Igul, we were quite surprised – we could rather emphatically state that we had not thought of her for at least 6 months until that fleeting encounter on the road. Thus, we wended our way by train to a certain spot where we had met several years ago. The old restaurant was gone, but there was a new one in the same place that served decent vegetarian food.

There, as Igul and I were talking of the deja vu of perhaps ordering the very same or, at worst, a very similar lunch years ago, she said something strange: “You know \[Bhārgava\], this is the 21st time we have met since the late summer of 1991.”  
We: “So you have actually kept a record of that? I thought we met reasonably often between 1991 and 1996.”  
Igul: “Yes, as you know, I keep a diary, and I recorded something from each of those meetings – we met 14 times between 1991 and 1996 and only 7 times in the three decades thereafter.”  
We: “It’s striking that you remember it so precisely. I never thought there would be something to record in most of our meetings.”  
Igul: “It so happens that you mentioned something of significance, either something I found funny or a phrase I wanted to reuse, something relating to religious observance, something relating to the R language or a mathematical formula that I just had to look up.”  
We: “OK, but it is notable that you remembered the total count for this triṣapta meeting. Interestingly, the year 1991 flashed in my mind just before you messaged me.”  
Igul: “Hmm… The very same year, coming to me was the reason I looked it up and am able to give you the precise count of our meetings since that date.”

We: “What do you mean by the year coming to you?”  
Igul: “We had a strange dream yesterday. I’d say it was more like a vision than a dream. I dreamt that I was talking to S; do you remember S? We were hanging out near S’s house – that place has changed now, but in my dream it had several features of the days when you were still around. However, in my dream, it featured the more recent wall across the shortcut you would take to reach it. Suddenly, I saw you emerge right out of the wall and ride your bike towards me! Notably, we were our nice-looking youthful selves rather than in the current state of dotage.”  
We: “That’s rather remarkable indeed.”  
Igul: “Of course, I had planned to meet you if you were in town, and that might have inspired the dream. Nevertheless, I was surprised by the vividness of this dream or vision and its reference to a particular meeting that happened really a long time ago.”  
We: “While I still don’t understand why you had a vision of that long-past time or saw S in it, you will be utterly surprised if you now hear what I experienced.”
