+++
title = "The accidental yogin"
full_title = "The accidental yogin"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/03/17/the-accidental-yogin/"
date = "2025-03-17"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/03/17/the-accidental-yogin/).

The accidental yogin

The results of the senior college admission exams were finally out. For Vidrum, it felt like the Marahaṭṭa-s reaching Delhi after having overcome the 26-year Jihad and many other a threat to their very existence. However, Somakhya poured chill water on this great moment of victory by stating that life was an endless struggle, much like the devāsura-saṃgrāma of the śāstra, with the only certainty being the final meeting with Vivasvant’s son. He told Vidrum that in a fortnight, medical school would begin with challenges even greater than those he had just surmounted. Thus, Vidrum parted from his friend and started riding home with his exultation tempered by a certain anxiety for the future that was to unveil itself. Just as he was reaching home, he ran into Vrishchika, his classmate Lootika’s sister, who brightened his mood by informing him about a massive uprising of certain jāti-s claiming reservations in the admissions. Normally, this would have meant the fear of street violence, but this time around, it meant Vidrum’s vacation would be extended as the opening of the medical school was to be delayed by more than a couple of weeks. Thus, he had more time to savor the high point of his life, along with the probable end of the ceaseless haranguing he faced from his ambitious parents.

His friends Somakhya and Lootika had planned to spend the evening exploiting the clear moonless sky for some astronomical exploration. He did not feel too inclined to join their endeavor, for he never fully grasped the excitement they felt over smudges of light under the eyepiece. His other friend Sharvamanyu was still in the long admission line for his professional school and had called to inform Vidrum that he had no clue when he might be done. Vidrum had the option of going for a movie with Sukar, Gardabh and Mahish, but he felt it prudent to save the money for something else more meaningful than blowing it up at the theater. Hence, he decided to spend some time in solitude by visiting the Aṣṭabhairava temple by the river. Deep within him, he felt some debt to the gods for having taken him across the great raṇa of the exam. It was one of the few temples that had survived from before the passages of the Army of Islam through the region. The temple featured a circle of eight liṅga-s surrounding a central one, and the inner surface of the walls had eroded friezes of the 64 yoginī-s. Images of the eight Mātṛ-s adorned pillars holding up the central shrine. While its name, Aṣṭabhairava, was somewhat known, most visitors simply took it to be an ordinary Śiva temple with a multitude of liṅga-s.

Somakhya had taught Vidrum the names of the eight Bhairava-s and Mātṛ-s, as well as the 64 yoginī-s. Vidrum had noted them in his phone and pulled it out to offer a salutation to each of them, and the central liṅga, which Somakhya had told him was that of Svacchanda Bhairava. While it calmed him down considerably, he could still sense that mixed feeling of triumph with the anxiety of the impending slog. At the back of it was the constant thought of whether he was really up to what life was to hurl at him, like a dart flung by the very god he was worshiping. The solitude of the temple drew him to quietly sit leaning on one of the pillars and just gaze at the liṅga-s and the multitude of goddesses. He remembered Lootika’s words that it should be seen as a puṇyaphala to even have this opportunity of worship.

After a short while, his contemplation was broken by the arrival of four sādhu-s who were beginning a six-month vrata that was to culminate in the great Kumbhamela at Prayāga. As part of that, they were performing a Bhairava-pūja on every Monday until their northward departure. As Vidrum sat silently observing them perform their rite, he heard a noise. He saw a tall yogin-like figure join him in watching the sadhu-s do their puja. Vidrum was a bit surprised by his sudden arrival. From where he sat, he had a good view of the whole temple and its door. The entry of such a tall man would have caught his eye, yet he never saw him come in through the door. Vidrum wondered: “Was he hiding in some recess in the temple?’’ He looked around and saw nothing obvious. Yet the yogin was right there, joining the sadhu-s in their recitation of the Śatarudrīya as per the Mādhyaṃdina-saṃhitā. After the 11th abhiṣeka had been completed, Vidrum got up to receive the prasāda from the sādhu-s. When he turned around, the yogin-like man was gone without a trace. Right then, Vidrum saw a few more votaries enter the temple door and heard the rumble of a scooter and a vehicle horn outside. He darted out to see if the yogin was leaving; instead, he saw three more devotees arriving on a scooter.

Surprised, Vidrum wondered: “I simply could not have missed that guy go out. Rather he seems to have just vanished!’’ Given his varied and deep experience in the domain of the phantoms, the yogin’s disappearance quickly triggered his inner senses: “I don’t think this man was real – I strongly suspect I have just seen a sprite. As Somakhya and Lootika have often told me, I might indeed have a greater sensitivity to see them in pratyakṣa. Neither the sadhu-s nor the votaries who just came showed any signs of having noticed this yogin. Clearly, the sadhu-s had motioned to me to have the prasāda but did not even acknowledge his presence – that is strange!” As Vidrum left the shrine, he made a mental note that it was a sufficiently extraordinary experience that he should tell his friends.

While he had called Somakhya and Lootika to his house the evening of the following day, by some coincidence, a part of that meeting happened much sooner. After returning from the temple, Vidrum went over that night to a nearby shop to get some ice cream for himself and his family to celebrate his great victory. There, he ran into Lootika and her mother – they had stopped on their way back from Somakhya’s house to get some groceries. Lootika’s mother congratulated Vidrum on his heroic performance in the exam and remarked that, for a moment, she did not recognize him because she was distracted by a tall guy with a top knot beside him. Vidrum expressed surprise: “Hmm, I came alone and did not notice anyone next to me.’’ L.M.: “That’s strange. I clearly thought I saw an out-of-the-place guy with you, but he completely vanished. I guess the reflection on the glass door played some weird trick on my eyes!” But Vidrum could not shake it off. She had mentioned the top-knot – it was the very hairstyle of the yogin-like guy he had experienced at the temple! However, Vidrum knew it was too much of a thing to break to his classmate and her mom at this short meeting and kept silent. He eagerly glanced at his classmate, Lootika, to see if she might confirm her mother’s sighting. However, her response was less certain: “I did not register you coming in until my mother reacted as I was looking at these trinkets on the counter. Still, he had the sense she might have seen something and was purposely suppressing it.

As Vidrum returned with his ice cream, he experienced flashes of dread as he digested the fact that Lootika’s mother had seen the same apparition as he had. Not only did this confirm that he had actually seen a phantom, but it also meant that the phantom was following him. On reaching home, his fears were temporarily set aside as he took in the rare break from the normally tense relationship with his family as they praised his victory in the great academic battle and savored the sweetening of their tongues. As they put away their bowls to wash, Vidrum felt drained from the roller-coaster of a day and decided to hit the bed early.

Sometime into his sleep, his body was wracked by some pain which he thought was a consequence of his uncomfortable bed. He tossed and turned a bit, trying to return to his slumber. The next thing he knew, he was on the road leading to his house, walking in from the dead end, which was marked by the wall of the cemetery. A feeling of unease passed over him as he sensed he was not alone. On looking behind, he saw the tall yogin-like figure with the top knot glide noiselessly toward him. He quickened his pace but to no avail, as the figure simply sped up, closing the gap. Finally, just as Vidrum was about to make it to his gate, the figure reached out with his long hands and seized him. Vidrum awoke in a sweat with his heart pounding from what he had just experienced. A part of him felt relieved that it was just a dream, while a part of him felt that the phantom was actually possessing him. He tried his best to set it aside and continue his sleep. Tired from the previous day’s exertions, he fell into a deep slumber for a few hours but then awoke again as he saw the face of the top-knotted phantom repeatedly appear in front of him as though peering down from the canopy of the mosquito net above him.  
By then, it was morning and time to rise. Quickly readying himself, he said to himself that he should try to convince Lootika and Somakhya to come over sooner rather than later, as he felt the phantom yogin had seized him.

He first called Somakhya, but his friend did not seem to get the urgency. Then, remembering this incident with Lootika’s mother, he felt he could convince her more easily and messaged her. Lootika confessed to him right away that, like her mother, she too had seen a fleeting glimpse of the top-knotted yogin but evaded the issue the previous night as her mother was likely to brush aside the phantom explanation. She agreed to press on Somakhya the need to see him as soon as possible. As Vidrum awaited his friends, he felt some pressure on his head and behind his eye – he nervously wondered if it was just his disturbed sleep or a sign of his possession by the phantom. Indeed, he felt a bit of relief when he heard his friends at the gate. The two gazed at him as if inspecting a specimen but found nothing particularly untoward. Somakhya wondered aloud: “We don’t know if this chap is residing within Vidrum in the manner of a possession or is only loosely attached and somewhere in his environs.’’ Lootika whispered in Somakhya’s ear: “I have an idea. We should ask Vidrum to perform a difficult yogāsana that he is normally incapable of. If he does so, then he is within him.’’ S: “Brilliant idea.’’ So they asked Vidrum casually if he could assume the śirasāsana. While Vidrum was an agile guy, that was not an āsana he could perform under normal circumstances. However, that day, he said he would try, and on the very first attempt, he was standing on his head! Lootika again whispered in Somakhya’s ear: “He is undoubtedly possessed, and we have to be careful of this chap, for he seems to be capable of taking control of others.’’ S: “You are right. That also means we can make him use Vidrum as an instrument to talk.’’

Accordingly, they asked Vidrum to return to a comfortable svastikāsana seated and deployed the bhūtavāda-mantra from the secret kalpa of Ṣaṇmukha. On the 108th repetition of the incantation ending in “…skandasyājñayā vada vada svāhā \|’’, Vidrum appeared to snore a few times as if falling into a deep slumber and then suddenly started talking in a strange voice. Below is the transcript of the narration that Lootika recorded:

❁❁❁❁❁❁❁❁

In the long past days, I was a student in the same college as you. It was the first week of college and I was seated at the campus park with a bunch of classmates who had all cleared the entrance exam in the topmost slab. We were having a vigorous discussion on quantum mechanics – you know, particle in a box, Hermite polynomials, tunneling and the like. I was exhilarated by it, and it was clear that I was going to pursue a career in scientific discovery. I was enjoying academics like never before. It was so different from school, where I had to spend time with those in the intellectual slow lane. Here I was in a true satsaṅga. But all this changed a month later. My classmates were no longer interested in the exciting discussions on science for science’s sake but were immersed in trying to crack the exams for a good placement in professional schools. But my mind was not into such mundane pursuits and I had an edge over my classmates due to my extensive knowledge. I was poring over advanced textbooks of the sciences and mathematics and slaking my interests to the utmost. I had ambitions of becoming a physicist working on the frontiers of the science on a foundational “theory of everything.” To my then-limited mind, this meant the generation of a productive theory of quantum gravity.

However, I felt I also needed something akin to that initial satsaṅga to satisfy some inner yearning – it was a need of the soul. It dawned on me that I could only find that in a compatible woman, and decided to pursue that difficult goal. There were many beautiful women all around me, but none that fit with me like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. However, the gods smiled at me and brought a woman my way who showed some interest in the pursuit of knowledge as me. Unfortunately, she, perhaps due to a degree of autism, was given to texting excessively and wanted me to respond in kind rather than via the use of speech. This was quite tiresome for me, and unable to stay apace with her elegant walls of prose, I struggled to keep the conversation going. This meant our blooming relationship unfurled at a glacial pace. Soon, the two years of college came to a close, and both of us had to put our heads down like the rest of the class to pass the entrance exams just as you’ll have done. Unfortunately, in the course of this scramble, my woman slipped through the cracks. Like the rest of my classmates, it seems she chose some professional college, and once the results were announced, I was no longer receiving her fervid prose or a response to my attempts at the same.

I did well in the exam and joined one of the most reputed institutes in the country to pursue a master’s degree in physics with the goal of joining a PhD program in one of the world’s most reputed institutes with top researchers in String Theory. Hence, despite not finding any satsaṅga either in the curriculum or with a woman like the one I had before, I gritted it out in this institute for five long years. At the end of it, I had the requisite degree in hand and joined the lab of a fellow V1 in a famous program in the String Theory among the Mahāmleccha. I worked hard on the Swampland program, trying to delineate productive regions of the String Theory landscape, and made striking progress in this regard. I also had several publications on the side by extending some of the understanding I had gained to the theory of superconductivity. At the end of five more years, I was a brand new PhD in the rarefied highlands of the String Theory – massifs that only the smallest sliver of humanity had scaled – yet deeply empty within.

I did not know if this emptiness arose from the yearning for my lost woman or a burnout from my acute mental labors. It could also be something else: while I was exemplary in my mathematical prowess, deep in my heart, I was a physicist. Other than my superconductivity work, I felt that all my string-theorizing was an elaborate foray into the monstrous moonshine of mathematics with little to show in terms of real physics. Hence, even as I was preparing my interview talk for a faculty position, I suddenly quit. To earn my living, I joined a multinational giant to bring to bear my formidable computational and mathematical arsenal to reduce high-end problems explored by that industry. I was now rich as a man blessed by Vaiśravaṇa – still empty deep within– but at least kept busy by the deliverables needed by corporate life.

I was sent back home from the land of the Mahāmleccha to set up an AI research lab. My life took a most peculiar turn during that visit. I was renting a bungalow from a family that had an autistic son, whom they claimed to have special abilities. I was extremely skeptical of their claims, but they were nice people; hence, I decided to visit them on a holiday and check out their son. I had taken a set of plastic modeling sticks to make various polyhedral figures for the child, but I forgot them in my car when I went in to see them. Their child could not speak but could spell out words with an alphabet keyboard. Some time into the general interaction with my hosts, the child spelt out to his mother the statement that he was happy that I had brought him the modeling sticks and wished to play with them. The mother did not understand, but seeing him being persistent conveyed the message to me, stating clearly that she did not understand what it meant. I almost fell off my chair as there was no one other than me in the house who knew what my intention was and what I had in the car – in fact, in the hurry to meet with them, even I had completely forgotten the gift I had brought. The boy had no way of directly seeing what was in my trunk and had never gone out of the house the entire time. With some trepidation, I told them what his statement meant and went to my car to fetch the gift for the kid.

While the family was thankful for the gift, they were hardly surprised about their son’s mysterious performance. They nonchalantly told me that I should now believe what they had been saying to me all along – their son had the ability to discern unseen things by somehow reading other people’s minds. During my afternoon with my landlords, I saw more than one instance of the same. Needless to say, it had an utterly shattering effect on my very framework of knowledge. How could this even be possible, I asked myself. As I was driving back home from my visit, my mind went back to my old teacher of the śruti. He had introduced me in my youth to a śaiva yogin Kapālagaṇa Deśika who belonged to the lineage of the yoginī Stṛkā, whose samādhi you have visited. I felt he might have answers, for he had demonstrated to me a comparable capacity from his practice of the yogaśastra taught by Mahādeva himself. I realized that I had to practice the same and experience it in pratyakṣa; then, I could use my rational faculties to incorporate it into my worldview.

Ere long via my ācārya, I was back in touch with śrī Kapālagaṇa and set up a meeting with him at the Aṣṭabhairava temple after he had concluded his saṃdhyā devotions. On that fateful day, I sat beside him in one of the recesses of the temple. He offered some sacraments with the incantation of 81 parts into the calvaria he possessed and asked me to take it and pour it at a pit beside the river. After I did so and returned with the skull, he washed it and asked me to sit beside him. Gazing at the skull bowl, he passed his trident over me and spoke: “Before you went for your studies, you had come to me similarly. Drawing into my capacities of prognosis, I had told you that like Jayadratha the saindhava, by the grace of Mahādeva, you will perform many great acts of valor but stumble in the final frontier of your quest. The same awaits you for a second time before you will attain the gaṇatvam in the retinue of Śiva. In the process, you will see a blooming of your yoga powers via which you might grasp what you saw exhibited by the child.’’

Having said that, he informed me that I would meet success in the path known as sahaja – the fructification of my self-born yoga. Starting the next day, I turned my attention to yoga. Soon, I had given up my job and had immersed myself in haṭhayoga to fortify my body for the even harder practice of the antarmukha-yoga as per the śāstra-s promulgated by Śaṃkara. My progress was astonishingly rapid as it had awakened the sahajīya path within me. Graduating from practicing complex āsana-s and mudra-s, I was now deep into the practices of the kulapatha. I suddenly realized I had acquired siddhi-s one night. I was able to perform a dūradṛṣṭi-prayoga without any specific mantra. I used it to locate the woman of my youth and enjoy contact with her despite being at a distance. However, my bliss was rudely broken. I felt my guru śrī Kapālagaṇa break into my very “soul’’ via a parakāya-praveśa. He warned me that I had given into my desires for sambhoga at a time when my siddhi was incomplete. He felt the inevitable would ensue soon, but at some future point, the fruits of my yoga would be completed when I, in a phantom form, will receive a mantra from a V1 woman.

The next day a group of fellow yogin-s and their akhāḍa invited me to go to the Kumbhamela at Prayāga with them. There, due to my prowess, I was elected their mahānt and spent the days performing yoga and giving occasional speeches on the sahajīya-patha and kaulamārga. One day I got into an argument with a group of naked gosain-s. I told them truthfully that their founder had committed a grave affront against the dharma by helping the Paṭhaṇ-s against the Hindus. They were furious and rushed at me with their swords and struck me. I was taken to a Uttar Pradesh government hospital, where I expired the next day. I found my sense of existence continue as a bhūta, though I never joined Śiva’s retinue. I eventually reached this city again by possessing some yātrī-s. Here, I waited for a while, constantly visiting my woman from my youth. Clearly, I was frightening the wits out of her and her new lover, but I was thoroughly enjoying it. It was then that I saw this young man and possessed him for through my yogadṛṣṭi, I realized that he would lead me to my goal of acquiring the needed mantra-s for the completion of my journey.

❁❁❁❁❁❁❁❁

Then via Vidrum, the phantom yogin directly addressed Lootika and asked her to confer him the Jālandharanātha-mantra-s. Taken aback, Lootika turned to Somakhya and said – how do I convey these secret mantra-s to a sprite, that too in a land outside the Panjab? Even as she was asking Somakhya about this, the sprite became increasingly aggressive, and it appeared that Vidrum might rush at Lootika to strike her with a cricket bat. Suddenly, everything went quiet, and Vidrum fell as though asleep on the floor. Lootika explained to Somakhya that she had now heard the incorporeal voice of Kapālagaṇa admonish his student: “While you have found your teacher, you cannot demand the mantra-s from her by force. You still have a while to go to cleanse yourself of your duṣkarman. After you have done so, you will again meet with this girl within the bounds of the Panjab and respectfully ask for these mantra-s.’’

Somakhya: “I guess we must expect him sometime in the future to visit us when we are in the Panjab. Hopefully, we remember this encounter and are not surprised by him then.’’
