+++
title = "Prakīrṇā vicārāḥ"
full_title = "Prakīrṇā vicārāḥ"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/03/24/prakir%e1%b9%87a-vicara%e1%b8%a5/"
date = "2025-03-24"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/03/24/prakir%e1%b9%87a-vicara%e1%b8%a5/).

Prakīrṇā vicārāḥ

When the Egyptian religion came to an end at the hands of the second Abrahamism around 550 CE (following the closure of the temple of Philae around 537 CE by Justinian I), the tradition was already a hoary one – it had lasted at least 3650 years if not more. Undoubtedly, it had undergone many a transformation over that period but had survived as a distinct and recognizable tradition throughout. Over this span, Egypt had weathered numerous assaults as a political entity. We hear in the Greek epics of the Achaean raids on Egypt. In 525 BCE, the Iranians, led by Kambojiya-II, conquered Egypt, and subsequently, they again retook Egypt in 343 BCE. From the Iranians, the crown of Egypt passed to their conquerors, the Macedonians, with the Ptolemies lording over the land till 30 BCE. Thereafter, Egypt was incorporated into the Roman state by Octavian and more or less lost any semblance of political independence despite retaining its religious and cultural identity. Thus, these Indo-European overlays did not destroy Egypt as a cultural entity, as the coming of the neo-Abrahamism, descending from the polity known as the Israel, who were crushed by the Egyptians in 1207 BCE. Despite being a distant Afro-Asiatic tradition, the Egyptian religion influenced religious thought in the IE traditions of India, Greece and Rome and led to the knowledge of the [Golden Ratio in the religious iconography and geometry of those cultures](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2016/08/23/some-meanderings-among-golden-stuff/). But today, Egypt is entirely gone, and gazing at its ruins brings a mixed sense of grandeur, sorrow, and foreboding to the heathen mind.

Wandering on the streets of an old Indian city might give a discerning and historically aware Hindu a similar feeling. Suddenly, one may chance upon a temple excavated from the hard basalts more than a millennium before the current age by Rāṣṭrakūta builders. It looks incomplete – there are faintly recognizable sculptures of deities in the niches that are largely ground down. In some cases, one doesn’t know if the temple was abandoned before completion or if it was reduced to the current state by the third Abrahamism – Ishmael’s merry dāḍhīvāle. One might hear the ignorant local Hindu call it a construction of the hoary sons of Pāṇḍu from the National Epic. Hearing this, one is reminded of the later-day Iranians calling the monuments of their Haxāmanišiya monarchs as those of their epic hero Rostam. The old religion survives, but its historical memory and “spirit’’ are considerably denuded, at least among the masses – Marūnmāda, Pretonmāda and the Nīladrāpi have taken their toll. As we thus rambled on in the old city, for some reason, our mind went back to an even more remote time, when the first of our Āryan ancestors encountered the Harappans – strange and mysterious people who exist within us, but in a state of near total amnesia. We utter a few words of their old language even today, like karpāsa, i.e., the cotton they cultivated on the plains of the great river that they called something like “Vaiśambālya’’ (Sindhu), but beyond that, we know little to nothing of their tongue or their inner world. Unlike that amnesia, we at least have a strong mooring in the traditions of the IE side of our ancestry despite that memory being very gappy among the masses, along with a gaping erasure of the medieval in their minds. To us, it is indeed a matter of great awe to even contemplate how the first encounters between the Āryans, the Harappans and the miscellaneous hunter-gatherer tribes would have occurred in northern India. As we gave these thoughts verbal articulation while at Indraprastha, an old classmate of ours suggested that we visit a partially excavated Harappan site but we did not get the time to pull that off. The Harappan, the mysterious Ocher-colored pottery culture with Āryan imprints, and the five Prastha-s of the National Epic, all woven together in the land, give a sense of the process of the making of the nation that few of its current constituents are able to connect with these days.

Coming to the present and the hazy future, we saw those subtle signs of the coming nirṇaya that would be mostly missed by those with a secular bent. Our former classmate in Indraprastha had shaken off old secular pretenses and had come to fully appreciate it. That gave us some hope. But elsewhere, like another acquaintance in the Pāñcanada and among those in the peninsular lands which had manfully resisted the army of Islam and led the last Hindu empire, we witnessed a complaisance that was more a cause for despair. The capture of particular strategic niches by the marūnmatta (and the pretonmatta) is obvious for those with open eyes. This plays out against a backdrop of considerable improvement to the general thuggishness of the teeming masses that has come about under the rule of the Lāṭānartasiṃha. If the quintessential trait of the masses to relieve themselves of their sputum on the road were somehow curbed (as in Thailand), then the Svacchabhārata-abhiyāna would indeed have gone a long way: unfortunately, we are far from that goal. Yet, several once derelict neighborhoods have relatively improved in their cleanliness over the period since when the Dillīśvara inspired the masses with a broom in his hand. This has ironically lent a degree of timelessness to these pockets as they sort of remain islands of relative constancy from a bygone era. Together, these sights sent our thoughts wandering back to the extinct Egyptians. On the one hand, they yield a feeling similar to what the old Egyptians might have felt in terms of survivorship through the vicissitudes of their existence over the eons. But on the other, to the historically aware, this also betrays a dark feeling of the “Ante-tonitrus” – like what was to befall the Egyptians in the mid-500s. Thus, the discerning man feels like a soothsayer seeing the signs before the blast-off of Merapi in the luxuriant Yavadvīpa. Only in our case the blast-off would not be a natural cataclysm but that emanating from the Neo-Abrahamisms.

A man is a microcosm of his nation – in some ways, the central Spenglerian idea. He has a shaky infancy, a vigorous youth, perhaps a cruising middle age beset with a few mishaps here and there and then the decline of decrepitude. The same happens to a nation. All men ultimately die – some after a sapping illness and others after relatively good health late into their lives. The story of Egypt comes back again – the nation lived well into senility (the same root as sanātana) before perishing. All nations that we have known from history have ultimately perished irrespective of the vigor they displayed in youth or the maturity in middle age. When faced with this, a Hindu can still be optimistic – he can point to the fact that in his tradition, there is a certain acceptance of cyclicity – civilization ebbs and flows over vast yuga-s. Even something in a man is said to survive his death and associate with a new corpus. At least in the microcosmic example, most people lose all or most memories of their pūrvajanman. So one could ask: if this were to happen to a civilization, would it represent continuity at all? After all, even if it has reincarnated, it has lost all past memory. However, many H hold that there are exceptional cases when the memory does span multiple metempsychotic events – this is especially so if an individual displays special genius. This memory from the pūrvajanman is said to present itself as inexplicable virtuosity in the current one. If this were true of civilizations, then one could have a speck of optimism because if you had shown genius, as the H did in their past civilization, then some of that might present itself in its reincarnated version.

Irrespective of whether the genius of our civilization still survives, we have a more pressing question: where exactly in the cycle are we currently situated? Given the near universally accepted hoariness of our civilization, it stands to reason that we are definitely not in our vigorous youth. We could be in the phase of a prolonged middle-age slump from which we might bounce back, or else we could already be in decrepitude. Others might state that we had already died when the English conquest ended our nation in 1857, and we are in the troubled disease-ridden infancy of a new birth. We do think there are some markers to distinguish between these possibilities. This is primarily seen in the social response to modernism with its vanguard religion of left-liberalism, a secular evolute of Abrahamism. While this issue does not impact all communities of Hindudom uniformly, we see its effects across the board. Although we cannot specifically comment on its impact on all communities, as insiders, we do acutely sense its repercussions on our own subculture. Our sub-strain of V1s had, for the most part, belonged to the H elite and retained this status through the English cataclysm. In fact, they adapted much better to the new environment than many other groups, giving them an initial illusion of success. We believe this was because, in regions where Hindudom had shaken off the shackles of marūnmāda, it was transitioning to its own endogenous modernity. This modernity was different from the Occidental one but had certain common features that allowed adoption or syncretism with other strains of modernity. However, by the 4th or 5th generation of this encounter and syncretic development, the full effect of the secularized ekarākṣasonmāda concealed within the Occidental one started having its destructive effects. Its most damaging effects cannot be discussed explicitly in public, primarily because it would be a personally bitter pill to swallow for a subset of the readers. However, for the discerning, the information is out there to glean – other civilizations have gone through this tunnel before and have not come out alive at the other end. Simply put, a civilization needs population stability or expansion if the memes defining it are to survive. Anything that breaks the population stability denudes memetic survival resulting in loss of identity and civilizational decline. The primary effect of the swallowing of Occidental modernism in the transition to global modernity (at least in our community) has been its strong differential impact on the two sexes. Those who are observant will note that the consequence of this has essentially pointed in the direction of the demise of the community. Hence, we fear that a community that has reached this state is in or close to senility with its inexorable consequences.

Then, sitting in solitude, as our wanderings drew to a close, we pondered upon the philosophical underpinnings of the fate that had befallen us. We believe that the ancestral African Great Ape was patrilocal in its social structure and that Homo ancestrally retained this primitive condition (bonobos are the derived state). Consequently, we suspect that there was selection for males to retain stronger ideological mooring to form male-male bonds to defend their familial territory. In contrast, females were selected to be ideologically more fluid to adapt to the new group they would move into for mating. We posit that this biological substrate, along with the other basic primate parameters for mate choice when interacting with modernism, can result in seriously deleterious expressions that can be socially destructive. This lies at the heart of the breakdown we are seeing within our subculture. At an experiential level, as primates are social animals, all first-person experiences of human interactions can be seen as refractions of a network in the ideal world down in the physical world. In the course of certain interactions or due to intellectual cerebration, one may get some glimpse of the ideal network. Once one has this glimpse, the mismatch between that and its refracted image in the real world is rather jarring. This results in a yearning for the idealized network. Some people experience some approximation of that in the real world, but most do not. This is particularly accentuated at the time of memetic ravages like those caused by modernism. The consequence is a deep experience of suffering like the one underlying the world seen by the tathāgata.
