+++
title = "Nits Make Lice"
full_title = "Nits Make Lice"
date = "2018-08-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/30/nits-make-lice/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/30/nits-make-lice/).

Nits Make Lice

The current craze for surgically mutilating troubled high school girls
(Rapid Onset Gender Dysphoria) can be looked at another way: as a really
slick exercise in negative eugenics. Being nuts is fairly heritable: I
have no doubt that many of these girls’ mothers were cutting themselves
( while listening to grunge) back in the 90s. If you remove their
ovaries, these girls aren’t going to have descendants: end of story.

Genetic tendencies to insanity in the next generation will be weaker
than they otherwise would have been. This approach is far more effective
than castrating autogynephilic Decathlon winners and economists, because
it’s happening early in the reproductive schedule.

You might think it would be difficult to induce parents to have their
daughters spayed, but apparently you can convince bien-pensant liberals
of absolutely anything, as long as it’s false. Gotta keep up with the
Jim Joneses. They even pay for it!

Generally, negative eugenics has a bad reputation. Deservedly so:
usually it was coercive, and people have a right to be left alone. But
if you can con them into damaging or destroying themselves, that’s all
right. That wouldn’t be possible if people were stuffed full of sense
and agency, but of course they’re not. They don’t automatically think
for themselves or come to correct conclusions, even on old, long-settled
questions. Many of them are saps, really. Sad.

Apparently the real goal of the powers that be is to purge some kinds of
insanity from society, rather like Oliver Wendell Holmes: Three
generations of lunatics are enough.

Don’t pay attention to what the New York Times says: look at the
long-term consequences.























