+++
title = "Natural Aristocracy"
full_title = "Natural Aristocracy"
date = "2018-08-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/20/natural-aristocracy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/20/natural-aristocracy/).

Natural Aristocracy

Gregory Clark finds that social status is strongly heritable. Combined
with a very high degree of assortative mating for the genetic factors
behind this heritability, social mobility is surprisingly low. This
happens without anyone particularly trying to make it this way –
although it can happen less if people do try to stop it.An interesting
example out of Plomin’s group: genetics explains“twice as much
variance in educational attainment and occupational status in the
post-Soviet era compared with the Soviet era.”

Plomin ( or maybe more exactly his student Kaili Rimfeld) says that
“The extent of genetic influence on these social outcomes can be viewed
as an index of success in achieving meritocratic values of equality of
opportunity by rewarding talent and hard work, which are to a large
extent influenced by genetic factors, rather than rewarding
environmentally driven privilege. ”

I don’t think that statement is entirely wrong. Estonia today is better
run than it was in 1953, or 1990. But I am just as sure that it isn’t
entirely right. We’re talking about genetic factors that tend to
increase social status: intelligence helps, sure, but the people at the
top, the people running the show are rarely the smartest – or the most
decent, or the most effective. If we define ‘merit’ as a tendency to
effective action that favors the best interest of society as a whole –
surely what high-status people have more of is only loosely associated
with ‘merit’. They have more of what works for *themselves.* Call it
moxie.

So the ideal social policy would attempt – and succeed – at picking
people for high-status job that were good at getting the job done – not
just good at getting the job. Talent and hard work are influenced by
genetic factors, but then so is being a back-stabbing, credit-stealing
asshole.

I don’t think it would be easy: nature’s agin it. But it’s possible. I
think. To a degree.

What should the Classical Greeks have done with Alcibiades, who surely
had enough genetic moxie for a platoon? Answer: shoot the bastard. Him
better off dead.

In principle this is a question that liberals should be thinking about,
but apparently thinking clearly – about anything – is a job that
American liberals just won’t do.











