+++
title = "PTSD"
full_title = "PTSD"
date = "2018-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/18/ptsd/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/18/ptsd/).

PTSD

You know, it shouldn’t exist. Human history and prehistory is crammed
with all kind of mayhem and trauma: infant mortality, infanticide,
genocidal fights with neighboring tribes. You routinely lost family and
routinely killed enemies. Childbirth hurts a lot. What’s the adaptive
strategy, in all of these situations? ? Get over it.

Although you can find academic papers talking about PTSD in the ancient
world, they’re bullshit: people coming out of the Legions after putting
in their 25 were not famous for screaming in their sleep. Neither were
veterans of the American Civil War: nobody worried whether veterans
like Benjamin Harrison or Garfield were damaged goods. But although it
was the bloodiest war in American history it was mainly a rifle war, not
an artillery war. You rarely got your brain thumped.

But in WWI, we heard a lot about ‘shell shock’. Later, in WWII, ‘combat
fatigue’ or ‘battle neurosis’. Artillery wars. I would guess that what
actually happened was a combination of people finding a way to avoid
getting killed, and brain damage due to nearby explosions. After
experience in Iraq and Afghanistan, plus football and boxing, people are
[thinking](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/magazine/what-if-ptsd-is-more-physical-than-psychological.html)
seriously about those explosions as a cause of PTSD.

Psychology in the 20th century looked for social/environmental causes of
mental problems – toilet training, ‘refrigerator mothers’, ‘absent
father/overprotective mother’, ‘double binds’. And of other social
problems: school could make you smart or dumb, kids were ‘depraved
because they were deprived’, blah blah.

As far as I can tell they were entirely wrong. Genetics and physical
trauma ( which includes iodine shortages). No real sign that they were
right about those other problems either: certainly interesting that the
programs designed to ameliorate those problems, based on the standard
environmental assumptions, never, ever work.



