+++
title = "Tracing the NāgaBharata"
full_title = "Tracing the NāgaBharata Conflict"
date = "2014-08-30"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/08/30/tracing-the-naga-bharata-conflict/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/08/30/tracing-the-naga-bharata-conflict/).


					Tracing the Nāga-Bharata Conflict				



[ August 30, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/08/30/tracing-the-naga-bharata-conflict/ "Permalink to Tracing the Nāga-BharataConflict")

-   in [Delving into the
    Text](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/delving-into-the-text/),
    [Vedic
    History](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/vedic-history/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/08/30/tracing-the-naga-bharata-conflict/#respond)

# Tracing the Nāga-BharataConflict

In our **[previous
article](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/07/28/same-names-and-priestly-plagiarism-a-note-on-identity-and-conflict/ "Same Names and Priestly Plagiarism: A Note on Identity and Conflict")**,
we had ended with a hypothesis pertaining to a possible Pre-Khāndava
Dahana conflict between the Nāgas and the Bharatas, or even the
ancestors of the latter. After I had finished the previous article, work
had occupied me intensely and energy and time to research and write,
could not be found. But I would do a brief, cursory review of texts
during breaks. After coming across a reference in an insightful and
scholarly, Āṅglīka-Bhāṣā book whose title we may state in Deva-Bhāṣā as
“Mahābhārata Pitṛvamśa, I decided to search the Kumbhakona Recension for
that verse and found it:

“AyuH purUravA rAjannahuSheNa yayAtinA

tatraiva nivasanti sma khANDave tu nRipottama” Mbh (Kumbhakona) 1.227.44

Source:
<http://sanskritdocuments.org/mirrors/mahabharata/mbhK/txt/mbhK01.itx>
(Note: Just Ctrl+F for “Ayuh Pururava”)

The author had given the reference as “1.app108:50-51”. It was obvious
that this verse was from Ādi Parva as that is where Dhṛtarāṣṭra, after
counsel with Bhīṣma and others, tells the Pāndavas to live at
Khāndavaprastha. However “app108” was unclear and after a brief e-mail
correspondence with the author himself, I had learnt that this verse was
from the appendix passage no.108 from the Southern Recension. Here is a
paraphrased form of a part of his clarification:

“I can’t remember where I first came upon this detail. This appendix
passage no. 108 is present in all manuscripts of the southern recension
(i.e. the manuscripts in Malayalam, Telugu and Grantha scripts) and also
in manuscript D4 of the northern recension. So it would be in any
translation or edition of the southern recension (e.g. the so-called
Kumbhakonam edition)”

As for the appendix passage bearing the exactly same verse, go here.

<http://bombay.indology.info/mahabharata/apps/UR/Supp01.txt>

Again, just Ctrl+F for “Ayuh Pururava”.



Now that we are done with that slightly messy area on
manuscript/recension, let us delve into the text as well as other
evidences that may shed some light on the Nāga-Bhārata Conflict.

Roughly translated, the above quoted verse would mean that Ayus,
Pururavas, Nahuṣa and Yayati all ruled Khāndavaprastha. This verse is
found in a sufficient number of manuscripts that it cannot be dismissed
as a mere interpolation and even if it is, it still cannot be ignored
because interpolations are functional. Thus, there is no case against
its significance to understanding the precursors to the conflict.

Also, it would be very difficult for the readers to suppose that the
Pāndavas readily agreed to live in a desolate Khāndavaprastha which was
now an overgrown forest, without an iota of justification. On the other
hand, if Khāndavaprastha had held some sort of ancestral connection,
they may have felt less inhibited about taking up residence there.
Additionally, given that the decision to allocate Khāndavaprastha to the
Pāndavas was made by both Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Bhīṣma, it seems that the
Kurus did feel a sense of entitlement and ownership over it.



In that case, could we conjecture that after Yayati’s time, when Puru
had established his capital at Pratiṣṭhāna and the others in the
Pañcajana had established separate kingdoms, Khāndavaprastha got
gradually overtaken by Nāgas? Interestingly, this conjecture is
supported by another observation. We had noted in an early post that
Purukutsa of the Ikṣvākavas had fought against the Mauneya Gandharvas
(mythologized descendants of Gāndhāra of Druhyu clan) from the Narmada
region upon the request of Nāgas who were despoiled by them. \[Footnote
1\] Khāndavaprastha (Modern day Khandwa) is definitely part of the
region nourished by the Narmadā river and its tributaries. Since
Purukutsa is posterior to Yayati by a few generations (Refer to dynastic
list here), it is reasonable to hold that the Nāgas had gradually seized
control of the Khāndava region.

Another noteworthy point is the fact that the city eventually built by
the Pāndavas at Khāndavaprastha is twice compared to Bhogavatī, the
capital city of the Nāgas, for its beauty. These two verses are found in
both the Northern and Southern recensions:

“pāṇḍurābhraprakāśena himarāśi nibhena ca

śuśubhe tat puraśreṣṭhaṃ nāgair bhogavatī yathā” 1.199.30



“pañcabhis tair maheṣvāsair indrakalpaiḥ samanvitam

śuśubhe tat puraśreṣṭhaṃ nāgair bhogavatī yathā” 1.199.49



<http://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/mbs/mbs01199.htm>



Another point to consider would be that Hastināpura is also addressed as
Nāgasāhvya although it is pointed out that Nāga in this instance refers
to “elephant” as Hastināpura is also referred to as Gajasahvya.
\[Footnote 2\] Therefore, this cannot be adduced as evidence. However,
based on what we have noted so far, we can legitimately allow for a
pre-Khāndava Dahana struggle between the Kurus and Nāgas.









Footnotes



1\. There seems to be an interesting case of conflict between the Nāgas
and the Gandharvas. Apart from the one involving Purukutsa, we may also
note the case of Takṣaśilā. This famous city was founded by Takṣa, son
of Bharata Dāsarathi after the latter’s defeat of the Sailusa
Gandharvas. As we may poignantly note after Pargiter (Refer to Pg. 279
in his book available
[**here**](https://aryanthought.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/pargiter-ancient-indian-historical-tradition.pdf)),
there is no further mention of Takṣa or his descendants and for that
matter, none of the kingdoms of Rāma’s brothers and we may thus
conclude, in the case of Takṣa that his kingdom may have been absorbed
by the Gandharvas (Mythologized form of the Drauhyava descending from
Gāndhāra). If this could be assumed, together with the statement in
texts that Takṣaka of the Nāgas had taken control of that city during
the period of the Mahābhārata narrative, we may conjecture that there
was a Nāga-Gandharva struggle.

Is it possible that this struggle reflects a subconscious working of a
literary trope pertaining to a violent strife between the aerial
(Gandharvas) and chthonic (Nāgas, whose subterranean references are very
obvious) forces? Or does it refer to two Central Asian tribes who had
maintained a distinct identity outside the mainstream Ārya culture of
the Puru-Ikśvākus? Perhaps, the textual references to the fine horses of
Gāndhāra should evoke the image of a violent, raiding tribe that had
raided and attacked the lands of the serpent-totemic Nāgas who were a
settled and probably wealthy people. (Their being gem-rich also makes
sense in light of their chthonic associations.)



2\. One can find numerous instances of the references to Hastināpura as
Nāgasāhvya, Gajasāhvya or even Vāraṇasāhvya in the Mahābhārata. Some
argue that the word, “Nāga” also refers to elephants and since “Gaja”
and “Vāraṇa” occur in place of “Nāga” and also because the elephantine
references cohere well with the story of Hastināpura being founded by
Hastin, fifth in descent from Bharata Dauṣyanti (Hastin meaning elephant
as well), Hastināpura is not related to the Nāgas. For an interesting
discussion of the term, “Nāgasāhvya “and its relation to metrical
structure, check [this
out](http://themotherindia.com/2012/08/21/sanskrit-tidbits-iii/).

Tags: [bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[gandhara](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/gandhara/),
[gandharvas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/gandharvas/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[india](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/india/),
[krishna](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/krishna/),
[kuru](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/kuru/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[naga](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/naga/),
[nagas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/nagas/),
[pandava](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/pandava/),
[puranas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puranas/),
[puru](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puru/),
[serpents](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/serpents/),
[snakes](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/snakes/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedas/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

