+++
title = "Beating the Spooks"
full_title = "Beating the Spooks"
date = "2019-02-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/02/20/beating-the-spooks/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/02/20/beating-the-spooks/).

Beating the Spooks

Back in 2002, I was sure that Iraq didn’t have a nuclear program (and
said so) , but the nation’s intelligence agencies ( along with the
Administration, Congress, the press and the pundits) thought otherwise.
I was right.

How did this happen?

I knew that there were, effectively, only four ways to develop
fissionable materials: gaseous diffusion, calutrons, centrifuges and
breeder reactors ( the plutonium path). All were technically difficult,
expensive, and in many cases had signatures that we would have noticed
using our ‘national technical means’, such as spy satellites, aerial
reconnaissance, etc.

Gaseous diffusion requires enormous facilities, which were not seen. It
also requires knowledge of obscure materials properties and huge
electricity usage, also not seen. Scratch gaseous diffusion.

The Iraqis had made a gram or so of enriched material back in 1990 with
calutrons, surprising because calutrons are incredibly inefficient ( as
Lawrence showed in the Manhattan Project). Couldn’t have been resumed
with using vast amount of power, which wasn’t happening – we would have
noticed. Also pretty difficult under sanctions – you couldn’t buy the
parts anymore from competent countries. Scratch calutrons.

Centrifuges are tough engineering, take a big facility ( for the
thousands of centrifuges). Without imports ( or money), Iraq would have
had to use their native talents. But the Kurds were in revolt, the
Shi’ites had recently revolted. Can’t hire them. The country was half
illiterate, and had an average IQ in the 80s – and performed
accordingly. In other words, Iraq was not Germany. This was apparently
unknown to the intelligence agencies. Scratch the centrifuges.

Breeder reactors leak odd noble gas isotopes. Detectable, but not
detected.Scratch breeder reactors and plutonium.

Some loon suggested that the Iraqis had perhaps mastered laser isotope
separation – when, at the time, nobody else on Earth had managed to do,
in spite of vast efforts involving thousands of physicists in the US,
France, and the Soviet Union. This when nobody in Iraq ( or anywhere
else in the Moslem world) had invented or discovered anything in seven
hundred years.

Parenthetically, North Korea managed a nuclear program, without a lot
of outside help or money. But A. Koreans are smart, B. North Korea
didn’t have \~80% of the country in rebellion, and C. much of their
effort was detected by our ‘national technical means’ – they didn’t
manage to keep it invisible. That’s hard.

In order to achieve what the Bush Administration alleged, Iraq would
have to create an undetectable-by-the-US Manhattan project, with no
money, even though they’re not technically skilled, and with most of
the population unusable because disloyal ( and poorly educated morons).

Speaking of: someone once said that doubting the Iraqi capacity to pull
off a secret invisible, undetectable nuclear program was racist. Indeed.

Money: oil exports were allowed under the Oil-For-Food program, but
those monies could only be spent on approved imports. Approved by the
US. We would take our time approving pencils.

It was pretty easy to observe & control their oil exports, with only
one port (Basra).

Iraq got a little money from kickbacks and truck smuggling. I estimated
around a billion a year ( from press reports) . Barely enough to pay for
air conditioning the palaces.

So where and how did the intelligence agencies go wrong?

First, they had to please the boss: I didn’t. They told Bush II what he
wanted to hear. Second, on technical issues, very few people in
intelligence actually know anything. This was demonstrated again later,
when the CIA and DIA concluded that we had found ‘mobile biological
labs’ in Iraq. Which were actually vans with portable hydrogen
generators – hydrogen for balloons intended to measure high-altitude
winds, for increasing the accuracy of artillery. Pinheads.

I’ve heard that the CIA had *one guy* that knew enough to do the
capacity analysis I’ve outlined, and he was working on something else.

There were guys at DOE that knew everything there is to know about the
nuclear production cycle, including centrifuges – but they were ignored.
The CIA found its own ‘expert’ – a mechanical engineer that had worked
on the stable platform for a centrifuge project at Oak Ridge – not the
centrifuges themselves. Laid off, he became the CIA’s centrifuge
oracle, even though he knew little about the subject.

On technical issues, what do Administration political appointees,
Congress, the press, and the pundits know? Nothing. Don’t know much
about biology, don’t know much about history. They certainly don’t know
jack about the nuclear production cycle.

But maybe the CIA is good at humint? No: arguably worse than any other
intelligence agency in history.

Have things gotten any better? No.











