+++
title = "The BIG date"
full_title = "The BIG date"
date = "2006-08-01"
upstream_url = "https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/08/01/the-big-date/"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/08/01/the-big-date/).

The BIG date

I found this forward from Craig’s List hilarious (below the fold)….

So I answer this girls post because she seemed like the type that I  
was looking for; laid back, fun, sexy, with a good sense of humor an  
attractive description. I sent her my pic and I suppose she was  
impressed because she got back to me lighning quick. At 6’2 198lbs and  
GQ good looks, I’m not going to say I’m the hottest guy on craigslist  
but let’s just say I do ok for myself and rarely field a complaint. So  
this girl sends me a pic back and to be honest she seemed attractive  
and very busty too (bonus!) She told me she was curvy, but of course  
all the weight was in the right places. I was slightly worried that  
she might be a tad bit bigger than I had hoped but she couldn’t be  
that bad, right? Wrong!

I got up to the UWS a little late and was 3 blocks from were we  
decided to meet so I called her. She picks up the phone and says:  
“OH!! I SEE YOU I SEE YOU!!!” And begings frantically waving at me  
from over 2 blocks away like she needs rescue on a sinking ship. I’m  
like thinking , jesus, calm down already. I hang up the phone. As I  
approached (still over a block away) I had to clear my eyes hoping I  
wasn’t seeing straight. This girl was big. Real big! I almost turned  
right around and ran but honestly I felt like a deer in the  
headlights, more or less mentally paraylised but still moving slowly  
toward her. As I got closer the visual carnage was too much to  
contemplate: A girl that was 5’0 190lbs easy but the weight was ‘in  
the right places?’ Now I’m no fashion plate but this girl was more  
than a train wreck. Here’s what she was wearing: shorts past her fat  
knees, sneakers with white socks, and a Sponge Bob t-shirt tucked into  
her shorts with a black belt. Are you kidding me? A s we were walking  
to the corner bar I noticed her limping. I looked down. Her foot was  
in a cast! Holy crap, I kid you not!

So I’m in the bar with her and trying to figure out how not to be  
mean. Hell, I even bought her drink (which put me 6 dollars over my  
fat chick spending budget of zero for the year). I was thinking maybe  
just maybe she was really a cool person with a great personality.  
Maybe she’ could make me laugh? Wrong again. She went on to tell me  
during over the course of the drink the following things: about her  
grandmother who died but she missed the funeral because she hadn’t  
enough money to get home, her mom who was just diagnosed with breast  
cancer, her cat in her apartment that won’t stop pissing on the  
furniture, (that sounded so homey), the fact that she’s moving to the  
bronx next month, her metro card that was stolen on the C train, her  
mounting student loan debt, and the fact that she thinks most guys are  
slime and only want sex.

I told her, ‘you know what?’. “I’m slime, A big Slime”. “So, I better  
go”. I drank the remainder of my beer like a frat boy in a chugging  
contest. Put my glass down pat her on the back, wished her luck and  
left.  
Does it get any more depressing that that?

### Related Posts:

- ["It's Craig's
  List"](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/04/09/its-craigs-list/) - [Not sexual
  charity](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2007/08/15/not-sexual-charity/) - [The software distribution
  revolution](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2009/12/06/the-software-distribution-revolution/) - [The perils of
  Wikipedia](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/08/26/the-perils-of-wikipedia/) - [Smart & hot
  actresses](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2007/10/11/smart-hot-actresses/) - [Brit Pic](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/04/30/brit-pic/)

### *Related*

[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gnxp.com%2FWordPress%2F2006%2F08%2F01%2Fthe-big-date%2F&linkname=The%20BIG%20date "Facebook")[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gnxp.com%2FWordPress%2F2006%2F08%2F01%2Fthe-big-date%2F&linkname=The%20BIG%20date "Twitter")[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/email?linkurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gnxp.com%2FWordPress%2F2006%2F08%2F01%2Fthe-big-date%2F&linkname=The%20BIG%20date "Email")[](https://www.addtoany.com/share)
