+++
title = "Wrestling with the angel"
full_title = "Wrestling with the angel Fight all night (Further thoughts on intercultural philosophy)"
date = "2019-06-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/06/18/wrestling-with-the-angel-fight-all-night-further-thoughts-on-intercultural-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/06/18/wrestling-with-the-angel-fight-all-night-further-thoughts-on-intercultural-philosophy/).

Wrestling with the angel: Fight all night (Further thoughts on intercultural philosophy)

I hope that readers will bear with me while I keep on exploiting the
metaphor of [wrestling with the
angel](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/17/wrestling-with-the-angel/).
There are a few more indications, in fact, we can take out of it. First,
Jacob *fights*. He does not just encounter the angel, he fights with
him. Similarly, in order for the encounter with another philosopher to
be really transformative, one should not just engage with a restatement
of one’s ideas, and rather look for points of difference and not just of
harmony. One is not transformed with the encounter of the n-th
philosopher who agrees with oneself.

Then, Jacob fights *all night*. He fights while not being completely
sure about the strength of his adversary, whom he cannot see. He tests
his adversary’s and his own strength throughout a long wrestling.
Similarly, although a short quote by a Chinese philosopher or an Arabian
one might embellish our articles and impress our readers, this is not
what I mean when I am talking about a fruitful transformative encounter.
For that, one needs time and ongoing engagement.  
An easy device in this sense is to engage with a full text, not just an
impressive quote. By engaging with the full text, this unleashes its
potential for a cross-cultural fertilisation, insofar as the same
question is given a different answer, or vice versa, or the context is
completely different. It is not irrelevant whether the discussion about
the existence of free will in Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, for instance, is
prompted by the problem of the validity of the injunctions of sacred
texts asking one to do something (see Freschi, ”Free will in
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta”, *Religion Compass*). In this way, one can go
beyond a trivial restatement of what one knew with a different voice. It
takes time, but we are doing philosophy, not emergency surgery.
