+++
title = "A Sellarsian solution"
full_title = "A Sellarsian solution for the self?"
date = "2019-06-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/06/09/a-sellarsian-solution-for-the-self/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/06/09/a-sellarsian-solution-for-the-self/).

A Sellarsian solution for the self?

The [conflict between Buddhism and qualitative
individualism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/how-can-you-be-yourself-if-there-is-no-self)
is a major difficulty for my own philosophy. In addressing that
conflict, there is one approach that has repeatedly stuck out at me. I
don’t think it actually *solves* the problem, but it may be a step
towards a solution.

That step is to build on the
[similarities](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/01/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/)
between the Buddhist conventional/ultimate distinction and Wilfrid
Sellars’s distinction between the manifest and the scientific image.
Both of these dichotomies are focused on the human person or self: at
the conventional (*sammuti*/*vohāra*) or manifest level, selves and
their differences are real and important, and stories can be told; at
the ultimate (*paramattha*) or scientific level, selves disappear,
reduced to smaller particles that form a more fundamental level of
explanation.

We may note here a key way that Sellars departs from at least
Buddhaghosa’s Buddhism. He agrees with Buddhaghosa’s view that the
ultimate/scientific level is an important respect *truer* than the
conventional/manifest. But the further difference is very important: for
Sellars, the manifest image is necessary for *ethics* (and probably
aesthetics and politics.) It is at the manifest level that ethical or
normative claims make sense; the scientific image is normatively inert.
Cells may be more *complex* than atoms, but they’re not *better*; they
just *are*. Natural science has not found ways in which concepts of good
and bad help us to explain anything. Once upon a time, when [God was the
best available scientific
explanation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/02/the-god-hypothesis/)
for biological diversity, they might have. But that is no longer
remotely the case. So, for Sellars, we need the manifest image, with its
less scientific approach, in order to be able to speak about good and
bad.

I suspect that Sellars is right about this. I am coming to believe that
we do indeed need to posit both a conventional essentialist level of
reality and an ultimate reductionist one – and that that ultimate level
of reality is normatively inert. All value, all goodness and badness –
ethical, aesthetic, soteriological –exist at the conventional level.
Buddhaghosa would not agree with me on that point: for him the
*dhamma*s, the ultimate simples to which reality is reducible, are
intrinsically laden with the qualities of *kusala* and *akusala*, good
and bad. Yet I think Śāntideva and his Madhyamaka fellows probably
*would* agree with me, and with Sellars. Their conception of the
ultimate is very different – it is non-conceptual, *anabhilāpya*, beyond
words – but that also makes it beyond value. Śāntideva says at
Bodhicaryāvatāra IX.11 that puṇya and pāpa, goodness and badness, arise
only in one who has illusions. In that respect Śāntideva turns out
closer to the
[Pudgalavādins](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/how-can-you-be-yourself-if-there-is-no-self/),
who argued that ideas of good and bad karma could make no sense without
the concept of a person. (Students encountering Buddhism often ask, “if
there’s no self, what gets reincarnated?” It is a good question, and one
that also applies to a naturalized karma without rebirth.)

Sellars’s scientific reality, then, is somewhere between Buddhaghosa’s
and Śāntideva’s conceptions of ultimate truth: like Buddhaghosa’s it is
describable in reductionist terms, but like Śāntideva’s it is not a
source of normativity. Goodness and badness are part of the manifest,
conventional, level, the level where stories can be told. And it is at
that conventional level where the qualitative individualist concept of a
true self –[like any Aristotelian
essence](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/11/the-metaphysical-prehistory-of-qualitative-individualism/)
–can exist.

When we put non-self in Sellarsian terms in this way, I think a couple
things may follow. It allows room for our preexisting reasons for
action, which I think are essential starting points for us to have any
reasons for action at all. I don’t accept [Śāntideva’s famous
argument](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/03/of-anatman-and-altruism/)
that we should act selflessly because there is no self, because –[as
Stephen Harris pointed
out](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/03/of-anatman-and-altruism/) –
without the existence of beings it is no longer clear why we should do
anything at all, including prevent suffering (“no one disputes that” is
[not a sufficient
answer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/the-buddhist-problem-of-value/)).
Rather, ethical action needs to start from our preexisting reasons at
the conventional level –as in some sense [it already
does](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/)
in Buddhist societies. And that conventional level may well have room
for qualitative individualism.

The thorny question that perplexes any such approach, of course, is the
first question that Hegel would ask: what is the *relation between*
these two levels of reality? *That* is not an easy question to answer,
for Buddhaghosa or for Sellars or even for Śāntideva. Hegel would take
that question as a fatal weakness in all of their systems, such that
both levels must be fully incorporated into something higher. I am not
sure that I agree with him, but am also not sure I have a way to answer
that criticism. It is likely the next question I need to wrestle with.

All of this is why I have found it
[so](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1/)
[important](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-2/)
[to](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/05/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/)
[disagree](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/04/the-importance-of-reading-buddhaghosa-closely/)
[at](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/04/there-is-only-name-and-form/)
[such](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly)
[length](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/conventional-teaching-wrongly-taken-as-an-equal)
with Maria Heim’s and Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad’s non-ontological reading
of Buddhaghosa. I do *wish* they were right that Buddhaghosa sees the
ultimate truth as no better than the conventional; it would be much
easier for me to agree with him if they were so. I just find that
Buddhaghosa’s writings do not support that interpretation. On the other
hand, I find it of central importance for a Buddhist philosopher to
realize that Buddhaghosa is indeed talking about how things actually
are, not merely giving a guide to what one might encounter in meditation
practice –and I find plenty in Buddhaghosa’s writings to support the
claim that he is doing just that.

A relevant final note to all of this: I am aware that Jay Garfield
recently came out with an [edited volume on Sellars and Buddhist
philosophy](https://www.amazon.com/Wilfrid-Sellars-Buddhist-Philosophy-Foundations/dp/0367112094).
As of the time of my writing this post I have not yet read it, but I am
excited to do so. Several articles in the book look directly relevant to
everything I’ve said here, and I am confident that my mature position on
this topic will be shaped by it. But I thought it would be well worth
posting this first because I came to my own Sellarsian understanding of
Buddhism entirely *without* that book or its contributors, and I think
it is helpful to show the world what an independently arrived Sellarsian
Buddhism might look like – *especially* if my position then changes as a
result of having read it.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/06/a-sellarsian-solution-for-the-self)
