+++
title = "Reading Sanskrit texts"
full_title = "Reading Sanskrit texts “unaided”"
date = "2019-06-03"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/06/03/reading-sanskrit-texts-unaided/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/06/03/reading-sanskrit-texts-unaided/).

Reading Sanskrit texts “unaided”

A student has asked me this question, which I thought might be
interesting to open up to a broader audience:

> After how long and how much study does a new scholar become
> proficient enough in Sanskrit to read the original unaided (especially
> if the AOS is primarily philosophy)?

My reply was this:

Your question is a good one, and I think it has no single good answer.
If you are thinking about reading without a dictionary, then that
depends on how much time you’ve put into reading that author and genre
after getting two to three years of solid grammatical study. I think
that after five years, it would be possible to read many texts without
frequent recourse to a dictionary or grammar. And it depends on the
author. Being able to read Gaṅgeśa’s navya-Nyāya style will take longer
than being able to read Vātsyāyana’s commentary on the Nyāya-sūtra,
which is much simpler grammatically, and less wide-ranging in
vocabulary. Reading Mīmāṃsā texts requires a lot of understanding of
Vedic ritual and other texts, too (especially the brāhmaṇas). However,
this also assumes that one is practicing reading and not just
translating.

After initially learning grammar, many students continue to “crack”
sentences by analyzing sandhi, compounds, verb conjugations, etc.,
rather than to read as one reads difficult texts in one’s own primary
languages. That is, to read holistically, not always stopping to look up
problem words, but entertaining the best reading provisionally against
context, and going on to check if that’s right. Grammatical analysis
then begins to work in the background and is foregrounded in cases where
there is difficulty.

When I was in graduate school I was at a translation session for the
*Vīmalakīrtinirdeśasūtra* at the Mangalam Research Center and I asked
the late Michael Hahn a similar question. He smiled and, if my memory
serves me correctly, suggested that really good reading facility with
Sanskrit required at least ten years of solid study.

But those are my thoughts, as a philosopher trained in Sanskrit (not as
a Sanskritist with primarily Indological training). I told the student I
would post this question online and see what others think.

