+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-09-11"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/11/notes-on-kalamukha-s/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/11/notes-on-kalamukha-s/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## Notes on kAlAmukha-s

![aghorAstra
mUrti](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/aghorastra.jpg?w=720)

Notes on kAlAmukha shaiva-s and their branches.  
kAlAmukha-s are described as those who worship that in which kalA-s are
installed. They are called kAlAmukha-s because of their connection with
kalAmukha. These kalA-s are nivR^itti, pratiShThA, vidyA, shAnti,
shAntyAtIta.

Since the five kalA-s mentioned above relate to the five faces,the
worshippers are called as kAlAmukha-s. The kAlAmukha-mahA tantra is said
to be revealed by ShaNmukha to mahAkAlA, the gaNa of shiva.

kAlAmukha-s are further divided into mahAkAla-s, kAla-s, kAlavaktra-s
and  
kevala-s.

Of these, the mahAkAlA-s are those who worship who worship aghora mukha
of shiva. They always hold a bhasma pAtra and are engrossed in the japa
of aghora mantra and they perform uddhUlana with black bhasma and follow
the ten-fold niyama-s. They carry a yoga-daNDa and are always intent on
anugraha(..sadAnugrahashIlata).

Then there are kAlA-s who worship shiva during six specific time periods
during the day.

The kAlavaktra-s are so called because they worship shiva during five
periods of the day and adorn their heads with black bhasma all the
time(literally during day and night and they have conquered their
fetters/bonds (kR^iShNena bhasmanA vaktraM bhUShayanti
divAnishaM..kAlavaktrA ime GYeyAH jitapAshA..)

Lastly the kevalas who are knowm so because of their worship of shiva
four times a day and are intent on kaivalya.

It is said that the kAlAmukha shivapUjA paddhati the usage of the
pa\~ncha brahma mantra-s is as follows.

shiva should be meditated with sadyojAta mantra with the mahat mudra  
Having meditated upon shiva, he should be installed with vAmadeva mantra
and sthApinI mudra.  
\*aghora mantra is then used along with the shivamudra nirodhinI to
block him.  
sAnnidhya mudra along with tatpuruSha mantra to make him present and  
iShana mantra is told by displaying a\~njali mudra to him favorable.

It is said that the kAlAmukha shivapUjA paddhati the usage of the
pa\~ncha brahma mantra-s is as follows. It seems this also goes by the
name pa\~nchAvaraNa pUjA paddhati.

shiva should be meditated with sadyojAta mantra with the mahat mudra  
Having meditated upon shiva, he should be installed with vAmadeva mantra
and sthApinI mudra.  
aghora mantra is then used along with the shivamudra nirodhinI to block
him.  
sAnnidhya mudra along with tatpuruSha mantra to make him present and  
iShana mantra is told by displaying a\~njali mudra to make him
favorable.

-From “kAlAmukha and pAshupata temples in dharwar” by Vasundhara
Filliozat. Root source: pampAmAhatmya in skAndamahApurANe, bharadhvAja
samhitAyAM, hemakUTakhanDe uttarabhAge.

Related notes on the topic centered around bhethAla rudra by the AchArya
of MT – <https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/> :

“Some kAlAmukha AchArya-s go by the name bhetAla guru and parashu
bhetAla mahAmuni in eastern Karnataka & Andhra. They seem to have
consecrated a rudra temple near the hill of bhairavakoNDA which later
seems to have developed as a center of bhairavAchAra. Another
inscription suggests that the siddhasomeshvara temple near Kurnool was
founded by the same bhetAla duo. Now the use of the name bhetAla by the
kAlAmukha-s is of importance in light of the mantra-s you mention.  
bhaTTa utpalathe Kashmirian commentator of varAhamihira’s bR^ihat
saMhita states that the pAshupata-s (which includes the kAlAmukha-s)
worship rudra using the vAtula tantra. Now the mantra-s of bhetAla-rudra
are attributed to only one text i.e. vAtula tantra. Two large fragments
of a text under this name survive in karNATa and TN, but from what I
know of these fragments they are highly overlaid by saiddhAntika
material. Memories of the original mantra portion of the vAtula tantra
appears to have been preserved in commentarial tradition of the text at
least in the TN recension. These include a series of rudra mantra-s such
as the vaidika rudra mantra-s, bhetAla rudra, ghaNTakarNa, anna-rudra,
pANi-rudra, invocation of rudra as a cat etc. The fact that they
emphasize on rudra rather than the saiddhAntika sadAshiva or bhairava or
the eponymous tantra-s suggests that these mantra-s indeed have their
root in the old vAtulAgama that as per utpala was practiced by the
pAshupata-s. The core mantra- like the first one to bhetAla-rudra that
you mentioned also follow the simple structure of the older pAshupata
and uchChuShma kalpa rudra mantra-s. The longer mantra-s appear to be
later expressions of this tradition using a pattern closer to those of
the classic tantra-s.  
So in a sense the bhetAla rudra might have links to the very origin of
vetAla-s in the shivashAsana. It should be noted that the first mention
of the word vetAla is in the kumArashAsana in the context of the kaumAra
mAtR^i known as vetAlajananI.“

<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/02/23/the-kalamukhas-i/>

<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/03/23/kalamukhas-ii/>

<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2012/09/27/a-narrative-on-the-kalamukha-s-implications-for-the-bhairava-srotas/>

This entry was posted on September 11, 2020 at 5:47 pm and is filed
under [shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/11/notes-on-kalamukha-s/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/11/notes-on-kalamukha-s/trackback/)
from your own site.

