+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-09-23"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/hanumadopasana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/hanumadopasana/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## hanumadupAsanA, sugrIva & shrIrAma

**To take note before reading:** Post meant only for a minuscule
percentage of practitioners who can relate to this. **If you are a rAma
bhakta, please do not read this post!**

If hanumAn has to be associated with other deva-s, it ideally has to be
nR^isiMha, garuDa, rudra, vAyu, marut-s or sugrIva. The sugrIva
tradition seems lost for the most part for Hindu-s though it survives
at-least as textual records elsewhere. A short note on sugrIva mantra-s
is made towards the end.

Association of hanumadopAsana with rAma has become common for some
centuries now and the practice has made inroads into the realm of what
is considered as shabda pramANa or Apta vAkya. If reality can be altered
by merely quoting texts or tradition the world will surely be a
different place.

At a personal level, associating hanumAn upAsana with rAma, is most
bizarre and out of place and such association is to be limited only to
the rAmAyaNa katha. The extant rAmAyaNa of course is a great text and
should be studied carefully and there is no denying that a
hanumadopAsaka should definitely study the sundara khANDa thoroughly.
One can even make a nAmAvali of hanumAn from the extant rAmAyaNa.

What can be done when even hanumAn mAla mantra-s or even some mUla
mantra-s are filled with words like rAmadUta, rAma priya etc.? Such
pada-s should ideally be replaced with vAyuputra or similar appropriate
pada-s. Merely choosing words to retain the chandas may not be
sufficient in this case. Care has to be taken to see if the replacement
fits well with the “tone & rhythm” (for lack of a better word at the
moment) of the mantra. Ideally such replacement should be inspired by
the devata itself if one is in such a stage to be able to pull off
something like that. It makes more sense to associate this great deity
with real deities instead of an artificial construct.

It isn’t without reason that when I put this before a certain
acquaintance, who has some experience of these things, he remarked that
he feels life in a kR^iShNa vigraha put up by the gauDIya but not in a
rAma vigraha. It is definitely not being said that this single
subjective experience limited in space & time, should be taken as some
sort of pramANa. One should bow to rAma vigraha sincerely in a properly
established Alaya as many vaiShNava mantra-s will be deployed during the
archana. Even if it is not constructed according to Agama, since he is
usually installed as an avatAra of viShNu, one should sincerely
prostrate and indulge in rAma archana/bhajana in public.

What about those rAma bhakta-s/upAsaka-s who could do so and so miracles
or who could even effect ShaTkarma deploying rAma mantra-s? Certainly
shArada and others say it is possible. It is certainly possible that
some things can be achieved with sAdhana involving yama niyama etc (as
highlighted in the yoga-sUtra-s) and some deeds of such sAdhaka-s or
siddha-s whose strength is acquired either through other means or
thorugh related deities like hanumAn or through vaidika and vaiShNava
deployments done in parallel, are sometimes mistakenly (at most times
out of humbleness and bhakti) attributed to things which make less to no
impact. shrIvidyA rAma etc and such are some such gynmastics.

In a way this can be compared with the Ishvara or para-brahman of
advaita vedAnta to whom many things are attributed in theory but in a
practical setting these concepts of the advaitic Ishvara and parabrahman
are for the most part redundant. They have a different use, but
definitely not in the way understood by those who study advaita vedAnta.

The most twisted part is where one says yatra yatra raghunAtha kIrtanaM…
It is generally held that when one sincerely recites the AkhyAna-s of a
devata, under certain favorable conditions, the devata-s presence might
be felt by some or that the devata is pleased. Of course when one speaks
of the deeds (a good portion of deeds of later part of rAmAyaNa) of shrI
rAma, which in good probability are actually the deeds of hanumAn (we
dont know what is there in something referred to as hanumat rAmAyaNa but
I suspect that it might be actually about the great deeds of hanumAn and
had less or nothing to do with shrI rAma), including the manifold
rAkShasa vadha, the real devata’s presence i.e. hanumAn can be felt by
some instead of the artificial construct! Do give this some thought. –
Yes. It sounds like a wild imagination/theory at the moment.

It is no wonder then that when the nAstIka-s adopt AstIka mantra-s they
adopt mantra-s of manifold Hindu deities including hanumAn and sugrIva
but not those of rAma. Being external unattached observers, their minds
unalloyed with early & late medieval Astika obfuscations of our
traditions, they clearly knew what is useful/practical from our
traditions and what is not.

We get to know only little of the sugrIva tradition from the mantra
fragments that survive. The main mantra of sugrIva has a format similar
to that of hanumAn. There are many sugrIva mantra-s which seem to be
deployed for a wide range of purposes. There is the jvara nAshana
sugrIva mantra true to its name. A sugrIva mantra combined with chAmuNDA
for bhUta vAraNa. A different sugrIva mantra especially meant for ending
shAkinI mAya or to eliminate shAkinI graha-s. shAkinI pramardaka sugrIva
– The great hammerer of the shAkinI-s. A certain mantra of sugrIva
combined with pratya\~NgirA. Also a mantra to be used with yantra to
keep away the DAkinI-s and another one which is combined with the great
hanumAn himself.

Also see:
<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/03/01/the-hanuman-cult/>

This entry was posted on September 23, 2020 at 2:17 pm and is filed
under
[hanumAn](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/hanuman/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/hanumadopasana/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/hanumadopasana/trackback/)
from your own site.

