+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-09-19"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/19/yamantaka-notes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/19/yamantaka-notes/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## yamAntaka Notes

![yamAntaka – vajra bhairava – Source:
<https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/45621>](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/yamantaka1.jpg?w=768)

The longer yamarAja & the vikR^itAnana.

The AstIka version of these mantras comes across as a complete and
comprehensive package (including mantra-s of kAlI & yama with similar
structures)\*\* and hence do not seem to be borrowed from the main
bauddha yamAntaka tantra-s i.e. the kR^iShNa yamAri and the vajra mahA
bhairava tantra-s. Gudrun B also makes this observation in her paper.
The nAstIka versions are different in the sense that they may not be
presented like the Astika package but expound both mantra-s in great
detail. Both mantra-s are mentioned in various bauddha root texts.
However, no dedicated Astika texts for yamAntaka are available at the
moment. (-This point to be updated as and when information becomes
available-). In the Hindu world the references to this mantra exist only
in compendiums and no root texts seem to have survived. Is it possible
that the bauddha texts of this deity were once Hindu texts which have
been re-worked due to a section of shaiva-s getting ostracized, and
eventually joining hands with the vajrAyana bauddha-s in the centuries
following Adi Shankara’s advent?++

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/image.png?w=663)

The different akShara-s of the longer yamarAja are said to be
contributed by (or said to represent various beings) different classes
including bhUta-s, mAtR^i-s, including mAra-s. The word mAra is the
bauddha way of saying rudra/rudra-s in many contexts. So the bauddha
memory of this mantra is clear that this has its origins in non-bauddha
sources. By non-bauddha, perhaps we can say shaiva sources.

Along with the yamarAja the vajra mahA bhairava describes a rudra mantra
in the adhyAya that immediately follows where the deity is clearly
called a rudra-maheshvara in a mantra that is translated as “knowledge
mantra”.

For the shorter mantra, the different syllables are said to either
represent various devata-s like indra, varuNa kubera etc.. the
lokapAla-s or the akShara-s are combined with the devata-s for a certain
bali kriya as part of maNDala archana.

The yoginI chatuShTaya associated with yamAntaka as per kR^iShNa yamAri:
charchikA (chAmuNDA), vArAhI, sarasvatI & gaurI with vajra-s prefixed,
which strengthens the suspicion that yamAntaka is rudra/bhairava adopted
by bauddha-s.

Meaning of longer yamAntaka from Gudrun B’s paper:

“O you immeasurable (i.e., undefeatable) (ameya) by the assembly (=
troups) (sadas) of king Yama! Having arms (dor) in which there is no
(a-) rise (= production) (udaya) of mercy (daya¯) towards Yama! Since
(you) can destroy (= stop falling into) the iron hell (ayo-niraya-ks.
eya), I would desire to worship (you), O disease-killer (nir-amaya ¯ )!”

An acquaintance familiar with bauddha sAdhana-s once remarked about some
bauddha-s holding the view that , without the “right view” of deities
there is always the danger of the deities turning into rudra-s. The fear
seems not unfounded given the large scale adoption of shaiva practices.

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/image-1.png?w=355)

\*\**See
<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/07/23/the-samkshipta-bhairava-mantra/>
for the complete thing.*

For an anecdotal account of the greatness of the yamAntaka sAdhana, the
following video from 13.20 might be of interest. So the siddha Gen Nyima
being referred to in these accounts, when stripped of the superficial
bauddha externalities is a rudra upAsaka in essence.

# An error occurred.

[Try watching this video on
www.youtube.com](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dR8Ow-zhY5M), or enable
JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser.

++*This suspicion arose due to 1) some aspects of kApAlika practices
being preserved by the vajrAyana bauddha-s 2) The violent manner in
which the kApAlika-s were supposedly dealt with by rAjan-s influenced by
either Adi Shankara himself or his descendants. The shankara vijaya in
all possibilities is exaggerating the situation but we do get a clue
that the smArta populace has turned very antagonistic to a section of
shaiva-s.*

To be continued/updated…

This entry was posted on September 19, 2020 at 3:38 pm and is filed
under [bauddha](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/bauddha/),
[shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/). You can
follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/19/yamantaka-notes/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/19/yamantaka-notes/trackback/)
from your own site.

