+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-09-23"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/dasha-danda-vidhi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/dasha-danda-vidhi/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## dasha daNDa vidhi

There are 10 ways of punishing the bhUta-s/graha-s that have possessed
the victim. These do not necessarily involve any physical violence. It
is said that without employing this ten fold procedure the mantrin might
be harmed or become an object of ridicule/parihAsaM\*\*.

The dasha daNDa-s are 1) bhasma snAna 2) mantra pIDana 3) todanaM –
Pricking 4) prAshanaM 5) AgneyaM 6) a\~njanaM 7) nasyaM 8) bharjanaM 9)
daNDAhataM/tADanaM 10) roma pIDanaM

A special wand/short staff\*\* having 7 parva-s is to be made for the
purpose using a special procedure. The staff is to be fitted (most
likely Shrink-Fitted) with metallic bands made of Gold and Silver at the
parva-s. This wand is employed to inflict some of the daNda-s mentioned
above.

However, there is also a different opinion on the subject of inflicting
punishment from one of the texts which belongs to the ABK system. Here
it is said that during the process of bhUtochchATana no harm should be
done to the being. At the same time it is also cautioned that the
mantrin should neither speak too harshly nor too softly with the being
as both of them have their disadvantages. A appropriate tone for the
purpose has to be assumed by the mantrin.

As can be seen, even in the earlier case, the physical violence is
limited and is employed on a need basis and should perhaps be evaluated
case wise. Among the ten, only three processes involve actual physical
harm. Yet in other cases, a certain staff made from the branches of a
tree endowed with huge thorns is placed on the victim’s head, but not
beaten with it. This tree is something that supposedly is found/grows
only on top of hills or mountains.

\*\* See a fictional example of the same here from a Malayalam movie:
<https://youtu.be/tvCw2QVYD6A?t=5607>

This entry was posted on September 23, 2020 at 2:18 pm and is filed
under [bhUta
tantra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/bhuta-tantra/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/dasha-danda-vidhi/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/dasha-danda-vidhi/trackback/)
from your own site.

