+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-09-25"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/25/on-staffs-staves-wands/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/25/on-staffs-staves-wands/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## On Staffs, Staves &Wands

Though it was a common sight till a few decades ago to see Hindu-s of
various varNa-s, carry a stave or staff with them, it has become out of
fashion, and is now used only by partially disabled people.

The Apastamba gR^ihya sUtra like the other vaidika texts gives details
of the various daNDa-s to be carried by the brahmachArin from different
varNa-s, during upanayana and also during the snAtaka rite.

I am unsure what other rites are done to these staffs that are carried
around, in a vaidika context. There is the general practice of
performing a japa & homa uttering a daNDa mantra invoking various
deva-heti-s into the daNDa. Later the ghee is applied to the daNDa along
with haridra and kuMkuma. After this, the daNDa might be carried around
wherever the sAdhaka wanders.

The kulachUDAmaNi has a specific rite for invoking mahiShamardini to
prepare one such staff as part of acquiring the vetAla siddhi. One is to
acquire wood from a Neem tree and go to a cemetery on a Wednesday and
during the midnight bury the wood beneath the shavAsana (?) and perform
axara laxa of the old mahiShmardinI followed by a homa with axara
sahasra oblations. Take out the wood and shape into a staff and pAduka?

On a durgAShTamI night in the shmashAna one is to go the cemetery and
arrange a shavAsana on top of the staff and pAduka-s. After performing
8000x japa, pUja on the shavAsana and after offering bali, utter the
mantra on the staff. This act grants the vetAla siddhi which commands
the vetAla to perform things as ordered by the mantrin.

Coming to the realm of pA\~ncharAtra, there are instructions on making
the brahma daNDa. It’s length should be of one hasta and should be made
out of yaGYa vR^ikSha-s like palAsha etc. It should be adorned with
gems, or with flowers made of Gold or Silver and with creepers and
fruits. On the top of this brahma daNDa, a pratiShTha should be made of
golden sudarshana. Seeing a vipra holding such a daNDa, the various
kShudra graha-s and elements causing vighna-s to any yAga are said to
run away.

In the realm of the bhairava, similarly a daNDa is established on a
pedestal and a pUja is offered to the bhairava daNDa. However, in this
case, the daNDa is seen as belonging to bhairava and I am unsure if the
mantrin is supposed to carry the staff with him or not.

In the earlier post on the [dasha daNDa
vidhi](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/23/dasha-danda-vidhi/), a
mention is already made about a procedure of making a wand to be used in
the context of bhUtochchATana.

There is also the popular Y shaped yoga daNda which is used in the
context of prANAyama and also for ease during japa. There is folk lore
of such yoga daNDa once used/prepared by yogin-s of yore being imbued
with magical properties along with their pAduka-s & kaMaNDalu.

Then there are lesser known usages like the one mentioned by the AchArya
of MT where a wand used in some rites is called as [siddha
kAShTha.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/06/01/the-ponderous-tale-of-the-tombstones/)

Of all the various daNDa-s above, I think what is usually shown in
nATaka-s/movies as being carried by the archetypal kApAlika is more like
the one from the kulachUDAmaNi.

This entry was posted on September 25, 2020 at 4:14 pm and is filed
under [mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/25/on-staffs-staves-wands/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/09/25/on-staffs-staves-wands/trackback/)
from your own site.

