+++
title = "Asian historicism before"
full_title = "Asian historicism before Protestantism"
date = "2019-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/08/18/asian-historicism-before-protestantism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/08/18/asian-historicism-before-protestantism/).

Asian historicism before Protestantism

We are surely familiar with the pattern by now: members of an Asian
tradition are concerned about supposed corruptions in their tradition
which depart from the intentions of the tradition’s historic founders,
so they turn with renewed focus to the historical texts that they take
to be at the tradition’s centre. We, with our historical hindsight, now
know that this Asian concern with texts and founders is an alien
importation, the work of colonial subjects aping their Protestant
missionary rulers’ search for textual historicity.

Except for one thing: it isn’t.

My first sentence about this pattern *could* have been speaking about
the 19th- and 20th-century Sri Lankan reforms of Anagarika Dharmapala
and Walpola Rahula, so often now maligned as exemplars of a supposedly
Western-corrupted [“Protestant
Buddhism”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/).
But it could just as easily have been speaking of the works of [Dai
Zhen](http://www.iep.utm.edu/dai-zhen/), a fascinating Chinese thinker
whom I encountered in Justin Tiwald and Bryan Van Norden’s excellent
[reader in “later” Chinese
philosophy](https://www.amazon.com/Readings-Later-Chinese-Philosophy-Century/dp/1624661904).
(While I recognize it is standard usage in the study of Chinese thought,
“later” remains an odd word to describe a period that begins in 200
BCE.)

Dai Zhen was the leading practitioner of a field of study called
*kaozheng xue* 考證學 (usually rendered “evidential learning” or
“evidentiary research”), which, according to Tiwald and Van Norden,
sought “rigorous methods of textual analysis and historical and
linguistic evidence” (310) to reconstruct the works of Confucius and
Mencius. That is, it was what we would now call philology. And moreover,
Dai’s philology had a specific purpose: to purge Confucianism of
accretions it had unknowingly received from Daoism and Buddhism. Dai was
particularly worried about the emphasis on *li* 理, a presumed
metaphysical pattern underlying all things, that he found in the works
of Neo-Confucians like [Zhu
Xi](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/zhu-xi/); Dai argued, with
reason, that such an idea had little foundation in the ideas of the
historical Confucius and Mencius, and we could find that out by turning
to back to the original works of the founders. So surely, then, he must
have been imitating the Protestants as we all know Dharmapala and Rahula
did, right? Well, Dai died in 1777, and at least on a Wikipedia version
of history, the first Protestants didn’t even arrive in China until
thirty years later. So one would have to stretch pretty hard to identify
a Protestant influence on him.

And if you are tempted to stretch that hard, consider further: it isn’t
even just chronologically post-Protestant thinkers like Dai who follow
this pattern. Steven Collins’s excellent article [“On the very idea of
the Pali
Canon”](http://www.ahandfulofleaves.org/documents/Articles/On%20the%20very%20Idea%20of%20the%20Pali%20Canon_Collins_CCRS_1990.pdf)
rightly points out how we should not equate the term “Theravāda” with
early Buddhism, since the term wasn’t coined until many hundreds of
years after the Buddha’s death, probably in Sri Lanka a thousand miles
from where the Buddha lived. Collins is reminding us that Theravāda was
a *movement* – but specifically a historicist one, one aimed at
preserving a tradition taken to be historically attested. It is the
common pattern in the history of philosophy that a different Collins,
[Randall
Collins](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/05/on-innovation-through-conservatism/),
would describe as “innovation through conservatism”, and one with a
strong consciousness of historicity and textuality.

Unlike most other South Asian traditions, the newly emerging Theravādins
composed *vaṃsa* texts – the
[Dīpavaṃsa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dipavamsa) and the
[Mahāvaṃsa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahavamsa) – which aim to
describe the history of transmission lineages, and which Heinz Bechert
has called the only “historical literature in the strict sense of the
word \[in South Asia\] prior to the period of the Muslim invasions.” The
Dīpavaṃsa (circa 4th century) appears to be the first place the term
“Theravāda” is used to describe something Buddhist. What we see emerging
in the Dīpavaṃsa and Mahāvaṃsa –alongside the works of Buddhaghosa, who
wrote after the Dīpavaṃsa but after Mahāvaṃsa –is the idea of a “way of
the elders”, a *thera-vāda*, that was distinct from, and defining itself
against, other “ways” of being Buddhist. (These did not specifically
include *Mahāyāna*, because that movement was barely a player in the Sri
Lanka of the early centuries CE; the Mahāvaṃsa describes many
non-Theravāda traditions but Mahāyāna is not among them.) And the
Theravāda defined itself in relation to a newly closed set of texts that
it now identified as a canon. The *vaṃsa* texts identify, using
historical records, how the Theravāda lineage is purer in part because
of its set of texts, more than a thousand years before the birth of
Martin Luther.

Human beings and their ideas are shaped by their history, so history
matters. It should not be so surprising that that view has been taken up
in multiple places across human history. And it has been a [common
pattern](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/newly-authentic-scriptures/)
across premodern societies to prioritize old, received wisdom over new.
Texts, whether oral or written, are the repository by which that wisdom
can be preserved across generations. Why then should we be surprised
that several different premodern societies all tried to establish what
they took to be an accurate history of that wisdom, its texts, and its
putative founders? It seems far stranger to me that we now so routinely
assume such an attitude is “Protestant” or “structurally Protestant”.
Such an approach, I think, gives Protestants far more credit than they
deserve.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/08/asian-historicism-before-protestantism)
