+++
title = "Who is afraid of"
full_title = "Who is afraid of ‘Philosophy’ in India?— A guest post by Mrinal Kaul"
date = "2019-08-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/08/12/who-is-afraid-of-philosophy-in-india-a-guest-post-by-mrinal-kaul/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/08/12/who-is-afraid-of-philosophy-in-india-a-guest-post-by-mrinal-kaul/).

Who is afraid of ‘Philosophy’ in India?— A guest post by Mrinal Kaul

For past couple of decades, the idea of liberal arts in higher education
in India is going through a process of churning. As a part of this a
number of educational platforms, both public and private, have come to
the forefront. One could not imagine exclusive world class universities
only catering to liberal arts some twenty years back in India. But they
are a reality now. One such experiment was made by the well-known
philosopher and public intellectual Sundar Sarukkai at Manipal in 2010
where I teach now. His idea was to create a committed space for the
study of philosophy, both eastern and western. Unfortunately, that did
not happen. Sarrukai decided to leave the institution in 2016 and
recently philosophy was also removed from the curriculum. The question
is not about philosophy or not-philosophy. ‘Philosophy will survive far
better outside these institutions’, as Sundar Sarukkai would put it. The
question is why are institutions afraid of serious engagement with
philosophy? Of course, the question could also be why are institutions
vary of engaging with serious philosophy. Who are they afraid of? This
question holds importance for me because I think our commitment, as
academics, towards our disciplines should be over and above the
allegiance we share towards an institution or an authoritative
individual.

Philosophy is the backbone discipline for all other disciplines. All
disciplines work under the rubrics of a philosophy. Thus, we have
philosophy of history, philosophy of economics or philosophy of
sociology etc. and when Philosophy itself is discussed as a discipline,
we talk about the meta-philosophical investigations, in other words—how
is the philosophy of philosophy done. I think a subject like philosophy
is particularly seen as intimidating by institutions because it teaches
us the art of questioning with rigour. Philosophical robustness, for
instance, also teaches us how to question hegemony—that is traditionally
so deeply ingrained in the ‘philosophy’ of educational institutions in
India. A democratic institution is an organized idea in a structured
form. Institutions should not be afraid of ideas, rather they should
learn how to engage with ideas and also create opportunities for others
for discussing ideas from different points of view.

Institutions need vision. And this vision is not cultivated overnight. A
number of struggling minds over a longer period of time with the help of
all like-minded supporters gradually develop into a vision that
eventually takes the shape of an ideal institution. These institutions
need to develop their own vision over a period of time without which
they would be running a mindless mind. I recently took closer cognizance
of this when I was invited for a lecture in Shimoga, a city in the
central part of the Karnataka State. I was to speak on the ‘theories of
knowledge in Indian philosophical traditions’ and I had to share the
stage with none other than Ganesh Devy, the famous linguist who spoke
about why and how certain languages become hegemonic over a period of
time. The gathering, even though meant for local college students was
also attended by some eminent Kannada writers and thinkers. By noon
everyone knew I belonged to a place that Sarrukai had created. To my
surprise during the lunch hour many scholars started asking me in a mild
accusatory tone why was ‘philosophy’ shut in my center to which
unfortunately I had no answer for I myself was clueless. Their concern,
I felt, was genuine for the center was primarily established as a
philosophy center.

What followed was more interesting. It was only after some time that a
veteran local academic came to me and said: “there are no good
institutions in Karnataka for doing good philosophy and philosophy
program in Manipal did not come overnight. A lot of collective and
constructive effort had gone into it over the years and it took people
like U.R. Ananthamurthy and Sundar Sarrukai to work it out with the help
of Manipal authorities. And you people got away with it in a few days.”
Even though I remained silent with my head down in subtle sense of
shame, I did begin to think what really solid places are there in India
where one can do good philosophy. I kept thinking with no answers coming
my way. Of course, I am talking about an institution and not individual
scholars who, no doubt, one can find in great numbers.

Ganesh Devy kept talking about how because of the hegemonic status that
many Indian languages enjoyed over a longer period of time, so many
other (particularly the languages labelled as tribal) languages died a
silent death. And I kept thinking about how disciplines like philosophy
succumb to the petty power dynamics of institutions. Ironically, one
clear example is that of the state of affairs of classical Indian
philosophy in Indian universities. Or to go a step ahead and ask the
question why is it that every discourse or any text book on ‘Indian
philosophy’ ends up in Sanskrit sources alone as if there were no
‘patters of thinking’ being discussed in other South Asian languages.
Even within the domains of each one of these linguistic cultures, there
has been heterogeneity of thought, subject-matter and approach. It is
not that the Sanskrit sources ‘are’ hegemonic, but we have supplied this
hegemony to them very generously. And we have also done this rather by
neglecting the non-Sanskrit sources for too long. After all, philosophy
in South Asia, as Jonardon Ganeri would maintain, was also “written in
many languages including Pali, Prakrit, Sanskrit, Malayalam, Urdu,
Gujarati, Tamil, Telugu, Bengali, Marathi, Persian, Kannada, Punjabi,
Hindi, Tibetan, Arabic, and Assamese. From the time of the British
colonial occupation, it has also been written in English” (Jonardon
Ganeri. (2017) The Oxford Handbook of Indian Philosophy, p. 1
(Introduction)). In fact, the Sanskrit sources themselves are hardly
explored properly and many a times terribly misinterpreted in the
popular discourse. This should call for more serious engagement with a
subject like philosophy in Indian universities where emphasis should be
laid on the robustness of curriculums rather than getting away with
philosophy courses.

What the newly formed liberal arts institutions in the country should
understand is how to learn to be self-critical. Many such private
institutions are founded on such slippery grounds where disciplines are
compromised at many levels because of the academic autonomy they are
offered, yet others are making best use of such autonomy. Many others
simply play with the category of interdisciplinarity in such a trivial
manner that students are kept totally aloof from being trained in a
certain one discipline rigorously. To add more to this, unfortunately,
academics in many Indian institutions seem to be coming under the sway
of ‘radical states of mind’ rather than ‘self-critical states of mind’.
On the one hand where certain Indian academics are boasting (and rightly
so) of bringing revolutionary changes to Indian academic system even if
so far only at a minuscule level, yet on another hand what public
institutions are facing at the hands of the Power they are tied up with,
is something deeply to ponder over. And to ponder about this seriously
and to think why philosophy courses are either being killed or not dealt
with meaningfully in Indian academic institutions, we need a systematic
way of critical thinking—Philosophy.

Mrinal Kaul is Assistant Professor at Manipal Centre for Humanities,
Manipal. You can read more about him on his Academia
[webpage](https://manipal.academia.edu/MrinalKaul) and on his
[blog](https://kashuradab.wordpress.com). You can read more about the
Manipal University
[here](https://manipal.edu/mu/academics/centers-of-excellence/mcph.html).
