+++
title = "A Buddhist argument"
full_title = "A Buddhist argument against rebirth"
date = "2019-08-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/08/04/a-buddhist-argument-against-rebirth/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/08/04/a-buddhist-argument-against-rebirth/).

A Buddhist argument against rebirth

I am not entirely sure that I agree with the argument I am about to
make. However, I do find it at least plausible and I have not seen it
made before. I think this argument is worth somebody making, and I think
it is worth doing here.

That is: I would like to make a *Buddhist argument against rebirth.* An
argument against rebirth *on Buddhist grounds.*

I say “on Buddhist grounds” to make the methodological caveat that this
is not, to my knowledge, an argument that any Buddhists have made in the
past. Rather, it is a Buddhist argument in the sense that I am a
Buddhist and I myself *make* the argument on Buddhist grounds, as a
[Buddhist
theologian](https://www.amazon.com/Buddhist-Theology-Critical-Reflections-Contemporary/dp/0700712038).
It disagrees with most Buddhist positions that have been taken in the
past –just as Nāgārjuna and Linji and Zhiyi and the author of the Lotus
Sūtra all did when they made *their* radical revisions of the Buddhist
path as known up to that time. Many Buddhists of course disagree with
these thinkers, as well they should;Buddhist sectarianism expresses
[real and important
differences](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/in-defence-of-buddhist-sectarianism/).
Still, most of us accept that the arguments of Linji or the Lotus Sūtra
are legitimately Buddhist despite their radical differences from the
Buddhism that came before them.

So to the argument itself. Most of us, it is not controversial to say,
are deeply attached to our selves. The typical claim made by every
non-[Pudgalavāda](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/how-can-you-be-yourself-if-there-is-no-self/)
Buddhist is that this is a *problem*. The idea of self is not only an
illusion, it’s a *harmful* illusion, because it leads us to an
attachment to something that does not deserve that attachment. We cling
to the self and what is associated with it. In the [Cūla Sīhanāda
Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.011.ntbb.html),
the Buddha says that plenty of other teachers have warned against other
types of clinging; what is original to him, what makes his understanding
the fullest, is that he specifically warns against clinging to an idea
of *self*.

And it seems to me that that sort of clinging, the clinging to self, is
*exactly* what lies behind much of the widespread human belief in an
afterlife. We are so attached to the idea of our selves existing that we
cannot bear the thought of those selves ceasing to be, cannot even
imagine it. We [often act and
speak](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/in-praise-of-the-culture-of-death/)
as if death is something unusual that won’t really happen to us. This
latter insight about our denial of death is hardly new to me; Freud, for
one, wrote:

> We have shown an unmistakable tendency to put death aside, to
> eliminate it from life. We attempted to hush it up, in fact, we have
> the proverb: to think of something as of death. Of course we meant our
> own death. We cannot, indeed, imagine our own death; whenever we try
> to do so we find that we survive ourselves as spectators. The school
> of psychoanalysis could thus assert that at bottom no one believes in
> his own death, which amounts to saying: in the unconscious every one
> of us is convinced of his immortality. ([Reflections on War and
> Death](https://www.bartleby.com/282/), chapter 2)

But Freud was no Buddhist. The point I want to make here is the Buddhist
one: belief in an afterlife, including rebirth, *is a clinging to self.*
It is our obsession with our selves and our own existence that makes us
postulate the continuance of that existence, whether in a heaven or in
rebirth. Without that unhealthy obsession, we wouldn’t need that belief:
we would be in the healthier world of
[Epicurus](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/07/the-good-life-present-and-future/)
and
[Lucretius](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/the-three-basic-ways-of-death/),
where “death is nothing to us”. From a Buddhist perspective, the
existential dread that greets the thought of our complete nonexistence
is a healthy spiritual practice, one that helps us realize just how
unsustainable our attachment to self turns out to be.

So too, it matters how much empirical observation has shown a connection
between the mind and the brain. We have long known that changes to the
brain, like drugs or injuries, affect the mind; contemporary
neuroscience has explored this connection in excruciating detail and it
has been quite successful in doing so, a progressive research program.
The Epicureans appear to have been right that the mind is in that sense
*material*. And so it seems logical to presume, with the Epicureans,
that when the brain stops functioning, the mind will stop with it. By
contrast, there seems to be far less evidence that minds can exist in
any sense not connected to physical brains. Given the state of the
empirical evidence as I understand it, rebirth appears to be not merely
a *belief* that sustains our attachment to self, but an *illusion* that
sustains our attachment to self: exactly the sort of thing that Buddhism
is supposed to be all about fighting against.

Now there *is* one major problem with a Buddhism that rejects rebirth,
one that [Jan
Westerhoff](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/)
[and
I](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/without-rebirth-suicide/)
have both noted in the past: if one rejects rebirth and *also* accepts
the doctrine that the sole good in life is the reduction of *dukkha*
(suffering, unsatisfactoriness), then it would seem that the best way to
proceed in life is to kill oneself –or, if one is more altruistically
oriented, [to kill
*others*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/without-rebirth-suicide/).
[Wilhelm Halbfass
points](https://www.amazon.com/Tradition-Reflection-Explorations-Indian-Thought/dp/0791403629)
to a group called the Saṃsāramocakas, described in some classical
Sanskrit texts, who supposedly took up a related conclusion and went
around killing people to eliminate their *dukkha*. But we only know the
Saṃsāramocakas through their opponents; it is not clear they actually
existed. Nearly all the rest of us human beings would take their
supposed position as a genuine *reductio ad absurdum*: the *prasaṅga*
(consequence) of these positions is one that we cannot accept, and
therefore we must *either* accept rebirth *or* accept goals in life
other than the reduction of *dukkha*.

Westerhoff takes the first of these two options: he thinks that as
Buddhists we must be entirely committed to *dukkhanirodha* and that we
must therefore grasp at whatever straws we can find to prove the
existence of rebirth. I do not. A core tenet of Buddhism has always been
the need to see things
[*yathābhūtam*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/),
just as they are, and it seems to me that a rebirth doctrine does not do
this; it is one more form of illusion, and, if my argument above is
correct, an illusion that leads us to exactly that form of clinging
which the Buddha is most concerned to reject. Rather, I think [we must
take the second
option](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/),
and allow that there is more to life than *dukkhanirodha*, as most
self-identified Buddhists [have in practice
done](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/12/the-christian-christmas/)
throughout history.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/08/a-buddhist-argument-against-rebirth)
