+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-12-09"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/09/deva-prashna-on-shabari-giri/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/09/deva-prashna-on-shabari-giri/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## Outcome of two deva prashna-s at shabarigiri

The following is an account of two deva prashna-s that happened on
shabari giri. This is the translation of the contents mentioned in a
Telugu book on shAstA on two prashna sessions. Not a verbatim
translation but a summary is presented below. The objective of the
prashna is to find out the will and the disposition of the deity. The
need seems to have arised from the fact that due to heavy rush, some
modifications have to be made for crowd control and the authorities
wanted to know if the changes done with such intent had any negative
effects, as also to know if any other changes have to be made. The first
detail was of a deva prashna done in 1995 over a period of three days
and the changes were implemented. The second detail of the deva prashna
was of the one done in 2001.

The prashna session of 1995: April 16th to April 18th of 1995.

This was conducted by the jyotiSha expert from Kerala by name shUlapANi
vAriyAr and his team. After having darshana of shAstA he entered the
maNDapa meant for the prashna. In the middle of the maNDapa, a container
meant for measuring vrIhi (rice), a large dIpa stambha, another smaller
container meant for measuring rice, cowrie shells, flowers, vibhUti
(bhasma), rock sugar and other items were arranged. After a sharp
examination of the items and the manner in which they are placed, he
gave some instructions which made the team to change the location of the
flowers in the maNDapa. The dIpa in the maNDapa is now lighted from fire
brought from from the mUlasthAna.

A tAmbUla was presented by the devaswom board to the team performing the
prashna. The main tantri of the shAstA Alaya now has sprinkled everyone
with the sha\~Nkha jala, after which the tantri inscribed a rAjachakra
with the bhasma. The main expert shrI shUlapANi then inscribed the rAshi
chakra and after washing the cowrie shells in his hand with milk, looked
around the crowd and picked a [7 year old
kumAri](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJluO4jDXsg) (see link for
example) and instructed her to place the shells in any one place in the
rAshi chakra. The kumAri taking the shells, performed the pradakShiNa to
rAshi chakra and after looking and performing namaskAra to shAstA,
placed the shell in one of the divisions and hence the deva prashna was
initiated. On examining the nature of the betel leafs in the tAmbUla, it
was found that the betel leaf picked up was mangled. The following are
some of the findings from the prashna.

The vrata unlike today was originally meant to be done for 56 days. It
was found that shAstA is being vimukha (i.e. turned away or looking away
from) to those people who visit shabari giri without the proper dIkSha
and niyama. The deity is favorably disposed only to those who does the
shabari giri yAtra properly.

The known rule of women above 10 and below 50 not visiting the place is
to be strictly adhered to and was re-iterated during the prashna.
However, some strI-s within the restricted age group did visit the place
and was polluted and hence a shuddhi kalasha is to be performed for the
same.

The deity is angered due to people without the requisite vrata and
niyama performing pUja in garbha gR^iha. Only those who are ready to
take up dIkSha for the time period of an year are supposed to perform
pUja to the deity and it was mentioned that alternate arrangements to
stay elsewhere on those days where no pUja is performed on shabari giri
can be made.

During the renovation work taken up by the devaswom board, the Alaya and
abode of a certain bhagavatI was demolished and is seen as roaming
around without a proper place. It was mentioned that the devata should
be immediately pacified and a place (An Alaya perhaps) be arranged for
her.

In the sannidhi of mAlikApuraM due to lack of vigraha, pUja-s are being
performed only to a trishUla. The correct deity to be invoked here is
shrI bhuvaneshvarI. However due to ignorance shrI durgA is being
propitiated and even that is not happening properly. Added to this, as
the surroundings were also unclean, the deity mAligai purottamma is
angered and many accidents/calamities happened because of this. A
shAntika rite is prescribed for the same in the deva prashna.

Few people witnessed that a strange human form is roaming around the
mAlikApuraM during midnights. This was confirmed in the deva prashna and
it was revealed it was a yakShiNI. A large vR^ikSha/tree near the
sannidhi of mAlikApuraM was hacked down and uprooted as part of the
renovation work by the devaswom board. The yakShiNI who has this
vR^ikSha as her abode on losing the same, is revealed to have been
angered and is mentioned as the cause for the yearly/frequent fire
accidents and macabre deaths/durmaraNaM around the place. As parihAraM,
it was mentioned that outside the compound wall of the mAligApurottamma
sannidhi a new sapling has to be planted and a puruSha form to be
invited (AvAhana) into the sapling, and a bali is to be offered and
shAnti are to be performed.

No changes were required near the 18 steps. However, the karuppa svAmi
and karuppAyi placed as kShetrapAlaka-s are to be treated as something
even more. As these two are more powerful than the kShetra pAlaka-s at
other places, very special pUja-s are to be performed for them.

In the past, to increase the daiva chaitanyaM, every night a dIpa was
lit after harivarAsanaM and is protected till morning. As this was
discontinued and only incense sticks were being lighted, shAstA is
displeased by the same. The suggestion is to reinstate this practice.

The quality of the abhiSheka dravya-s brought by bhakta-s and those used
being not upto the required standard/quality and seems to have earned
shAsta’s displeasure, as was revealed during the prashna. Henceforth it
was instructed that the chandana used for shAstA be prepared properly
near the sannidhAnaM itself.

A note on timings was revealed without causing disturbance to the devata
who prefers to be in ekAnta after the ucchi kAla pUja.

A certain tantri family has the shAsta here as kula devata and shAstA is
excessively pleased if they perform pUja. However due to changes over
time, this practice was stopped and the tantri family was subjected to
some difficulties. So it was advised in view of loka kShema and kuTumba
kShema for the said tantri family, that their family restart shAstA
archana on shabari giri.

On the kAntimala which is directly opposite to shabari giri, there is an
AchAra of lighting a lamp every night accompanied by a smaraNa of the
ponnaMbala shrI dharma shAstA, which is now discontinued. It is revealed
now that this practice should continue.

The maNTapa built by the board on ponnaMbalameDu is revealed to be done
at a faulty location and due to people moving around it was polluted and
counted as an apachAra to the deva-s. So a parihAra was prescribed.

Looking at the laxaNa of the tAmbUla on the first day, it was surmised
that either the Alaya or the vigraha might have been partially damaged.
As this could be potentially disastrous, on further prodding, it was
revealed that the kannimUla gaNapati vigraha was cracked and a stone in
the garbha gR^iha was moving/loose. It was immediately checked and found
to be true.

In the past it was mentioned that this prashna was performed was
conducted by the Pandala Raja who brought his own AsthAna jyotiSha-s for
the purpose. Now the board has taken over and in spite of people
disagreeing and angered about it, the rAja (or his representatives?) was
not let into the prashna till the third day. The Pandala Raja should be
part of this, as the outcome of the prashna has an influence on their
family too, as shrI dharma shAstA’s avatAra is connected with this
family.

Fortunately, in the prashna session that happened in 2001, the Pandala
Raja family was represented. This was performed from April 15th to 17th
of the year 2001. It was mentioned a great chaitanya and shakti has
accumulated in shabari giri, though some doSha-s/errors have crept in
which need ritual rectification. A summary of the outcome of this
session is mentioned below.

Due to lack of co-ordination and miscommunication among various groups
it was revealed that due to some mistakes during the punaH pratiShTha,
the gaNapati vigraha that was moved and left in Pamba, still had daiva
chaitanya and great powers left in it. Hence it was suggested that the
gaNapati vigraha should be re-installed (near Pamba I guess?)

A proposal was made regarding the temple timings and days when temple
should be opened and the will of the deity is sought for the same.
shAstA has approved it.

It was suggested that an Alaya is to be built in
kAntimalai-ponnaMbalameDu. It was reiterated that young women within the
restricted age should never enter this place.

Those who never performed maNDala dIkSha and above mentioned women
should let be allowed on the 18 steps and the board should ensure this.

The niyama-s for the melshAnti and kIlshAnti are reiterated. A skanda
Alaya to be built for those coming through the vanDiperiyAr route. As it
was revealed that the divine ornaments from Pandala that are brought
every year are being eyed by dacoits, caution was advised on the same.
Some vAstu doSha-s which needs rectification around the premises were
also pointed out.

No hunting is to be allowed in the area which was once patrolled by
dharma shAstA called pungAvanaM (from erumeli to paMba) . The purity of
the pUjA dravya-s is re-iterated.

kocchu kaDutta, valiya kaDutta, karuppa svAmi and karuppAyi amma are to
receive visheSha pUja-s for increasing the chaitanya. In the past a
bhakta brought an idol of a goat with a sarpa on its head (?) for which
a pratiShTha was done near the mAligApurattamma sannidhi. This was
revealed to be faulty. However due to many people visiting the place and
making offerings, the idol has acquired some chaitanya. So it was
suggested that instead of discarding it and wasting the accumulated
chaitanya, it can be transferred to the shape of a chandra made with
gold (? this part is unclear) and moved to the nIlakkal mahAdeva temple.
The goat with snake idol can be discarded after the transfer of the
chaitanya.

vAvar svAmi, it was revealed is not vAvar the Muslim as is popularly
understood but the actual name is vApara svAmi and is mentioned as part
of the bhUta gaNa-s of shrI bhUtanAtha svAmi and is the main a\~Nga
rakShaka (Body Guard). However no changes to the AchAra need to be made
it was told.

[Click for a more recent deva
prashna](https://yensures.com/2018/08/31/keralafloods-devaprashnam-conversation-with-the-divine-in-sabarimala-warnings-ignored/).

— Content complete – Need to be proofread.

This entry was posted on December 9, 2020 at 4:46 pm and is filed under
[Divination](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/divination/),
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[shAsta](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/shasta/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/09/deva-prashna-on-shabari-giri/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/09/deva-prashna-on-shabari-giri/trackback/)
from your own site.

