+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-12-08"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/08/ghantakarna-rudra-ghantakarna-mahavira/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/08/ghantakarna-rudra-ghantakarna-mahavira/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## ghaNTAkarNa rudra – ghaNTAkarNamahAvIra

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/ghantakarnayantra.jpg?w=269)

One of the few deities common to both the shaiva and the jaina
traditions. The jaina tradition refers to the deity as ghaNTAkarNa
mahAvIra while the shaiva tradition as ghaNTAkarNa rudra. Though the
jaina version of the deity’s mantra seems quite popular at the moment,
the shaiva versions are not as popular. As an example, John Cort’s
article on the deity does not say anything about the shaiva version, nor
does it explore any other AstIka versions of the same.

While the jaina version is to be found in the popular ghaNTAkarNa kalpa,
the shaiva version finds mention in the vAtUlAgamokta rudra kalpa.
Ishvara is the R^iShiH with anuShTup as the chandas, and the devata is
called as ghaNTAkarNa rudra with an interesting dhyAna as mentioned
below.

bhUteshaM bhUtasanghaIH parivR^itamanishaM mattabhetAla pIThaM

hAhAhIhIti nAdairaitirabhasakR^itairaTTahAsairupetaM

hastaissAhasrasaMkhyairvidhR^itashikhichayaissAdhayadehAdirUDhaM

sphoTAn.h daMdahyamAnaM haramahamanishaM ghaNTakarNaM namAmi

The mantra goes thus: oM hrIM ThvaM ghaNTAkarNa vishAlAkSha mahAbala
parAkrama! sphoTakAnAmajaM pAhi rakSha rakSha mahAbala.

My text has rvaM as the bIja and it might be a typo. The second shaiva
source is the bhuvaneshvarI yantra kakSha puTi (BYKP), published by an
Andhra brAhmaNa shrIman brahma deva shAstrin from the East godAvarI.
There the mantra dhyAna and other details are similar to the rudra
kalpa. The BYKP gives a yantra for the same and around the yantra, the
mantrin is to inscribe “dvaM hrIM dvaM ghraM ghaNTAkarNa rudra mArI
masurikAnnAshaya 2 shamaya 2 ThvaM dhvaM huM phaT”. The yantra is to be
inscribed on an audumbara plank.

A slightly different version is mentioned in the agni purANa and is
combined with a mantra of tryaMbaka rudra for protection of cows in the
goshAla/gokula. In the agni purANa we have the mantra as below:

ghANTAkarNo mahAseno vIraH prokto mahAbalaH

mArI nirnAshakaraH sa mAM pAtu jagatpatiH.

This is combined with the tryaMbaka rudra mantra which goes thus: oM
namo bhagavate tryaMbakAya upashamaya 2 chulu 2 mili 2 bhida 2 gomAninI
chakriNI hUM phaT asmin grAme gokulasya rakShAM kuru 2 shAntiM kuru 2.

We also see a similar combination as above in the tantra sAra sangraha
from Kerala, where instead of tryaMbakAya upashamaya, we have the
pada-s, vajrahuMkAradarshanAya, but the application remains the same.

The shaiva versions as can be seen above are focused exclusively on
sphoTaka shAnti.

The jaina version:

The jaina version with which a recent (1898 CE) jaina upAsaka buddhi
sAgar sUri attained siddhi with a 19 lettered mantra of ghaNTAkarNa goes
as below:

oM hrIM aiM klIM ghaNTAkarNa namostu mama kAryANi siddhyantu!

John Cort’s article gives us the following details against the backdrop
of which, ravi sAgar, the teacher of buddhi sAgar sUri, initiated him
into the ghaNTAkarNa mantra:

“The practice of constantly remembering this siddhamantra had come down
in the lineage, and by it those illustrious men had been saved from
harassment by animals and undesirable elements. But there had been no
direct vision of the hero Bell-Ears, the presiding deity of the mantra,
for two or three generations in the lineage. Ravisagar saw in the young
Buddhisagar the power to generate a direct vision.”

buddhi sAgar’s upAsana of ghaNTAkarNa and the success he attained is
described in Cort’s article as below:

” On the first day of the recitation, Buddhisagar saw wheels of
unlimited light, star disks, and minute points in his ajna cakra \[point
between the eyebrows\]. Then the points gradually opened up and became
glowing lamps. The light of the lamps came together in his forehead. In
this light for a brief time he saw the dim form of a black figure. On
the second day, he became absorbed in an indescribable bliss, and his
ajna cakra glittered with a shining light. All six cakras opened. All
his kundalis \[circles at the six cakras through which the yogic power
travels\] were awake. His entire body experienced an unprecedented and
stimulating sensation. On the third day, he had the same experience. In
three days he recited the mantra 27,000 times. Mantra-consciousness was
awake throughout his body.  
After the three days, Ravisagar instructed Buddhisagar to incorporate
this supreme mantra in his life, and to give mantra initiation to those
among hisfollowers who were suitable to recite it. Then he instructed
Buddhisagar to sit in one place and recite the mantra. Buddhisagar
commenced the recitation, reciting in his mind for eight hours every
day. After nine months he had finished 1,800,000 recitations. When he
had finished 800,000, mantra-consciousness awoke in him. After
1,000,000, he gained the power over dreams, after 1,400,000 he gained
the ability to tell the future, and after 1,800,000 he gained the power
to untangle problems and ward off misfortune.”

buddhisAgar now decided to perform a homa to the deity and obtain a
direct vision of ghaNTAkarNa and apparently succeded in the same as
mentioned in the same article:

“…Buddhisagar started reciting the mantra. At 2:00 A.M. there was an
unprecedented light in his ajna cakra. In the ajna cakra he saw a divine
form with bow and arrow in hand, a smiling face, a powerful body,
wearing golden clothes, a diamond-studded crown, and a diamond necklace.
Twice he heard the words, “attention, attention, blessing, blessing.”
Buddhisagar folded his hands in thanks at the blessing, and performed
veneration. At the end he heard in his right ear the words, “The god is
present right before you.” For a while the deity was visible. Thus it
was that Buddhisagar, the great ascetic, the great king of yogins, the
greatly fortunate, greatly knowledgeable, and most worshipful, received
that direct vision which is difficult to obtain.”

We get an impression that the jaina-s invested more time and effort in
ghaNTAkarNa upAsana and attained great results from the same. buddhi
sAgar apparently was performing \~7000 japa daily of the mantra he
received over a period of nine months following the yama and niyama that
is expected from a jaina ascetic.

There are a few other mantra-s of great importance in the jaina
tradition, one of which is as below: This is the version which is most
popular on the internet though the mantra with which buddhi sAgar
attained siddhi is slightly different. Along with the mantra a stotra
with 71 shloka-s seems to be equally popular.

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/image.png?w=383)

Having discussed the mantra-s, a natural question which would follow is
about the origin of this devata. This post is meant as short note and so
we are at the moment only interested in whether the tradition of
ghaNTAkarNa upAsana is transferred from the shaiva system to the jaina
system or vice versa. The ghaNTAkarNa kalpa popular in Gujarat seems to
have a shloka as follows:

praNamya girijAkAntaM R^iddhi siddhI pradAyakaM

ghaNTAkarNasya kalpaM chAriShTakaShTa nivAraNaM

The narrator seems to bow to rudra as the beloved of girijA who provides
R^iddhi and siddhi and then proceeds to reveal the kalpa of ghaNTAkarNa.
Given that we have a rudra kalpa which presents the mantra of the deity,
this connects the jaina and shaiva texts. The next text to examine is
the ghaNTAkarNa pratiShTha manual used in installing a ghaNTAkarNa idol
in a jaina temple.

The ghaNTAkarNa pratiShTha in the jaina tradition involves what is
termed as the sapta pITha pUjanAtmaka vidhi, the breif details of which
follow: After performing the jinArchana and the laghusnAtra vidhi as per
the jaina tradition, one makes an altar/vedika and on it inscribes a
svastika with chandana along with the shapes of pAda-s (?) and the
ghaNTAkarNa mUrti is placed on this. After offering dhupa and dIpa, hold
flowers in the hands in a\~njali mudra and utter:

“oM bhUrbhuvaH svaH ghaNTAkarNa mahAvIra atra Agaccha Agaccha , tiShTha
tiShTha svAhA”

and offer puShpA\~njali. After this one utters the long mantra of
ghaNTAkarNa shown above. Then one takes goghR^itaM ( cow ghee) in hand
and utters:

navanIta samutpannaM sarva santoShakAraNaM, ghR^itaM mayA samAnItaM
vilepanaM prati gR^ihyatAM and smears the same to the ghaNTAkarNa murti
while uttering:

“oM bhUrbhuvaH svaH ghaNTAkarNa mahAvIra vilepanaM samarpayAmi”.

One ties kaMkaNa after this and then seven wooden planks are arranged as
pITha-s before the ghaNTAkarNa mUrti. Different sets of deities are
invoked in these pITha-s the details of which are as below:

1.  First pITha: 64 yoginI-s
2.  52 vIra-s
3.  16 vidyA devI-s
4.  aShTa bhairava
5.  nava graha
6.  dikpAla
7.  gaNapati, kArtikeya, kShetrapAla, puradevatA

The 64 yoginI-s invoked in the first pITha starting wih brahmANI,
kaumArI, vArAhI, shAnkarI etc. The invocation follows the format as
shown for all deities.

oM brahmANyai namaH, bhagavati yoginI iha ghaNTAkarNa pratiShThA
mahotsave Agaccha 2 idamarghyaM pAdyaM, baliM charuM gR^ihANa 2
sannihitA bhava 2 svAhA, jalaM gR^ihANa 2 gandhaM puShpaM akShtAn
phalAni mudrAM dhUpaM dIpaM naivedyaM sarvopachAraM gR^ihANa 2 shAntiM
kuru 2 tuShTiM, puShTiM, R^iddhiM vR^iddhiM sarvasamIhitAni kuru 2 svAhA
– anena mantreNa sarvopachAraiH pUjanaM

This is done for the deities of all pITha-s. The 64 yoginI-s are:
brahmANI, kaumAri, vArAhI shAnkarI, indrANI, kaMkAlI, karAlI, kAlI,
mahAkAlI, chAmuNDA, jvAlAmukhI, kAmAkhyA, kapAlinI, bhadrakAlI, durgA,
aMbikA, lalitA, gaurI, sauma\~NgalA, rohiNI, kapilA, shUlakaTA ,
kuNDinI, tripurA, kurukullA, bhairavI, bhadrA, chandrAvatI, nArasiMhI,
nira\~njanA, hemakAnti, pretAsanA, IshvarI, mAheshvarI, vaiShNavI,
vainAyakI, yamaghaNTA, harasiddhi, sarasvatI, totalA, chaNDI,
sha\~NkhinI, padminI, citriNI, shAkinI, nArAyaNI, phalAdinI,
yamabhaginI, sUryaputrI, shItalA, kR^iShNa pAsA, raktAkShi, kAlarAtri,
AkAshI, sR^iShTinI, jayA, vijayA, dhUmravarNI, vegeshvarI (?),
kAtyAyanI, agnihotrI, chakreshvarI, mahAMbikA, and IshvarA.

The same process is repeated in the second pITha for the vIra-s who are:
kShetrapAl, kapila, vaTuka, narasiMha, gopAla, bhairava, garuDa,
raktasuvarNa, devasena, rudra, varuNa, bhadra, vajra, vajrajangha,
skanda, kuru, priyaMkara, priyamitra, vahni, kandarpa, haMsa, ekajaMgha,
ghaNTApAtha, dajaka, kAla, mahAkAla, meghanAda, bhIma, mahAbhIma,
tu\~Ngabhadra, vidyAdhara, vasumitra, vishvasena, nAga, nAgahasta,
pradyumna, kaMpilla, nakula, AhlAda, trimukha, piShacha, bhUta bhairava,
mahApishAcha, kAlamukha, shunaka, asthimukha, retovedha , smashAnachAra,
kelikala, bhR^i\~Nga, kaNTaka, vibhIShaNa.

The 16 vidyA devI-s invoked in the third pITha are: rohiNI, praGYA,
vajrashR^i\~NkhalA, vajrA\~nkushA, apratichakra, puruShadattA, kAlikA,
mahAkAlI, gaurI, gAndhArI, mahAjvAlA, mAnavI, vairoTyA, acchuptA,
mAnasA, mahAmAnasA.

The 8 bhairava-s would be: bhairava, mahAbhairava, chaNDa bhairava,
rudra bhairava, kapAla bhairava, Ananda bhairava, kaMkAla bhairava,
bhairava bhairava.

The graha-s and the lokapAla-s are the same as in the Astika rituals.
Even in the jinArchana vidhi and the laghu snAtra vidhi, performed
before the sapta pITha pUja, the dikpAla-s, and the navagraha-s are
extensively called upon.

One striking feature is the difference in the deployment of the mantra
for various objectives in the shaiva and jaina realms. For the jaina
usage, we can look at the long mantra of ghaNTAkarNa mentioned earlier
which calls for destroying of disease and sphoTaka first, and then goes
on to ask for protection against many other calamities, as if retaining
the earlier shaiva memory in the second line. Being mindful of examples,
of how mantra-s/mantra systems evolve over time, we get the impression
that the jaina-s probably indulged in a sincere practice of the early
shaiva version first, and later built- upon/enhanced it, perhaps
inspired by the devata directly. In the jaina ghaNTAkarNa stotra
comprising 71 shloka-s, ghaNTAkarNa is called upon for protection
against mArI/mahAmArI four times (i.e. in four shloka-s) and once to
protect the pashu-s/cattle like in the shaiva usage. Both in the
remaining (of the 71) shloka-s and in other jaina mantra-s, the deity is
called upon to intervene, regarding a multitude of difficulties and
desires of the sAdhaka. This makes sense given that the mantra
transmitted to buddhisAgar calls upon the deity for kArya siddhi which
is generic, while in the shaiva world almost all mantra-s are only in
the context of sphoTaka vAraNa. We can with some degree of certainty say
that the deity clearly had shaiva origins, though the upAsana was later
taken up by the jaina-s and furthered with great fervor & intensity.

This entry was posted on December 8, 2020 at 3:32 pm and is filed under
[jaina](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/jaina/),
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/). You can
follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/08/ghantakarna-rudra-ghantakarna-mahavira/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/08/ghantakarna-rudra-ghantakarna-mahavira/trackback/)
from your own site.

