+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-12-22"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/22/bala-as-the-highest-vidya/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/22/bala-as-the-highest-vidya/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## bAlA – As the highest vidya – bAlA bindu tApinIupaniShad

![bAlA tripura sundarI – Kakinada – Alaya is \~120 years old. The
initial yantra made for the pratiShTha we are told, was unbearable and
difficult to manage. So a new yantra was made by removing some
bIjAkShara-s, the deity pacified and the old yantra was left in the pond
in front of the
Alaya.](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/bala-kakinada.jpg?w=524)

मुखे श्रीमातङ्गी तदनु किल तारा च नयने

तदन्तङ्गा काली भ्रुकुटिसदने भैरविपरा ।

कटौ छिन्ना धूमावति जय कुचे श्रीकमलजा

पदांशे ब्रह्मास्त्रा जयति किल बाला दशमयी ॥ १२॥

When the bAlA dashamayI was first posted in egroups two decades ago, it
brought much Ananda to those who were seeing for the first time. The
above shloka which is part of the bAlA dashamayI stotra, speaks of the
various dasha mAhAvidyA-s as different parts of bAlA. Her mukha is
mAta\~NgI, tAra her eyes, breasts as kamalA and the feet as bagalA. This
also raised the question if there is a bAlA centered tradition where
bAlA is seen as the highest deity and not as a preliminary or an a\~Nga
of pa\~nchadashI & ShoDhashI. The dashamayI stotra is one stuti in that
direction. The tradition of bAlA as the highest deity finds mention in a
work called the bAlA bindutApinI upaniShad. I was told that this was
first published a few decades ago by a vaidika family from the East
godAvarI district. About two decades ago we had one more publication
from the same areas, along with a commentary by a vaidika from Andhra by
name lakShmI-nArAyaNa sUri. It is of course quite possible there are
other works where such a scheme with bAlA as central deity is expounded,
though this post will be restricted to the upaniShad.

Like the nR^isiMha tApinI the work is primarily divided into the pUrva
and uttara tApinI with the pUrva tApinI divided into 7 khaNDa-s and the
uttara into 9 khaNDa-s. From the third & fourth khaNDa of the uttara
bhAga we have:

3.praNavaM bhuvaneshAnIM pAdamityava dhArayet

lalitA ShoDhashI chaiva bAhuyugmaM vinchintayet

bagalA parameshAnI durgAchaiva navAkSharI

netra dvayaM vijAnIyA tArakaH keshabandhanaM

4.vArAhI shyAmalA chaiva stana yugmaM prakIrtitaM

pratya\~Ngira pR^iShTha vamshA evam rUpA maheshvarI

anvetu ShaNmatasthAyai mantrAshshaivAstu vaiShNavAH

a\~Nga pratya\~Nga rUpeNa evaM dhyeyaM mumukShuNA

Clearly lalita of the pa\~nchadashI and the ShoDhashI are to be seen as
two hands of bAlA. The commentary goes into an elaborate discussion on
whether this is proper and justifies the same. Likewise vArAhI &
shyAmalA are to be imagined as the stana-s of bAlA. The commentary
mentions that by vArAhI, the bR^ihadvArAhI is meant and by shyAmalA
specifically rAjashyAmalA is intended. Furthermore all the different
mantra-s from the ShaNmata (six mata- shaiva, vaiShNava, saura etc) are
to be seen as the a\~Nga and pratya\~Nga-s of bAlA. The central deity is
bAlA tryakSharI. The bAlA ShaDakSharI is termed as bhramarI bAlA and is
to be invoked seprately as seated on the side of the central bAlA
traykSharI. When the name bAlA is introduced in the text for the first
time, no explanation on why the deity is called so is given. The
commentator glosses over that part “bAlA nAmnIM paradevatAM”

The mahApUjA of bAlA according to this tradition includes calling upon
many deities including shrI rAma through rAma ShaDakSharI, gopAla and
interestingly the yajurlakShmI who is also mentioned to in the nR^isiMha
tApinI. The upaniShad recommends japa while performing maithuna with
bhAryA i.e. wife after performing various kinds of nyAsa on her and
warns against performing the same otherwise: “yonau lingaM tu saMsthApya
mahAmantrAn japetsudhIH, evaM kurvIta bhAryAyAM anyatra patito bhavet”.
A note of caution though: This part is to be carefully executed after
proper initiation and instruction to do the same. Experimenting this out
of delusion or enthusiasm without correct instructions and approval can
be potentially disastrous for a sAdhaka. Then a chakra of bAlA is given
along with the devata-s and bIjAkShara-s which includes among many other
mantra-s, inscribing the nArAyaNAShTAkShari, vAsudeva dvAdashAkShari and
sudarshana in the bhUpura along with pratya\~NgirA, gAyatrI and the
shatAkSharI.

The seventh khaNDa is interesting and is comparable to the pada and pAda
sAma of the nR^isiMha tApinI but not in the same detail. The khaNDa
seeks to convey how the seen (and also the unseen) world is pervaded by
its highest deity bAlA: “dR^isyamAna prapa\~nchasya paradevatA rUpatvaM
prakaTayati”

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA sachchidAnandAtmakaM brahma bhUrbhuvaH tasmai
vai namo namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA prakAsha rUpiNI ssuva bhUrbhuvaH tasmai vai
namo namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA vimarsha rUpiNI ssuva bhUrbhuvaH tasmai vai
namo namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA bindu rUpiNI ssuva bhUrbhuvaH tasmai vai namo
namaH

…

…

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA shakti rUpiNI bhUrbhuvassuvastasmai vai namo
namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM mUlaM pa\~nchadashAkSharI bhUrbhuvassuvastasmai vai
namo namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA pa\~nchadashAkSharI bhUrbhuvassuvastasmai vai
namo namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA bhuvaneshvarI rUpiNI bhUrbhuvassuvastasmai vai
namo namaH

oM aiM hrIM shrIM yA bAlA vAgvAdinI rUpiNI bhUrbhuvassuvastasmai vai
namo namaH

and list various shakti-s and categories of existence. This ends with
the ninth khaNDa where the fourteen loka-s starting with atala, vitala,
bhU, bhuvarloka etc are all seen as different a\~Nga-s of virADrUpiNI
bAlA.

At a later point, the complete 7th khaNDa of uttara bhAga will be
transliterated…Hence…To be continued

A note on bAlA upAsaka-s from East godAvari district: For some reason
there seem to considerable number of people in this district who had
success with bAlA upAsana. Most of them come from brAhmaNa families but
there were some non brAhmaNa-s too like the late head of the bAlA
tripura sundarI pIThaM near my home. There used to be a brAhmaNa family
as tenants in our house and the lady is named after this devata. Her
mother in law’s mother was a successful bAlA upAsakI and is famous in
some circles as someone who can call bAlA at will and that the deity
would respond. At one time, she instructed her daughter to name one of
her daughters after the deity and to acquire a daughter in law named
after the deity…who happened to be our tenant. There were others.
Interestingly, a small fraction or rather only in one instance there is
also the anecdote of a successful bAlA upAsaka deploying the mantra for
something as petty as getting the right card in the card game/poker.
Needless to say, this will not go well in the long run though he might
have succeeded in the game. There are few rudra Alaya-s in this district
where the main devI is called bAlA tripura sundarI. The famous example
being the pa\~nchArama kShetra in sAmarlakoTa.

This entry was posted on December 22, 2020 at 7:01 pm and is filed under
[bAlA](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/shakta/bala/),
[shAkta](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/shakta/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/22/bala-as-the-highest-vidya/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/12/22/bala-as-the-highest-vidya/trackback/)
from your own site.

