+++
title = "Passages"
full_title = "Passages"
date = "2020-04-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/04/11/passages/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2020/04/11/passages/).

Passages

Viruses don’t often switch species: there are many barriers. In order
to succeed, viruses must interact correctly with hundreds of proteins –
ones they make use of, and immunity proteins that might destroy them.
Not easy, and so less than one in a thousand bird and mammal viruses
seem capable in infecting humans. This can’t be a product of gradual
evolution: the viruses has to be capable of infecting human cells from
day 1. Virologists often attempt to grow important human pathogens in
laboratory animals, and usually it doesn’t work. Second, the virus, even
at at the very beginning, has to have an R0 \> 1, else it will quickly
burn out. So, even at the beginning, it has to be able to infect humans
and be transmitted at least moderately efficiently to other humans.

That doesn’t mean that there isn’t room for improvement. Once our new
virus starts spreading, mutations that further its spread will be
favored by natural selection. That selection is extremely rapid.
Virologists make practical use of that rapid selection. For example,
they wanted a mouse model of SARS. They did manage to get SARS to
infect mice, but it didn’t cause as serious a disease as in humans.
They passaged the virus 25 times: infected a mouse, injected a sample
from that infected mouse into another mouse, and so on, resulting in a
strain that was highly lethal to mice. Natural selection in the course
of the infection of a single mouse led to a better-adapted strain of
coronavirus: repeated 25 times, it transformed the virus from not too
serious to highly lethal.

In an analogous experiment, researchers took a subtype of an avian
influenza virus (one not known to infect humans) and passaged it in
ferrets. Originally, it could infect ferrets but was not transmitted
noticeably to other ferrets: but after 10 passages. it could – without
losing virulence.

“At this point, the virus population will experience selection for
variants with increased capacity to spread through the human
population.”

Covid-19 has been not in humans very long and is probably changing
fairly rapidly.





