+++
title = "Agnimitra & Conflict With Vidarbha"
date = "2021-01-23"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/01/23/agnimitra-conflict-with-vidarbha/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/01/23/agnimitra-conflict-with-vidarbha/).

The Śuṅga dynasty is one of those ruling dynasties of ancient India
which has been mentioned by almost all sorts of Indian literary sources.
Apart from the archaeological and numismatic evidence of the Śuṅga
Empire that existed from about 187 to 75 BCE, some vacuum in the Śuṅga
history is filled by these literary sources. From *Purāṇas* to
Patañjali’s *Mahābhāśya*, from Bāṇa’s *Harshacharita* to Kālidāsa’s
*Mālavikāgnimitram*, every one of these literary sources has helped
historians and scholars to abridge those gaps and form a cohesive
account of Śuṅga rule.

There are many riveting events in the entire Śuṅga period, and one such
fascinating event is the topic of this write up – the conflict between
crown prince Agnimitra and the kingdom of Vidarbha or Berāra which has
been detailed by the great poet Kālidāsa in his *Mālavikāgnimitram*.

**Background**

The events leading up to the establishment of the Śuṅga power have been
described in *Harshacharita* by Bāṇa and also in *Purāṇas*. The
unpopular Maurya sovereign Bṛihadratha was assassinated by his general
*(Senāpati)* Puśyamitra right in front of the Maurya imperial army in
Pātaliputra. Maurya rule came to an end and a new ruler ascended the
throne of Magadha. But the territory that came under the Śuṅgas was not
what Aśoka had ruled in the Maurya Empire’s heydays. The Śuṅgas ruled
the central part of the erstwhile Maurya territory.¹ The area under
Maurya control had already diminished and by the time Puśyamitra came to
the throne, northern India had become autonomous. On the other hand,
Āndhras and Kaliṅgas had also asserted their independence.²
Nevertheless, Śuṅgas still ruled a huge area from Pātaliputra to
Ayodhyā, Vidiśa and if *Divyāvadāna* and Tāranatha are to be believed,
till Jālandhara and Śākala (Sialkot) in Punjāb.³ *Divyāvadāna* also
tells us that Puśyamitra himself continued to reside in Pātaliputra.⁴

![**Representative artwork from Śuṅga period. (A Śuṅga Royal family,
West Bengal 1st Century
BCE)**^(**\***)](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/01/royal_family_sunga_west_bengal_1st_century_bce.jpg?w=786)

**Fact or Fiction**

Now some people might criticise the approach of using incidents from a
drama and considering them as sober history. There can be no doubt that
a dramatist may use a setting or characters from traditional history and
embellish them with their words, especially in the ancient times when
such themes were very common in every ancient civilization. Therefore,
some precaution is understandable but that should not come into our way
of considering these literary works as worthy of research with regard to
history of the period, especially when many of the characters and
situations mentioned in the play have historical evidence.

***“The name of the Śuṅga*** ***kings in the play correspond exactly to
those found in the Purāṇas, including their*** ***genealogical
order..”⁵* **

The other material from the *Purāṇas* also corresponds to the play as in
the king of the empire, *i.e.* Puśyamitra/Puśpamitra has been called the
general or *senānī* and not the king.⁶ In the play, crown prince
Agnimitra has been shown as governing Vidiśa as his father’s Viceroy and
we know from archaeological evidence that Vidiśa was actually part of
Śuṅga Empire. Another fact that comes in favour of *Mālavikāgnimitram*
particularly is the absence of the curse in the play. To elaborate, we
know that Kālidāsa did use curse as an important element in the story of
many of his play or poems. Whether it’s *Vikramorvaśiya*,
*Abhijñānaśākuntalam*, *Meghadūta* or *Kumārasaṁbhava*, the characters
and sometimes even the basic story line are always inspired from the
traditional tales of Hinduism and beautifully embellished by him,
interspersed with a lot of historical information. But interestingly,
many of these stories originally did not have curse as part of their
tales.⁷

So Kālidāsa uses this innovation of his to take the story forward when a
character is cursed. And in these literary works therefore, the curse
plays significant role. But interestingly, the curse is conspicuous by
its absence in *Mālavikāgnimitram*. The treatment of this play is quite
different to the other plays of Kālidāsa and it seems that “*the scene
of **Mālavikāgnimitra*** *is part of real, local history.” ⁸*

**Conflict of Agnimitra with Vidarbha**

Eminent historian H. C. Raychaudhuri in his *Political History of
Ancient India*, takes evidence from *Mālavikāgnimitram* and describes
the events that led up to the conflict between Śuṅga prince Agnimitra
and the kingdom of Vidarbha. He suggests that the ascendence of the
Śuṅga power corresponds with the formation of kingdom of Vidarbha under
Yajñasena. In the play, Yajñasena is the king of Vidarbha and he is also
related to the *Mauryasachiva*, who has not been named. The
*Mauryasachiva* is brother-in-law of the king Yajñasena in this play.

> *“It appears that during the reign of Bṛihadratha Maurya, there were
> two parties or factions in the Magadha Empire, one headed by, the
> king’s sachiva or minister, the other headed by his senapati or
> general. The minister’s partisan Yajñasena* ***was appointed governor
> of Vidarbha, while the general’s son Agnimitra got the Viceroyalty of
> Vidiśā. When the general organised his coup d’etat, killed the king
> and imprisoned the minister,* *****Yajñasena*** ***apparently declared
> his independence and commenced hostilities against the usurping
> family.”***
>
> ***Raychaudhuri, Political History of* Ancient India from the
> Accession of Parikshit to the Extinction of the Gupta Dynasty.**

But the cousin of Yajñasena, Mādhavasena has already made an alliance
with Agnimitra and is travelling along with his sister Mālavikā,
secretly towards Vidiśa where Mālavikā is to be married with Agnimitra.
But both of them are arrested by an *Antapāla*, Warden of the Marches of
Yajñasena and kept in custody. Another important role is played by
Agnimitra’s brother-in-law, Vīrasena (he was brother of Agnimitra’s
queen Dhāraṇī) who has been in the meantime appointed in charge of a
fortress in the frontier on the banks of Narmadā by Agnimitra.⁹ Mālavikā
somehow manages to escape but Mādhavasena is still imprisoned and when
Agnimitra learns about these events, a conflict ensues. The details of
the play and of the love story between the heroine Mālavikā and the hero
Agnimitra is not our concern here, rather what happens between the
Agnimitra and the kingdom of Vidarbha is the topic of our study.

Raychaudhuri especially points out the significance of two specific
phrases used in the play. One is *achirādhishṭhita* and the other is
*navasaṁropaṇaśithilastaru*. The *Amātya* of Agnimitra describes the
kingdom of Vidarbha as *achirādhishṭhita* (established not long ago) and
the king of Vidarbha is described as **navasaṁropaṇaśithilastaru** which
means the king has been compared to a newly planted tree which is not
firm. And because the king is in relation to the Maurya minister, he has
been described as *prakṛityamitra* meaning a natural enemy.

After learning about Mādhavasena, Agnimitra promptly sends his messenger
to the Vidarbha King to quickly set his friend Mādhavasena free but the
reply he gets is unsatisfactory. Yajñasena has replied that there are
certain ways in which *“mutual transactions between equals are
conducted”* and thus asks for the freedom of the Maurya *sachiva* who
has been imprisoned by Agnimitra. The Śuṅga prince is unsurprisingly
enraged. He doesn’t think that the king of Vidarbha is in a position to
negotiate rather he should only obey Agnimitra’s orders.

Agnimitra swiftly gives orders to Vīrasena to march against Vidarbha. In
the ensuing conflict, Vīrasena is victorious and he sets Mādhavasena
free,¹⁰ who is welcomed in Vidiśā. The independent kingdom of Vidarbha
ceases to exist and the kingdom is divided between the two cousins,
Mādhavasena and Yajñasena in two halves under the paramount sovereignity
of Puśyamitra. The river Varadā forms a boundary between these two
halves.¹¹

**Contrary View**

The fact that Dr. Raychaudhuri interpreted the phrases and words
mentioned in the play like *achirādhishṭhita*,
*navasaṁropaṇaśithilastaru* and *prakṛityamitra* with regard to the
kingdom of Vidarbha to mean “established not long ago”, “a newly planted
tree” and “natural enemy” respectively has already been mentioned. But
this interpretation has been disputed by another historian Dasharatha
Sharma. He interpretes that *“in Kālidāsa’s usage, a ‘new’ ruler need
not be the one who has founded a new kingdom.”*^(*12*) He disputes the
view that the kingdom of Vidarbha under Yajñasena was a newly formed
independent kingdom. Rather the fact that Mādhavasena enjoys royal
status even before Yajñasena’s defeat by Agnimitra is pertinent. He
directs us to another detail in the play. Mādhavasena couldn’t have been
made a royal by the Maurya *sachiva* who had no direct relation to him
(The *sachiva* was brother-in-law of Yajñasena). As per Sharma, this
interpretation betrays that the kingdom was not “newly founded”. The
negotiation by the king of Vidarbha was thus very clear – one *śyāla*
(brother-in-law) was to be exchanged for another, albeit a would be
*śyāla*.¹³

Sharma also interprets the phrase **prakṛityamitra** differently.
Raychaudhuri has interpreted it to mean a natural enemy because
Yajñasena was a relative of the *Mauryasachiva* and therefore a natural
enemy of Agnimitra but Sharma interprets it in the context of Kautilya’s
*Arthaśāstra*. As per *Arthaśāstra*, “the adjoining ruler is regarded as
*prakṛtyamitra* and the one next to him as *mitra*” and therefore,
Yajñasena on account of being a neighbour to Agnimitra was a potential
enemy.^(*14*) Sharma thus suggests to research into these details more
before forming a concrete opinion on the play and using it to form
history of the Śuṅga period.

**Conclusion**

Various interpretations of these phrases notwithstanding,
*Mālavikāgnimitram* by the great *Kālidāsa* provides us with such a
fascinating chunk of the history of Śuṅga period. And this is a great
example that many of our literary works after careful corroboration from
other sources, can be of great help to learn about many such dark spaces
in ancient Indian history.

**References**

1.  [*History and Culture of Indian People, Volume II, The Age of
    Imperial
    Unity.*](https://archive.org/details/ageofimperialuni07bhar/page/96/mode/2up)
2.  *ibid*.
3.  *ibid*.
4.  Raychaudhuri, H. C. , [*Political History of Ancient India from
    Accession of Parikshit to the Extinction of Gupta
    Dynasty.*](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/198/mode/1up)
5.  TIEKEN, H. (2001). THE PLACE OF THE “MĀLAVIKĀGNIMITRA” WITHIN
    KĀLIDĀSA’S OEUVRE.*Indo-Iranian Journal,**44*(2), 149-166.
    Retrieved January 22, 2021, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/24663799>
6.  *ibid*.
7.  *ibid*.
8.  *ibid*.
9.  [*History and Culture of Indian People, Volume II, The Age of
    Imperial
    Unity.*](https://archive.org/details/ageofimperialuni07bhar/page/96/mode/2up)
10. *ibid*.
11. Raychaudhuri, H. C. , [*Political History of Ancient India from
    Accession of Parikshit to the Extinction of Gupta
    Dynasty.*](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/198/mode/1up)
12. Sharma, D. (1955). TESTIMONY OF THE MALAVIKAGNIMITRAM REGARDING
    PUSHYAMITRA SUNGA’S RELATIONS WITH VIDARBHA: A
    REVALUATION.*Proceedings of the Indian History Congress,**18*,
    59-61. Retrieved January 22, 2021, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44137339>
13. *ibid.*
14. *ibid*.

**Photo Credit** – **\*** *WikiMedia Commons*.

This post has also been published on
[HinduPost](https://www.hindupost.in/history/agnimitra-and-conflict-with-vidarbha/).

