+++
title = "Post Stories in Samskrit"
full_title = "Post Stories in Samskrit"
date = "2021-05-28"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VDBSQk5FMVVTVEJQUkVWNlRVUlJQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VDBSQk5FMVVTVEJQUkVWNlRVUlJQUT09).

Post Stories in Samskrit 



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1622212323post%20stories%20in%20samskrit.jpg)

This one program if implemented assiduously by all the Samskrit lovers
and Samskrit teachers all over India and abroad can take the Samskrit
language to crores of homes. It has the potential to be a game changer
in Samskrit teaching apart from making people aware that Samskrit is a
simple spoken language, lakhs of people speak Samskrit and any one can
learn it easily. But the greatest contribution it could make is
connecting our kids and younger generation with our knowledge heritage
through Samskrit, initiating them into learning the most ancient but
equally modern, most refined and the richest language of the world and
taking a step ahead towards fulfilling a civilisational aspiration of
Bharat.  
  
Many of the parents have an earnest desire to teach Samskrit to their
children. But neither are they able to fulfil it nor are the schools
doing it effectively. This program could be a great beginning in this
direction.  
  
The proposed plan is that all the school going children should be
encouraged to memorize a story in Samskrit and its video be uploaded in
social media. If memorization is not possible, let the student practice
to pronounce it correctly and its audio record be uploaded. Stories may
be downloaded from
[www.sambhashanasandesha.in](https://www.sambhashanasandesha.in)
Sambhashana Sandesha is the most popular monthly magazine of Samskrit.
It has a popular column, Balamodini, for children’s stories. About a
thousand such stories were published in it for the last 25 years. Those
stories are simple in language and high by values. Hence, they are ideal
for rendering. But stories may be taken from other sources also. Prior
Samskrit knowledge is not a must for memorizing or reading the story. In
fact, reading or memorizing the stories will be a stepping stone to
learn Samskrit. For those who study Samskrit at schools, it will help
them to practice conversation in Samskrit. Even the parents also will
benefit from it.  
  
The videos or audios of the stories should be uploaded in social media
like Facebook, Telegram, WhatsApp, Instagram, Koo, Signal, Twitter, etc
by all the students or their parents. Alternative arrangements for
uploading may be made for those children who do not have social media
account. Every student should tell as many stories as possible and each
story may be uploaded separately. Efforts should be made to maximise the
viewership of each story. Maximum number of children participating, each
student telling maximum number of stories, each story getting maximum
number of viewership and maximum number of Samskrit lovers and Samskrit
teachers working for this project in this year will be crucial factors
for the success of this project. This program need not be only school
centric. Any lover of Samskrit or a group of them can take up this
activity.  
  
A subject becomes popular for any one of these three reasons – Money,
Success and Prestige. Learning Samskrit should be made a matter of
prestige in the community. At the end of 19th century and in the
beginning of 20th century, as part of the Hebrew revival movement, all
the children who were able to give one hour lecture in Hebrew were
felicitated by the community elders due to which all children and
parents were aspiring and preparing for that great occasion in their
life and thus Hebrew became a fashion among the youth. Even in India,
the early ones who studied English were publicly honoured, English
educated were held in high esteem, and the impact was so severe that
even today many parents with a false-prestige insist their kids to speak
in English rather than the mother tongue. We need to reverse this trend.
Children who tell more stories in Samskrit should be felicitated
publicly or at least appreciated and recognised. Hundreds of students
telling thousands of stories in every school should be a common feature
all over the country. Every child in every home should be encouraged to
practice a story in Samskrit.  
  
Let every one of us strive to popularise Devavani through this program -
Post Stories in Samskrit. Let our tongues and mobile phones be the new
instruments of change in Samskrit learning and teaching. Let Samskrita
Sarasvati dance on the tongues of our children. Let Samskrit be heard in
the corridors, classrooms, staffrooms and playgrounds of every school.
Let speaking Samskrit be a new fashion. Let every home be a Samskrit
home. Let Samskrit sounds reverberate in every nook and corner of the
country!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 2472 \| 28-05-2021 08:02
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

