+++
title = "How to learn Samskrit "
date = "2021-05-15"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VGtSWmVVNTZVVEpQUkZVeFRrUk5QUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VGtSWmVVNTZVVEpQUkZVeFRrUk5QUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1621099908Samskrit.png)

Learning a language is a skill. More so learning Samskrit due to the
foreign method being employed in its teaching, its literature
predominantly being in Sloka form and the non-availability of good
teachers and books around you. Hence here are some tips.  
Language is basically speech and interactive. Reading and writing
through script comes later. Hence it should be learnt in that order
only. Speak the language before you read and write, and listen before
you speak. You may start with video lessons available at
[http://www.sanskrit.nic.in/](http://www.sanskrit.nic.in/sanskrit_language_teaching.php)
or there may be many other conversational lessons available in the
internet. While viewing them, listen attentively and repeat the words
and sentences as many times as possible. As you pick them up, start
using those words and sentences in your daily life at home or with
friends. It makes you acquainted with Samskrit sounds and naturally
internalises the word forms and sentence structures. This accelerates
your learning.  
  
Further, you may join any of the courses offered by Samskrit Promotion
Foundation’s <https://www.learnsamskrit.online> or Samskrita Bharati’s
<https://www.samskritabharati.in/correspondence> or <http://nsktu.ac.in>
(National Sanskrit University Tirupati) or
<https://www.sanskritfromhome.in> (Vyoma Linguistic Labs Foundation) or
<https://www.hua.edu/academics/programs/> (Hindu University of America)
to name a few. There are many other good online courses offered by
institutions and individual scholars. Every course is unique and useful.
You may choose the course depending upon your interest and level of your
language proficiency. Courses offered by Samskrit Promotion Foundation
are supported by Videos, Audios, weekly classes and WhatsApp help apart
from course books.  
  
The success of your learning hinges mainly on three things given in the
order of importance - 1. Learner’s efforts and approach to learning 2.
Teacher and teaching method 3. Books/Teaching-learning-material. Though
in the context of education in general, the order of importance would
have been 2, 3 and 1, here in your context, 2nd and 3rd are not directly
in your circle of influence whereas 1st is fully at your command. Hence
let us delve on the 1st.  
  
Though your purpose of learning Samskrit may be to read and understand
the great works of Samskrit, at the stage of learning the language and
for the sake of mastering it, you need to practice communication in
Samskrit both oral and written form. Don’t wait for people with whom you
can speak Samskrit, but start speaking Samskrit with whoever is around
you. Listening and speaking will give you fluency. Reading and writing
will enhance the correctness of your language and improve the vocabulary
as well. Constant thinking about the words, their forms like linga,
vacana, vibhakti, pratyaya, visheshana-visheshya-sambandha, etc., about
the sentence, its vacya, karaka, verbal declensions etc. alone will give
you command over the language. Memorising would also help. First
practice basic language skills, secondly learn basic Vyakarana and study
Kavya, then Laghu Siddhanta Kaumudi and so on. Then you may start your
journey with the study of a Shastra. Listen Samskrit, speak Samskrit,
read Samskrit and write Samskrit. Don’t run after the translation of
each and every word but rather try to understand and think in Samskrit.
Understanding 6 Karakas, 6 Karaka Vibhaktis, Shashthi Vibhakti and all
the Upapada Vibhaktis is very important to construct faultless and good
sentences in Samskrit.  
  
Repeated and continuous listening to GOOD Samskrit is very much
essential for acquiring GOOD language. Download good Samskrit speeches
from YouTube or articles and stories from
[www.sambhashanasandesha.com](https://www.sambhashanasandesha.com),
record the audio while you read them out loudly and later keep listening
to the audios again and again with full attention to the words and
sentence structures used.  
  
I would advise children and teenagers to memorise Subhashitas, Stotras,
Shabdarupani, Dhaturupani, Amarakosha, Ashtadhyayi, Bhagavad Gita etc.
Memorising these will be a great asset throughout one’s life. Adults may
read out one of these items loudly every day for a few months.  
  
Sambhashanam is the beginning and also the instrument to attain the
Shastrajnanam. Kavyadhyayanam with the application of Vyakaranam will
give you good proficiency in Samskrit. Language is for using and not for
only understanding. Hence use it.  
After mastering basic Samskrit language skills, the second most
important skill you need to acquire is making Anvaya of a Sloka which
you can learn through the practice of Akanksha Paddhati.  
  
There are several dimensions and levels of learning Samskrit like
Sarala-Manaka-Samskritam for all modes of communication and education,
Vishishtoddesha-Samskritam - Samskrit for Specific Purpose like
Ayurveda, Yoga etc, Praudha-Kavya-Samskritam for reading the literature
and for literary appreciation, Nyayabhasha-Samskritam for
Shastradhyayanam and Shastra-goshthi, Vaidika-Samskritam for
Vedadhyanam, etc. However, Sarala Manaka Samskritam (Simple Standard
Samskritam) is the stepping stone and entry gate to all other forms and
levels of Samskrit learning.  
  
A scholar who can explain with Sutras how a given Samskrit word is
derived is called “Vyutpanna”. Every student of Samskrit language
aspires to be a Vyutpanna in his/her life time. Would you like to be
one?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 10564 \| 15-05-2021 11:01
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

