+++
title = "24 Facts about Samskrit "
date = "2021-05-30"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFdwTmVVNUVaM3BQUkdONVRWUlJQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFdwTmVVNUVaM3BQUkdONVRWUlJQUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-162239462024%20facts%20about%20samskrit2.jpg)

1\. One can hear two models of Samskrit language, one is simple ‘easy to
understand’ spoken Samskrit language and the other one is scholarly,
flowery ‘difficult to understand’ literary Samskrit language. There is
no grammatical, structural or pronunciational difference between them.
Both are Paninian. The former is Simple Standard Samskrit with minimum
vocabulary, minimum structures and mostly with Samskrit words which
exist in Indian languages.  
  
2. Samskrit was a popular spoken language across the Greater Bharat.
Enough evidences are available in this regard in Vyakarana Mahabhashya
of Patanjali.  
  
3. Samskrit language and literature were studied by all the people
irrespective of caste or gender. One can know this fact from the
statistics given in the book “The Beautiful Tree” by Prof Dharma Pal.  
  
4. Samskrit is the first language uttered by Brahma. Hence it is also
called as Chaturmukha-mukhodbhava apart from Devavani.  
  
5. Samskrit is the only language in the world which has an unequalled
and uncorrupted tradition of classicalness, refinedness, antiquity and
continuity.  
  
6. Though every Indian language is a cultural language, Samskrit is
regarded as the pan-Indian common cultural language of every common man
of India.  
  
7. Samskrit language and literature have always promoted inclusive
thoughts. Samskrit is primarily responsible for the all-inclusive
culture of this land, Bharatavarsha.  
  
8. From times immemorial, Samskrit literature is the primary source of
inspiration and content for most of the Indian languages’ literature.  
  
9. Common Samskrit words being used in most of the Indian languages all
over India, Samskrit Stotras and mantras for pujas and Karmakandas,
common way of life due to shastras and their newer interpretations in
Samskrit according to changing times as references for Dharma,
internalisation of value systems propounded by Puranas and Itihasas by
the society etc are some of the major contributory factors for the unity
and harmony of our nation.  
  
10. The word generation power of Samskrit language is unparalleled in
the world. Samskrit can generate infinite number of words due to its
rich reservoir of verbs, prefixes, suffixes, compound-words and perfect
grammar.  
  
11. Samskrit language is as old as the Creation since Samskrit came from
the very mouth of the Creator, the Brahman, at the time of Creation.  
  
12. The fact that Samskrit is the language of Yoga, the language of
Ayurveda, the language of Vedanta, the language of Bhagavadgita, the
language of Natyashastra, the language of Indian Mathematics, the
language of Indian Astronomy, the language of Indian Economics, the
language of Indian Political Science, the language of Nyaya (Logic)
etc., should be properly understood and be factually highlighted.  
  
13. Samskrit is one of the three languages (English and Hindi being the
other two) taught and studied all over India both in School Education
and Higher Education. Rest of the languages are regional.  
  
14. The teaching method currently being employed in Samskrit language
teaching at school level, called Grammar-Translation-Method, is a
foreign method and this method is the main reason for the decline of
Samskrit language. Samskrit was taught through Samskrit before English
medium was introduced in India. Every language in the world except
Samskrit is taught through the target language. Samskrit will not
flourish unless and until this method is changed and Samskrit is taught
through Samskrit.  
  
15. There are seven language universities exclusively for each one of
the seven languages of India, whereas, there are seventeen universities
for Samskrit.  
  
16. More than 80% of about 40 lakh manuscripts available in about 3800
libraries and private collections in India and abroad are in Samskrit
language and most of them are unedited and unpublished.  
  
17. Since most of the Indian languages have more than 50% of their
vocabulary from Samskrit and since sound system, sentence structure and
underlying grammar of them are from Samskrit, learning Samskrit is not
like learning a new language for a person who knows any of the Indian
languages. It is just like making his/her passive knowledge active.  
  
18. There are thousands of children both in India and abroad whose
mother tongue is Samskrit. They are brought up in Samskrit at home. The
world was introduced to them through Samskrit. They think Samskrit and
speak Samskrit.  
  
19. As far as the number of students opting various languages at school
level in India is concerned, number of Samskrit students is the third
largest after English and Hindi.  
  
20. Dr Bhim Rao Ambedkar wanted to make Samskrit the Official Language
of the Union of India. In fact, he had moved a resolution in the
Constituent Assembly in this regard but unfortunately the resolution
could not get passed.  
  
21. Before English came to India, Samskrit was the pan Indian link
language, pan Indian medium language of Education, communication,
commerce, intellectual debate, etc. just as English is in India today.
Making it again as the pan Indian common link language is only a matter
of our will - our national will power.  
  
22. These three 1) The underlying bond of unity of India, 2) the quality
and character of inclusiveness or all-inclusive culture of this land, 3)
Vishwa Dharma – the ultimate way for prosperity, sustainability and
peace of the world – are the great contributions of Samskrit literature
which are seldom known by people.  
  
23. Samskrit Language and Samskrit Knowledge Systems are the greatest
soft power of India.  
  
24. Since Yoga, Ayurveda, Vedanta, Bhagavadgita, Meditation, Bhakti, etc
are getting popular all over the world and since Samskrit is the common
primary source for all these subjects, Samskrit language is slowly
emerging as a Vishwa Bhasha.  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 2657 \| 30-05-2021 10:40
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

