+++
title = "Abortion – an Astika"
full_title = "Abortion – an Astika view"
date = "2012-11-25"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2012/11/25/abortion-an-astika-view/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2012/11/25/abortion-an-astika-view/).

Abortion – an Astika view

With the unfortunate death of Savita Halappanavar in Ireland,
pro-abortionist camp is in uproar that abortion must be legalized to
avoid such disasters. The so-called Hindu-Right in India has mostly
supported this pro-abortion call as well. In fact, most of these
Hindu-Right people are the result of a combination of liberalism with
anti-Islamic terrorism beliefs/some mild pro-Hindu notions. As such,
most of them do not have any idea of the traditional Astika position on
abortion and the others couldn’t care less (for a section of them wants
to create a ‘new India’ based on scientific rationalism combined with
‘Hindu pride’ – but giving up all Hindu morals and practices).

For a change, we will take a clear look at the practice of abortion from
an Astika (traditional Hindu) point of view.

Abortion is a great sin and is a forbidden act as per our dharma
shastras. But abortion is not forbidden without any exception. Hindu
texts rarely take an absolutist stand. When the life of the mother is in
danger (due to some complication in pregnancy), abortion is recommended
by Hindu texts. Thus, in a society which follows traditional Astika
morals, Savita would have been offered an abortion and her life would
have been saved.

Susruta Samhita (Chikitsaasthaana, 15.13) says”..raks.ennArI ca
yatnanaH” – the woman has to be saved. Chikitsaasthaana, 15.15 even
makes it clear that a dead fetus has to be immediately removed from the
mother’s womb, as otherwise she may die painfully just as an animal dies
from suffocation (“nopeks.eta…pas’um yathA”). Thus, a woman in the
situation of Savita would have been saved as per ancient Astika customs
– the child would have been sacrificed to save the mother. But in other
cases, the texts are clear that the child should not be harmed for any
other reason. Life is precious. Saving both the child and the mother is
the prime duty. But when only one of them can be saved, preference must
be given to the mother’s life.

The Nastika positions may differ on this issue. Jaina dharma might go
for absolute prohibition. Non-violence of the highest form is
prescribed in their tenets (e.g. they are not even supposed to kill
mosquitoes). So, a Jaina mother might be expected to even give up her
life in order to save her child. On the other hand, the Charvakas
(predecessors of modern day hedonists) might support ‘abortion on
demand’.

Many Internet Hindus run around without proper understanding. Even a
famous columnist like Sandhya Jain has erred in stating that “This
profound civilisational view has influenced modern India’s Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, which offers virtually on-demand
abortion to adult women.” (taken from the page:
<http://www.ibtl.in/column/1326/abortion-a-hindu-perspective> – she
seems to have followed the belief of the authors of the book “The Human
Drama of Abortion: Seeking a Global Consensus” Pg.88). The Indian MTPA
is not based on the Astika shastras but based on modern feminist-liberal
views. The distinction between the two is very clear.

Let us now look at the Hindu view about the sanctity of a fetus’ life.
As early as Rg Veda, the protection of a fetus was given great
importance. Rg Veda (10.184) prays to Vishnu, Tvastr., Prajapati,
Sinivali (a wife of Vishnu), Sarasvati and Ashvins for fetus’ formation
and safety. AV 7.46 (Saunaka) calls on Sinivali to grant progeny. AV
6.113.2 (Saunaka) also specifically brands the person who performs
abortion as a great sinner (‘bhrUn.aghni’ is the term used – literally
means fetus killer). Manu smr.ti (5.90) says that a woman who commits
abortion is not worthy of receiving libations (udaka kriyA) upon her
death. Apastamba Dharma Sutra (1-7-21-8) considers the person who
commits abortion as a fallen person/outcast (patanIya). Gautama Dharma
Sutra (21.9) says the same about the woman who commits abortion
(bhrUn.ahani). Vas’is.t.a Dharmasutra (1.20) counts abortion
(bhrUn.ahatyA) as one of the panchamahApAtaka-s (five great sins).
ParAs’ara Smr.ti (4.20) states that abortion is twice as sinful as
killing a brAhman.a. ParAs’ara categorically states that there is no
prAyas’citta for the sin of committing abortion. From the period of
Vedic SamhitA-s to later smr.tis, Astika tradition has been clear about
abortion: it is a great sin. Abortion was allowed only in extraordinary
circumstances (e.g) when the life of the mother was in danger. There is
no question of ‘abortion on demand’ or ‘freedom of choice’ in the
ancient Hindu texts when it comes to killing a fetus.

Let us look at the moral issues of abortion:

The ‘liberals’ argue for abortion to be completely legalized. The main
argument is: a woman must have the right to decide whether she wants the
baby or not. The first counter point would be: she must decide it before
indulging in coitus. To not use any birth control measure like condom is
the fault of the persons involved, if they did not want a child. To go
for abortion to get rid of that ‘unwanted child’ is murder.

The moderate liberals’ normal posture is using ‘gradualism’. Typical
argument is that the fetus gradually becomes human. And in the initial
months, the fetus is not fully developed to be considered as a human
being. While this is good to hear, it is not a sensible position. When
does the fetus become a living being then? Is there any definite time
frame? Life is formed the moment an embryo comes into existence. If it
is a question of a young fetus being unable to feel ‘aware’ of its
surroundings, then a man in coma can also be ‘terminated’ using the same
argument. Gradualism is not a logical viewpoint. Hindu texts, in
general, hold that atman (soul) enters the embryo as soon as an embryo
is formed as a result of fertilization.

On the other hand, Peter Singer represents what we will call as the
radical liberals. Singer agrees that gradualism “is a resort to a
convenient fiction that turns an evidently living being into one that
legally is not alive. Instead of accepting such fictions, we should
recognize that the fact that a being is human, and alive, does not in
itself tell us whether it is wrong to take that being’s life”
(Rethinking Life and Death, pg 105). He uses the personism definition of
Michael Tooley. In the end, he says that a newborn baby (not just fetus)
is not self aware and hence, killing a baby cannot be considered as
equal to killing an adult human. Interestingly, Singer argues for animal
rights. So, according to our esteemed professor, a human infant is worth
less than a non-human adult animal.

To us, these ‘liberal’ arguments are neither sensible nor logical.

In the case of ‘right to decide’, the government must then allow gender
specific abortion as well. After all, a woman ‘must’ have the rights to
decide the gender of the child that she wants. To say that abortion is a
matter of right but sex selective abortion is not – this is not a
logically sound position. As for Singer’s interpretations, to forcefully
stop a person/soul from living his/her life is murder. As a society, as
a social species, every infant is a part of the future of our species.
Our genes are made immortal by procreation. To consider this blessing of
the Gods (or nature, if one wants to avoid identifying oneself as a
‘believer’) as a mere burden, which can be killed as per the whims and
fancies of some hedonistic humans, is a great sin. It is moral
depravity.

