+++
title = "Pygmy Split"
full_title = "Pygmy Split"
date = "2016-02-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/02/24/pygmy-split/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/02/24/pygmy-split/).

Pygmy Split

There are a couple of recent papers on introgression from some quite
divergent archaic population into Pygmies ( this also looks to be the
case with Bushmen). Among other things, one of those papers discussed
the time of the split between African farmers (Bantu) and Pygmies, as
determined from whole-genome analysis and the mutation rate. They
preferred to use the once-fashionable rate of 2.5 x 10-8 per-site
per-generation (based on nothing), instead of the new pedigree-based
estimate of about 1.2 x 10-8 (based on sequencing parents and child: new
stuff in the kid is mutation). The old fast rate indicates that the
split between Neanderthals and modern humans is much more recent than
the age of early Neanderthal-looking skeletons, while the new slow rate
fits the fossil record – so what’s to like about the fast rate? Thing
is, using the slow rate, the split time between Pygmies and Bantu is
\~300k years ago – long before any archaeological sign of behavioral
modernity (however you define it) and well before the first known
fossils of AMH (although that shouldn’t bother anyone, considering the
raggedness of the fossil record).

Logically, this means that Pygmies aren’t really modern humans. Or,
perhaps, they’re the most divergent of all modern humans. If you want to
say that the root stock had capability X in 100,000 BC, and so everyone
today must also have capability X (which does not logically follow in
any event, but we’re talking anthropologists, so don’t expect much) then
Pygmies might not have it. Or if they do, it’s a product of convergent
evolution. But of course in the real world the Pygmies have the
capabilities that they have: you can’t logic any of them away or conjure
new ones into existence.

The bigger picture is that this sure looks like a typical case of
backwards reasoning: A implies B, which implies C, and so on, but Z is
*awful* and so A can’t really be true. I don’ think this works, if by
“working’, we mean getting the at the truth.

