+++
title = "Calling a deer a deer"
full_title = "Calling a deer a deer"
date = "2021-05-23"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/05/23/calling-a-deer-a-deer/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/05/23/calling-a-deer-a-deer/).

Calling a deer a deer

We all know that most people are pretty good at calling a deer a horse –
pretending that the Emperor really is wearing uncommonly fine clothes
that are only invisible to stupid or unfit people, etc.

Most of the time, the penalty for calling a deer a deer is not as
drastic as that exacted by Zhao Gao. Most of the people saying instantly
falsifiable things about current issues are not doing it because someone
is holding a gun to their head. Sometimes negative career consequences
are a possibility, more often social penalties, but it seems to me that
most people *want* to go along – outside threats are not the biggest
drivers.

Now we all know that going along with horseshit can be a bad thing for
society as a whole, sometimes even at the individual level. It is good
for society to avoid marching off a cliff, and that is also good at the
individual level, even if everyone else is doing so.

But being right when nearly everyone else is wrong does not necessarily
confer a net benefit.

Sure, you avoid walking on air – but the penalty for conformity is not
always that dramatic, while the penalties for \_nonconformity\_ are
almost always there. They happen even if you’re proved right – maybe
*especially* if you’re proved right.

Still, there are some people that prefer the truth to the trend and have
enough mental horsepower to get there fairly often.

The question is, is this a bug or a feature? Is it bad for fitness, or
is it some kind of minority genetic strategy? Sure, it has some social
utility, but that doesn’t pay the genetic bills.

