+++
title = "Jelly"
full_title = "Jelly"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/04/14/jelly/"
date = "2016-04-14"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2016/04/14/jelly/).

Jelly

Our earthbag adventure has started with a bang. After about six intensive days working with about five to ten people we have completed four rounds of gravel (jelly stone as it is called here) bags and almost another two of mud. We have just one more round of bags to go until we reach our one metre wall-height target.

It hasn’t all been smooth though, in any sense of the word. In our enthusiasm, we started lining our foundation trench with gravel and laying the first round of bag on top without realising that the entire thing was on a slope, and the bottom of the foundation trench was also far from level. Many half bags later the walls were no longer on a slope and we have been trying to level out the recurrent dips and rises with more stop gap solutions.

On day five, as we were congratulating ourselves on finishing the layers of gravel at the base of the structure (to prevent water seepage into the earthen walls), Gautam called up from Bangalore to ask how the doorways were… Luckily, we salvaged the lack of situation by deciding that our doorways would start at about two feet up – exactly where the gravel bags stopped, and where construction currently stood – ensuring that small children and dogs couldn’t get out without help, and on the other hand creepy crawlies couldn’t get in.

The next morning Gautam rang up to ask if we had remembered to put in pipes for drainage. With a two feet barrier at the entrances, whenever we needed to clean the floor, or if water collected inside, we would struggle. One of the few disadvantages of earthbag structures is that you can’t drill into them or really alter them in any way once built. Bharath, our farm hand, took it all in his stride, found a spare pipe, cut it into lengths and had several strong men lift up the gravel bags to place the pipe on the ground level.

On Wednesday evening, after an exhausting week of simple living (carting water from a neighbour’s house, cooking on a wood-fired stove and trying to keep up some semblance of cleanliness with two small children, a dog and earth everywhere – we have Niveditha, 15 month Raghav and their labrador Rancho staying) and labouring in the sun, we were looking forward to the Thursday holiday – santhe or market day. At about 7pm, just as the two boys were about to fall asleep, Bharath rode in to tell us that there had been elephants the previous night at Kundrangi Devasthana, just across the paddy from us, and we should sleep in the container. We have never had elephants here before – indeed one of the reasons we bought this land was because they don’t come this side and thus it is safe to camp – and I was rather rattled. Thankfully, we had just had a deep trench dug across the meadow in front of our land – designed to keep our cattle and unwelcome (human) visitors but sufficient also as it turned out for elephants. After much discussion, trying to find the best solution to ensure dog, children and adults all got a comfortable bed for the night, we decided to move one of the tents next to the containers. By the time we had carried the tent across, Bharath got another call to say that the elephants – a herd of about 10 – were in his coffee estate and it wasn’t safe for him to return. So Bharath and Rancho slept in the container, and the rest of us in the tent. We parked Niveditha’s Alto at the bridge that crosses the trench as an elephant barrier, very much feeling the lack of Gautam’s beefy Pajero Sport, and hoped for the best. Dawn found us all safe and sound, and the car and remaining tents which had been outside untouched.

So ends our – mine and Uppu’s – first full week here. We have both loved every minute of it. For Uppu, it is constant fun – either neighbouring children, and dogs, are here spending the day or the night, or he hops on someone’s bike to go and have breakfast at their house; there is earth to be made into sandcastles and mud splats, JCBs to ride in and buckets and drums of water for impromptu baths (three or four in about an hour yesterday afternoon); and there is the river to visit, a whole meadow to cycle over and no boring laptops in sight – except when I write this blog post.

———————

Sorry no photos. I have tonnes but uploading this post – and trying to get online again after two weeks – has taken most of a hot, sweaty day in Sakleshpur battling with sim cards, data cards and power cuts; adding photos would require the best part of a week.
