+++
title = "Natural and Artificial"
full_title = "Natural and Artificial Intelligence, and Consciousness, Part I – Jonathan Edelmann"
date = "2020-07-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/29/natural-and-artificial-intelligence-and-consciousness-part-i-jonathan-edelmann/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/29/natural-and-artificial-intelligence-and-consciousness-part-i-jonathan-edelmann/).

Natural and Artificial Intelligence, and Consciousness, Part I – Jonathan Edelmann

I begin this post by overviewing some of the ways I have thought about
evolutionary theory and neuroscience using Indian thought, especially
Sāṃkhya-yoga and its interpretation in Puranic theology and philosophy.
In the next post I will apply some of these ideas to conceptualize
Artificial Intelligence. These posting are explorations of some
essential terms for discussion between India and Europe.

Due to advances in neuroscience and a widely accepted view that humans
are the result of a naturalistic evolutionary process, many today would
advocate physicalism, by which I mean some sort of theory that explains
all aspects of the human being by natural processes. On this view, then,
human consciousness is produced solely of the human brain which evolved
without intervention of non-natural forces.

The dualism of classical or the old Sāṃkhya-yoga recognizes two
different features of reality: (1) materiality, which includes the
physical body/brain and the subjectively experienced mental domain; and
(2) consciousness, the eternal and unchanging being that gives
materiality the appearance of sentience.

I think that from the Sāṃkhya perspective when neuroscientists examine
the correlations between mental events and brain events they are
examining the correlations between two forms of materiality. In Sāṃkhya
the conscious being that provides awareness to and within the mental and
physical aspects of materiality is, however, considered distinct from
them. Thus, whether it is the application of a drug or the targeting of
specific portions of the brain, in Sāṃkhya the changes that occur are
within materiality, i.e. the physical body and the mental realm. Yet in
Sāṃkhya consciousness retains a distinction from both forms of
materiality; it essential to human awareness, but it is not reducible to
the body or mind.

I think the Sāṃkhya perspective is *reductionist* or *physicalist* in
the senses that it reduces two domains of human experience (the mental
and physical) into one single type of being, but it is also
*non-reductionist* and *non-physicalist* in the sense that consciousness
is not a product of matter. There is, then, a sense in which
Sāṃkhya-yoga could agree that as bodies evolve new types of cognition
might emerge, and it could also agree that quantifiable correlations
might exist between the mental and physical aspects of materiality, but
it also advocates of type of awareness that underpins both forms of
materiality.

Many scientists and philosophers would say that any nonphysical
consciousness that is said to exist independently of the human brain is
implausible, but what of the other aspects of Indian thought, like
karma, the acceptance of a wide range of ontological terms that we might
think about as either natural or artificial. A contemporary criticism of
the Sāṃkhya in particular is that the introduction of an observing
consciousness quiet apart from mental and physical events adds an
unnecessary and untenable item, one that neither explains the
correlations of mind-body nor has any justification. The Indian
tradition, however, was familiar with physicalist philosophies;
approximately three hundred years ago Rādhādāmodara addressed Carvaka’s
reductionistic view in his *Vedāntasyamantaka*, a Sanskrit introduction
to Vaishnava teachings, but the discussion of Carvaka and related ideas
are wide reaching.

Using this ontological framework of Sāṃkhya in the next post I suggest
that AI might be thought of as a type of interaction between matter and
consciousness, but that the new natural sciences offer opportunities to
rethink old debates within India about the nature of the self.
