+++
title = "Of shopping carts and"
full_title = "Of shopping carts and cherrypicking"
date = "2020-07-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/19/of-shopping-carts-and-cherry-picking/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/19/of-shopping-carts-and-cherry-picking/).

Of shopping carts and cherry-picking

Evan Thompson has continued [our
dialogue](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/)
with a [new
reply](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
and I am now ready to respond to it. This response will be seven posts
long, so I will follow the practice from my last round of replies of
posting them three days a week (Sunday, Tuesday, Thursday) over the
course of the coming two weeks. When they’re all up I will [update the
index](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/)
so readers have a convenient record of the whole thing.

To begin with, I’m glad to see that Thompson and I have come to some
significant points of agreement. We can agree now that a eudaimonistic
Buddhism does not have to suffer many of the flaws that Thompson
identifies in Buddhist modernism, such as Buddhist exceptionalism or
pretending our innovations are those of the historical Buddha. But as
Thompson correctly notes, points of disagreement remain.

Our core disagreement is on the idea of [eudaimonic
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/).
This has two aspects, which each bear examination though they are not
separate from each other. The substantive aspect is about the workings
of karma and rebirth. The methodological or hermeneutic aspect has to do
with the claim that I am cherry-picking. They are not separate because
the accusation of cherry-picking depends on the closeness (or lack
thereof) of the relationship between the naturalized eudaimonic karma I
advocate and earlier Buddhist conceptions that involve rebirth. I want
to first approach the methodological issue, on which I think Thompson
and I may find some further agreement, and then start moving to the
substantive claims where I think we do still largely disagree.

Thompson says:

> Buddhist modernists need to face facts. Are you cherry picking what
> you like and rejecting what you don’t like? Then don’t claim to be
> congruous with your sources. Or do you want your revisionist project
> to be congruous with the tradition? Then don’t cherry pick. Trying to
> have it both ways is another example (among the many others detailed
> in my book) of how Buddhist modernists want to have their cake and eat
> it too.

I think Thompson and I share a critique of the [shopping-cart
view](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/)
of traditions, which is indeed close to the cherry-picking he describes
–where we are not allowing ourselves to be challenged by those aspects
of the tradition that are uncomfortable to us. Thompson [previously
urged
us](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/on-the-challenging-aspects-of-tradition/(http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
not to “miss (and miss out on) the radical and challenging aspects of
the Buddhist tradition”, and I [expressed my
agreement](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/on-the-challenging-aspects-of-tradition/)
with this. I’ve even gone a step further to say it’s [important to have
faith](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/why-i-am-a-buddhist/).

The question is what this faith and fidelity to the tradition then
imply. What they do not and should not imply is a *blind* faith, where
one accepts everything that is in the tradition. And the accusation of
cherry-picking – or of the shopping cart –can run the danger of urging
us into exactly that. The only *clear* alternative to “cherry picking
what you like and rejecting what you don’t like” in a tradition is to
try to accept *everything*, the entire tradition, whether you like it or
not – supernaturalism, sexism, [killing
unbelievers](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/),
and all. I don’t think I need to justify my reasons for rejecting *that*
approach. (I *think* it’s obvious why I reject it –but I could spell it
out if readers, including Thompson, think that would be helpful.) But to
reject the approach of blind faith is, pretty much by definition, to
reject at least *some* of the things you don’t like while accepting the
things you do, and therefore necessarily to leave yourself open to the
accusation of cherry-picking (or the shopping cart) to at least some
extent.

This is a reason that the accusation of cherry-picking is much easier to
make for someone who does not identify with the tradition. Whenever
someone within the tradition modifies it in any way, however small, it’s
easy to snipe at them from outside and say they’re cherry-picking and
not really congruous. That move is much harder to make from *inside* the
tradition, because it will always be vulnerable to a *tu quoque*
response. When Insider 1 claims Insider 2 has modified the tradition,
Insider 2 can respond that Insider 1 has done the same, because *that
will always be the case*: it is the nature of traditions to adapt and
change, even when the changes are [innovation through
conservatism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/05/on-innovation-through-conservatism/),
changes made in order *to* preserve the old tradition as pristinely as
possible. Since outsiders are not vulnerable to that response, they can
happily stand on the edge, taking as many pot-shots as they like.

So the cherry-picking accusation is a favourite move of [outsider
Buddhist-studies scholars like Donald
Lopez](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/05/on-the-genealogy-of-buddhism-and-science/),
or more generally [unaffiliated religionists like Herman
Tull](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/08/the-double-standard-of-misinterpretation/).
These folks love showing how much smarter they are than all those
Buddhist or Hindu fools who think they can show that the tradition is
compatible with science, when *these* scholars, with their eminently
superior knowledge and erudition, can point to all the ways it’s been
different. They can make such a gotcha easily because they have no stake
in the game, no interest in identifying with Buddhism, so they can
simply stand on the sidelines and laugh at people who do –[they can
snark, while thinking constructively with the tradition requires
smarm](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/from-snark-to-smarm/).
They stack the deck against Buddhism: a *real* Buddhist believes every
incorrect idea that other Buddhists have ever believed, you believe some
true things they disagree with, therefore you’re not a real Buddhist.
Yet the ironic thing is that this variety of critique inevitably turns
out to indulge in its own distinct form of cherry-picking. For while
these writers condemn the innovators they don’t like (i.e. contemporary
and especially Western Buddhists) for their cherry-picking, they are
never (in my experience) willing to say the same thing about premodern
Asian Buddhist innovators – in Tiantai or Chan or other traditions – who
had made other large changes to the tradition, sometimes far more
blatantly. (I don’t think you’ll find a Tiantai teacher being as ready
to admit they reject key teachings of the tradition [as I
am](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/).)

None of this is to say, though, that anything goes or that all
innovations are legitimate. I’ve been critical plenty of times of that
opposite extreme, especially from Engaged Buddhists. If Donald Trump
were to declare himself a Buddhist tomorrow [that would not make him
one](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/youre-no-buddhist/); to say
that he would be, is to make a mockery of all of us who see in Buddhism
a [normative
ideal](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/05/the-no-true-fish-fallacy/).
So I don’t actually think Thompson and I have a disagreement in
principle here. The question is what counts something as a legitimate
innovation within the tradition and what doesn’t. That’s not an easy
question and I don’t think a cut-and-dried answer to it is forthcoming.

Thompson puts the question in terms of whether the innovations are
“congruous”, or “congruent”, with “the tradition” or “your sources”. He
doesn’t define these terms; a dictionary definition of them says “in
agreement or harmony”. I have argued above that it is inappropriate to
expect Buddhist innovators (whether modernist or tantric to Pure Land)
to be in *complete* agreement with their earlier sources. I also
nevertheless think that it is reasonable to expect them to be in *some*
sort of harmony, for reasons discussed above. But what does that mean
exactly? Again, hard to answer in the general case. But perhaps we can
shed some more light by turning to the substantive issues of karma and
rebirth, which I will do in the posts to come.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4868)
