+++
title = "Karma in society"
full_title = "Karma in society"
date = "2020-07-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/26/karma-in-society/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/26/karma-in-society/).

Karma in society

[Last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers)
I explained why I think a constructive modern Buddhist philosophy should
indeed focus on Buddhist philosophical texts as its sources for karma,
and I stand by that. Yet ironically, even if we *were* to turn away from
philosophy to karma’s functioning in society, as Thompson now
recommends, we would then notice that even his sources for *that* point
themselves do not establish what he claims they do: i.e. that “the
concept is fundamentally a way to handle the problem of why bad things
happen to good people and vice-versa”. Just as [Obeyesekere never made
that claim
historically](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/),
these sources do not make the claim sociologically.

The sources in question are three articles about karma, all by his UBC
colleague Cindel White with some coauthors. Contra Thompson’s claim,
these studies do *not* indicate that the Buddhist concept of karma “is
fundamentally a way to handle the problem of why bad things happen to
good people and vice-versa”, even in the sociological context of
everyday Buddhism. This is for two key reasons.

Most obviously, none of these studies are studies of Buddhists! [The
first](https://www2.psych.ubc.ca/~ara/Manuscripts/White%20Baimel%20Norenzayan%202017%20causes%20and%20consequences.pdf),
White et al. 2017, is not actually a study of how karma functions, but
simply a research agenda for future such studies, inquiring about how it
*may* function. [The
second](http://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/3dda/be4e846fadcad8a97607e0b60e137f0117a1.pdf),
White et al. 2018, is a study of Canadian undergraduates, most of whom
identify as Christian or nonreligious, and second of Indians of whom
*0.2%* were Buddhist. [The
third](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0065260119300152),
White & Norenzayan 2019, is a large-scale comparative literature review.
It stretches credulity to take any of these as sources on what karma
means *in Buddhism.* None of them even claim to be about that.
Non-Buddhist conceptions of karma are relevant when the question at
issue is karma’s *origins* (as in Obeyesekere), since they are what
Buddhist concepts of karma developed *from*, but after the Buddha
created a distinctively Buddhist (more psychological) conception of
karma, what would matter in determining the “beating heart” of the karma
doctrine is what karma means *for Buddhists*. It matters very little
what other karmic traditions think about it. It matters *not at all*
what people think about related issues who do not even use the concept
of karma, and it is those people who represent most of the subjects of
White’s studies.

I could stop there, but I think it’s still worth noting further that
even if we *were* to look for karma’s core among non-Buddhists (which,
again, we should not do in a discussion like this) – even in *that*
context, these studies *still* do not claim what Thompson says they do!
That is: “In the case of karma, such studies indicate that the concept
is fundamentally a way to handle the problem of why bad things happen to
good people and vice-versa ([White et al.
2017](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/2153599X.2016.1249921);
[White et al.
2018](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0146167218808502); [White
& Norenzayan 2019](https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2019-58919-001))”.
They indicate no such thing. White et al. 2017 (“What are the causes and
consequences of belief in karma?”) simply establishes a research agenda,
outlining *questions* about beliefs and practices that they deem karmic,
questions that “it would be interesting to investigate”; they do not
claim to provide answers to those questions. White et al. 2018 (“The
content and correlates of karma across cultures”) – the only one in
which the authors performed an actual empirical study (and again, not a
study of Buddhists) – creates an analytic concept of karma that includes
theodicy in the definition. The questions that they use to measure karma
include several along the lines of “When people are met with misfortune,
they have brought it upon themselves by behavior in a past life”. They
conclude that belief in the different items of their questionnaire are
correlated with each other – establishing at most that belief in karma
typically *includes* a theodicy of this sort. It establishes nothing to
the effect that karma “is fundamentally” about theodicy. Finally, the
literature review in White & Norenzayan 2019 notes “Around the world,
people believe in a multitude of supernatural causes for misfortune”
(5), and indicates that karma is among them. That is true. I’ve never
denied that theodicy is *a* function that karma sometimes serves, among
Buddhists and others – but it too does nothing to establish that karma
“is fundamentally” about theodicy. The authors never make any such claim
about what karma “is fundamentally”, nor do they ever imply one –even
among the non-Buddhists whom they study, let alone the Buddhists whom
they don’t. So, it is *entirely false* that “such studies indicate that
the concept \[of karma\] is fundamentally a way to handle the problem of
why bad things happen to good people and vice-versa”, even among
irrelevant non-Buddhists, let alone among the actual Buddhists who are
the only ones relevant to a discussion of being congruent with Buddhist
sources on karma.

If we must turn to social science for the question of whether an
interpretation of karma is congruent with Buddhist tradition, then we
should instead look to thick anthropological studies of *actual
Buddhists* in relatively traditional settings. There, we can see how
karma functions in the minds of traditional Buddhists themselves, rather
than of Canadian sociologists trying to propose a cross-traditional
quantitative analytical concept. This is what I have previously done
with [Melford
Spiro](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/)‘s
study of Burmese Buddhists, which led Spiro to the distinction between
kammatic and nibbanic Buddhism. Spiro notes that for the Burmese karma
does sometimes serve the function of explaining people’s current status,
but it is not *primarily* that. Even in that explanatory context, they
are still not asking the general question “Why do bad things happen to
good people?” And in general they spend less time thinking of karma in
an explanatory context and more thinking of it in terms of the future
results of their own actions, to the point that they sometimes even keep
“merit accounting books” to keep track of the good karma they have
accumulated for their future well-being.

I might also note in passing that, despite their being in a
(non-Buddhist) tradition that accepts karma and rebirth, when my own
traditional Indian relatives (devotees of
[Ganesh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ganesha)) had to deal with the
question of why bad things happen to good people in a tragically
personal way – specifically, when my cousin died young in a motor
accident –they explained the fact *not* in terms of bad karma from a
past life, but in terms of the supernatural agency of a statue that had
been improperly blessed. They clearly did need a theodicean explanation,
they had easy access to the karma doctrine, they could have used karma
for that purpose – and they didn’t.

So, while I again insist that a philosophical discussion should focus on
philosophical texts, I’ll reiterate: even if we *do* turn to social
science for a discussion of karma’s core, we still do not have any
reason to believe that that core is the question of why bad things
happen to good people.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4885)
