+++
title = "Philosophical texts for"
full_title = "Philosophical texts for philosophers"
date = "2020-07-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/23/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/23/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers/).

Philosophical texts for philosophers

In my continuing response to Evan Thompson I now turn to another
methodological question that Thompson raises: what sources should we be
using in a discussion of karma? I claim that my eudaimonist
interpretation of Buddhist karma is congruent with existing Buddhist
tradition in important ways, so it matters what that existing tradition
has to say and how we determine it.

When I had [previously
said](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
that the traditional core of karma had to do with future results of
action –with that basic idea that good actions improve well-being
–Thompson had [asserted in
response](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
that “this idea isn’t the core idea of karma, if ‘core’ means what lies
at the heart of the concept’s formation. On the contrary, the core
problem, which drove the formation of the concept, is to explain why bad
things happen to good people.” To support this claim he linked out to
[Obeyesekere’s *Imagining
Karma*](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520232433/imagining-karma),
which studied the formation of the concept through philosophical texts
like the Upaniṣads. In his [new
reply](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
however, Thompson *now* says that “exegesis of philosophical texts…
isn’t the right method for a concept like karma.”

Here, it seems to me, goalposts may have been moved. In his [previous
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
when he was first trying to make the claim that the “core” of karma “is
to explain why bad things happen to good people”, Thompson was happy to
cite,as his only source, Obeyesekere’s study, which relies largely on
the exegesis of philosophical texts like the Upaniṣads. This was hardly
a surprise, given that both of us are self-professed philosophers, and
that [Thompson himself had
said](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
“my aim is to lay bare the *philosophical* problems with Buddhist
modernism.” Emphasis added. But once I [pointed out that Obeyesekere
said nothing of the
sort](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/),
*then* [Thompson
declared](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
that the right method for thinking about karma didn’t have to do with
philosophical texts but must be in the way they “function
psychologically and socially” in everyday people’s lives.

Now I’m happy to be charitable and assume that Thompson had believed all
along that we should be talking about ordinary people rather than
philosophy and just had neglected to mention this fact, however odd such
a neglect might be in a conversation that he had himself proclaimed was
about philosophy. I will proceed on that more charitable assumption,
because even on that assumption I still disagree with him. Again,
Thompson and I *are* philosophers, and we engage in the activity of
philosophy for a reason. Philosophy seeks truth – in Buddhist terms, to
see things as they are
([*yathābhūtadassana*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/))
–and it engages in sophisticated reasoning in order to get beyond the
delusions in which ordinary people are mired. Remember, Thompson’s major
injunction to one who is supposedly
[cherry-picking](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/of-shopping-carts-and-cherry-picking/)
is “don’t claim to be congruous with your sources.” I do not claim that
my Buddhism is congruous in general with everyday traditional Buddhist
practice, except to the extent that relates to the philosophy, and I
don’t see why I should. (It’s not as if traditional Buddhist practice in
Sri Lanka is particularly congruous with traditional Buddhist practice
in Japan.)

I do not accept [populist
definitions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/protestantism-and-populism-in-religious-studies/)
of what traditions are, because I’m trying to learn from them at their
best. I [apply this view to the
sciences](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/04/descriptive-and-normative-meanings-of-science-and-other-traditions/)
just as I do to historic traditions like Buddhism and Christianity.
Ordinary Americans are more likely to believe in creationism than
evolution; that does not mean that biologists should take creationism as
the “beating heart and lifeblood” or the “concrete, functional, and
living core” of American biology. The important question for
philosophers is not how biological ideas “function psychologically and
socially” in everyday life (though they certainly do that, all the time)
but which biological ideas, on systematic investigation, have turned out
to be true or false. So we study the biological ideas of biologists, not
of everyday people. And so if I were a Christian trying to advance a
constructive conception of God, of *course* I would try to determine the
core of the concept of God by reading the likes of Anselm and Aquinas.
They were the ones who put the most thought and learning into
considering what God could be in reality. I wouldn’t settle for less.

Now I have indeed come to start [learning more from nonphilosophical
Buddhists](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/)
myself lately, and that is because I think they’re *right* about one
thing that the Buddhist philosophers usually aren’t: namely that a good
life includes ends other than the reduction of suffering. I am happy to
draw from them as a way to correct what I think is a gap in the
philosophers’ writing, as I draw from non-Buddhist traditions. What I’m
not prepared to do is say that their beliefs necessarily trump those of
people who thought about the issues more deeply, just by virtue of there
being more people who believed them. When we are engaging with
traditions as philosophers, we should be focused on a dialogue with
their philosophers who had a project like ours.

For these reasons, even if it *could* be shown that karma’s main
function among nonphilosophical Buddhists was to explain why bad things
happen to good people, I would not accept that that was the concept’s
core – not for the kind of philosophical inquiry that Thompson and I
have been involved in since the beginning of this debate, and
participate in in our lives more generally. And yet having said that, I
don’t even think that it actually *can* be shown that theodicy is
karma’s main function among nonphilosophical Buddhists. Certainly the
sources that Thompson cites establish nothing of the sort, and I will
discuss that point on Sunday.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4875)
