+++
title = "Karma eschatology,"
full_title = "Karma eschatology, theodicy, or eudaimonism?"
date = "2020-07-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/21/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/21/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/).

Karma: eschatology, theodicy, or eudaimonism?

In my [previous
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/of-shopping-carts-and-cherry-picking/)
I discussed how Evan Thompson and I may agree in principle that not all
innovations to a tradition are legitimate. The real question, then, is
how applicable the accusation of cherry-picking (or shopping cart) is in
*this* case, the case that we are discussing, of the [naturalized
eudaimonistic approach to
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/).
So the question is whether this new approach is congruous with Buddhist
tradition, or with Buddhist sources.

If I am correct that it is, then it would seem that Thompson’s
accusation of cherry-picking does not stand. I contend that the
traditional view of karma generally follows [the view of
Śāntideva](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/)
that good and bad actions bring the agent good and bad results “in this
world and another” (*iha paratra ca*). On that traditional view this
pattern is deterministic: every good action ripens as a good result and
vice versa. What my approach does is to say that karmic results happen
only *iha*, in this world, because it turns out there is no *paratra*.
As a result karma must be [probabilistic and not
deterministic](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/)
in order to make sense. On my view, this naturalized approach to karma
entirely continuous with the *iha* half of the traditional view, even as
it rejects the *paratra* half –and this does not radically change the
system because [both halves work in similar
ways](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/).

I will say more about Śāntideva in future posts. But before going
further, I think we need to clarify some key concepts at issue in
Thompson’s [most recent
response](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/).
Thompson relies a great deal in this response on the concept of
*eschatology*, so it is important to clarify what that concept means.
Regarding the concept of karma, Thompson says:

> Lele claims that its core is eudaimonistic, whereas I think it’s
> eschatological. Eschatology in general and karmic eschatology in
> particular are concerned with rationalizing why bad things happen to
> good people and good things happen to bad people. According to karmic
> eschatology, in the long run—in the next life—people will receive the
> good results of their good actions, and the bad results of their bad
> ones.

There is a great deal of conceptual confusion in and around this passage
of Thompson’s. First of all, this is just not what eschatology is or
means. The word comes from the Greek *eschatos* meaning “last”. Its
traditional use in Christian theology is to describe the end times: the
Second Coming, Revelation, the Last Judgement. If it were to be applied
to Buddhism, its meaning would therefore likely be something like [what
Wikipedia says it
is](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buddhist_eschatology): the appearance
of the future Buddha Maitreya, the [Sattasūriya
Sutta](https://suttacentral.net/an7.66/en/sujato)‘s prophecy of
destruction.

By contrast, the branch of Christian theology concerned with
rationalizing why bad things happen to good people and good things
happen to bad people is not eschatology but – *theodicy*. The term
“theodicy” comes from the Greek for “God’s justice” – as we should
expect, because,
[again](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/),
the question really becomes a philosophical *problem* for those who,
unlike Buddhists, believe in an omnipotent and just God. If we want to
speak of karma’s functioning as rationalizing why bad things happen to
good people, we should then not be describing it as karmic eschatology
but as karmic *theodicy*. The adjectival form, [I’m
told](https://www.collinsdictionary.com/us/dictionary/english/theodicy),
would be “theodicean” –so the claim that Thompson has been making is
actually that rather than being eudaimonistic *or* eschatological,
karma’s core is theodicean.

Adding to the confusion: [Gananath
Obeyesekere](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520232433/imagining-karma),
whom Thompson cites as a source for the idea that karma is
eschatological, *also* misuses the term “eschatology” – but in a
*different* way than Thompson does! As far as I can tell Obeyesekere
unfortunately does not define eschatology, nor does he justify his use
of the term. Like Thompson he does not use “eschatology” in anything
like its traditional theological sense of final end times –but *unlike*
Thompson, he nowhere says that eschatology has to do with “why bad
things happen to good people”. Obeysekere, unlike Thompson, does not
confuse eschatology with theodicy; instead he confuses it with something
else –perhaps soteriology, the study of individual salvation, though
this is itself not entirely clear from his usage. At any rate, though,
[it bears
repeating](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/)
that, Thompson’s claims to the contrary, whatever term one is using for
the question of why bad things happen to good people and vice versa,
Obeyesekere *nowhere* claims that this question is what karma was ever
primarily about.

Clarifying this terminology becomes important in part because of yet
another conceptual confusion, and perhaps the most important one: when
we turn to the final sentence in Thompson’s passage above, what is being
described is neither eschatology *nor* theodicy. Eschatology proper,
just like eudaimonism,is concerned with anticipating the *future* –
which theodicy, especially karmic theodicy, is not. Theodicy’s concern
is with explaining why bad things are happening to good people in the
*present*; a karmic theodicy explains this in terms of the past.
Eudaimonism is about the results of one’s present actions on one’s own
future well-being.

And so what Thompson describes as “karmic eschatology” in that sentence
turns out, ironically, to be *its own form of eudaimonism*, just one
that relies on rebirth as a mechanism. Thompson has been working with
[my definition of
eudaimonism](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
as the ideathat “an agent’s good actions and good states of character
typically improve the agent’s well-being (flourishing, eudaimonia)”.
Notice then that the view that Thompson describes in that sentence, that
“in the long run—in the next life—people will receive the good results
of their good actions, and the bad results of their bad ones”, *is a
form of eudaimonism*, by the definition of eudaimonism that we have
agreed on! Good actions, on Thompson’s account of karmic so-called
“eschatology”, *do* improve the agent’s well-being –it just happens to
be in the next life rather than this one. Remove that last qualifier,
about the next life, and now you have something very close to the
eudaimonism I have been arguing for. By contrast, the view described in
that sentence of Thompson’s is *not* by itself theodicy, let alone
eschatology. For theodicy –the explanation of why bad things happen to
good people – is *not* concerned with the future; it is about explaining
the *present* or even the past, why bad things are happening to good
people right now or happened to them before, and (if one’s theodicy
relies on karma) explaining this as a result of one’s *past* actions.
And Thompson has done nothing to show that *that* is what karma is
primarily about, despite his claims to the contrary. I will substantiate
that point in upcoming posts.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4872)
