+++
title = "What would Śāntideva do"
full_title = "What would Śāntideva do without rebirth?"
date = "2020-07-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/28/what-would-santideva-do-without-rebirth/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/28/what-would-santideva-do-without-rebirth/).

What would Śāntideva do without rebirth?

I have argued against Evan Thompson that philosophical texts are [the
proper source for
philosophers](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers),
so let me now turn our discussion there: specifically to Śāntideva, whom
both of us cite.

First let us be clear about two points on which I think Thompson and I
agree. The first of these points is that Śāntideva himself believes in
rebirth, and this concept deeply suffuses his philosophy; Thompson and I
agree about that. The second is that Śāntideva is *wrong* in this
belief: though [Ian Stevenson’s kind of work does present a potential
anomaly](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/responses-on-humanity-rebirth-and-a-minimalist-model/),
the best evidence we have in psychology still shows us that human
consciousness is tied ineluctably to human bodies, and when that body
dies, the consciousness dies with it. As far as I can tell, Thompson
accepts this latter proposition. If he *does* believe human
consciousness is reborn at death, my apologies: in that case we are
having a very different conversation, and I would be genuinely intrigued
to hear his reasons for such a belief. Thompson has not said anything of
the sort in the conversation to date, however, so I will proceed in the
present discussion on the assumption that he does not.

The question then is how a contemporary Buddhist who accepts both of
these points should read Śāntideva’s work. It was specifically in answer
to this question that I first turned to a naturalized theory of karma: I
did so *because* I wanted to take Śāntideva as seriously as possible. My
[dissertation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/other-writings/) was all about
understanding Śāntideva’s reasoning at a deep level, so I looked in
detail at the kinds of arguments and reasons Śāntideva offers for acting
or feeling one way and not another –what Thompson calls their “warrant
and motivation”. As the dissertation discusses, these reasons for action
generally fell into three categories, not always separable from each
other: the pleasant and unpleasant mental states the actions generate;
metaphysical insight into the nature of things, especially their
emptiness (which I explored in more detail in a [later
article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/);
and good or bad karma. Only the last of these three is closely tied to
rebirth. The latter terms “good and bad karma” are specifically [my
translations of *puṇya* and
*pāpa*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/translating-pu%e1%b9%87ya-and-papa/),
terms ubiquitous in Śāntideva’s work; for him it is *puṇya* and *pāpa*,
rather than [*karmaphala* or
*karmavipāka*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/),
that most describe the process by which good and bad actions lead to
good and bad results.

What are *puṇya* and *pāpa*, in Śāntideva’s work? [As Barbra Clayton has
noted](https://www.amazon.com/Moral-Theory-Santidevas-Siksasamuccaya-Cultivating/dp/0415599350),
Śāntideva uses the term *puṇya* (good karma) interchangeably with
several other terms. These include *kuśala* (a term that means both
“skill” and “goodness”, like Greek *aretē*), *śīla* (properly restrained
behaviour), and *śubha* (well-being or welfare). That these terms are
used so interchangeably itself strongly suggests a tight connection
between virtue and well-being – which is to say eudaimonism.

*Puṇya* and *pāpa* are much more central to Śāntideva’s work than they
are to most of the Pali literature. The discussions of these terms do
frequently refer to results of an action in future lives – *but not
always*. As noted, Śāntideva specifically discusses ways in which bad
actions bring bad results in this life and another (*iha paratra ca*).
The [passage I quoted
before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/)
to that effect (BCA VI.6) is not an isolated one; Śāntideva uses an
almost identical phrasing (*iha loke paratra ca*) in another chapter, at
BCA VIII.40. So when Thompson says it is “abundantly clear in Śāntideva”
that “the eudaimonistic aspect of karma—that good mental actions bring
about good results—has no warrant and motivation for traditional
Buddhist philosophers”, he is entirely wrong. Śāntideva comes right out
and *says* the exact opposite of Thompson’s claim: that is, he not only
says that good mental actions bring out good results, he clarifies that
this is the case in this life *as well as* the next one. I’m not sure
what clearer statement of eudaimonism there could be than Śāntideva’s
claims that good actions bring about good results in this life, and he
tells us enough about the good and bad effects of good and bad actions
on the mind to make it clear why he takes that claim to be warranted and
motivated, even when he is making no reference to future lives.

For me, recognizing this *iha paratra ca* point was essential to
understanding Śāntideva’s arguments constructively, taking him seriously
as a thinker who has something to teach us now, rather than as a curious
museum piece of interest only to fusty antiquarians. (I believe he would
perceive himself as a thinker to be taken seriously in this way as
well.) This recognition allowed me to make better sense of Śāntideva’s
work as a whole –certainly including the verses of his that Thompson
cites, which we’ll get to in the next post. For according to Śāntideva,
this life and the next are not discontinuous. And thus a great deal of
what Śāntideva says about the next life applies just as well to this
one. This, in my view, allows a naturalized view of karma to be
congruent with Śāntideva’s, even though the naturalizing was never his
own view (and I’ve never claimed that it was).

To take a slightly different angle on the question we might ask: what
would Śāntideva do if presented with the evidence that humans are not
reborn after death, in a way that would be convincing to him? Śāntideva
does have a commitment to knowing things as they are
([*yathābhūtam*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/));
I don’t think his fidelity to scripture necessarily trumps that
commitment. So suppose Śāntideva were to have been presented with our
current psychological evidence that the mind dies at bodily death. Would
it be an existential crisis for him? Yes, probably; it *would* make a
major difference to the way he sees the world. But what *then*? Where
would he go from there? We cannot know such a question for sure, of
course. But we *can* make some inferences, twelve centuries later, from
the things he actually said in his compositions. Let us think critically
here about Thompson’s claim that “without the backdrop of the karmic
eschatology, the belief that good actions make things go better in this
life is not sufficiently supported. Rather, its warrant and motivation
drain away.” Given everything else Śāntideva says in his writings, do we
really think that, faced with the evidence against rebirth, Śāntideva
would have responded: “welp, I guess the Buddha’s teaching is crap, I’m
just gonna go spend the rest of this only life out drinking and whoring
now”? Or switched over to a completely different tradition like
Confucianism or Judaism?

That seems implausible to me. Śāntideva’s deep and sincere Buddhist
orientation to life seems to me sustainable even in the face of a
challenge to its supernatural underpinning, given the things he actually
does say. Especially, the absence of bad karmic consequences *paratra*,
in another life, does nothing to invalidate the presence of bad karmic
consequences *iha*, here in this world and life, consequences that
Śāntideva repeatedly refers to throughout his work. I believe it deeply
congruent with his own work and concerns to focus on the latter.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4890)
