+++
title = "Śāntideva’s passages on"
full_title = "Śāntideva’s passages on enemies and their context"
date = "2020-07-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/30/santidevas-passages-on-enemies-and-their-context/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/07/30/santidevas-passages-on-enemies-and-their-context/).

Śāntideva’s passages on enemies and their context

Having [discussed the broader context of Śāntideva’s
work](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/what-would-santideva-do-without-rebirth),
I think it is instructive to turn now to the two passages that [Evan
Thompson quotes from Śāntideva’s
Bodhicaryāvatāra](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
as supposed examples of the way that Śāntideva’s “philosophical
arguments fall apart” without rebirth. These respectively say (in the
Wallace and Wallace translation he cites), first, “In the past, I too
have inflicted such pain on sentient beings; therefore, I, who have
caused harm to sentient beings, deserve that in return./Both his weapon
and my body are causes of suffering. He has obtained a weapon, and I
have obtained a body. With what should I be angry?” (BCA VI.42-43) And
second, “since my adversary assists me in my Bodhisattva way of life, I
should long for him like a treasure discovered in the house and acquired
without effort.” (VI.107)

Note first of all that neither of these passages explicitly make any
mention of rebirth. And I think that both would make sense even if
rebirth were not involved. On the second (BCA VI.107), I’m not even sure
Śāntideva is himself thinking about past lives at all. This discussion
of adversaries seems to me an inspiring passage on patient endurance *in
this life*: those who oppose us help us develop the virtue (specifically
patient endurance) that leads us to a better life.

Regarding the first (BCA VI.42-3), on previous harm inflicted on
sentient beings, I agree that here Śāntideva is *probably* thinking
about past lives, but it is important to point out that even here he
does not specify this. More importantly, I think the logic of the
passage still works in a this-worldly way. Notice that Śāntideva is not
saying I have caused harm to *this* sentient being, the one who is
harming me right now. Rather, he is just saying I *have caused harm* to
sentient beings in the past, and that therefore I deserve it I return.
And who among us has *not* inflicted significant pain on other sentient
beings – intentionally or otherwise – *in this present life?* The pain I
receive now may well be disproportionate to the pain I have inflicted,
but I don’t think proportion is the point of the passage: in the larger
context of the chapter, the point of this passage is to remind us that
we are not innocent, as one more way to prevent the anger that he has
explicitly said is destructive to ourselves, [in this life and
another](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/).
In neither of these two passages that Thompson himself cites as
exemplary, then, is it the case that “the eudaimonistic aspect of
karma—that good mental actions bring about good results—has no warrant
and motivation” without rebirth.

Thompson wants us instead to see these passages as part of “the
mind-expanding Mahāyāna narrative in which all beings strive over
countless aeons to be happy and every sentient being has been your
mother”. But they aren’t! The idea that every being has been one’s
mother does appear in many Tibetan commentaries on Śāntideva –perhaps
the majority of them – but it *never* appears in Śāntideva’s own
writings. I don’t recall ever having seen it in any other Indian
Buddhist source, either. Indeed it is perhaps the place where I see the
most striking contrast between Śāntideva’s own words and the way the
Tibetans interpret him; from what I have seen, the overall Tibetan
Buddhist worldview is generally more pro-familial than the Indian. Those
Tibetan interpretations are one reasonable way to interpret Śāntideva,
but they are not Śāntideva’s own words or thoughts, any more than
naturalized karma is. Those Tibetans, too, are innovating. They are
putting their own spin on Śāntideva’s words just as we modernist
Buddhists are. Since our discussion is all about innovations to
tradition, I think it is important to be crystal-clear about that.

Moreover, since “cherry-picking” can refer to picking passages in
isolation without their context, let’s be clear about the specific
context of both of the passages Thompson quotes. They are not in the
chapter of the BCA on metaphysical insight or understanding (*prajñā*);
their primary purpose is not understanding the world or its events. If
we were to take the point of these passages as to “give you a way to
understand and respond to all the bad things that happen to you in this
life, even if they seem undeserved”, an appropriate word for what we
were doing would indeed be “cherry-picking”. For if we look at them in
context, we see that that is not their purpose. (Thompson is welcome to
draw inspiration from those passages for the concerns about theodicy
that so clearly bother him, but he should not pretend that they were
what motivated Śāntideva to compose them.)

Rather, these passages are part and parcel of the chapter on patient
endurance (*kṣānti*), whose primary purpose is to enjoin us to avoid
anger – framed, at its opening, by the passage I quoted earlier, about
the bad consequences of anger *iha paratra ca*. The bad mental action of
anger leads to bad results, for us as well as for others, in this life
and in future ones –it interferes with flourishing – and therefore it
is to be avoided. In Śāntideva’s own intention and worldview (a
worldview which includes rebirth), the primary purpose of the passages
in this chapter is not to give us a way of understanding others’ bad
actions, but to show us why anger is not justified. As far as
understanding others’ bad actions goes, the quoted point about past harm
one has oneself caused others takes up less than a verse. Rather, when
Śāntideva talks at length about understanding others’ bad actions, it is
in making an argument against free will (VI.22-33), pointing out that
others’ actions are deterministically caused and therefore not subject
to blame. That longer passage also makes no reference to rebirth or
multiple lives. Rebirth is in the background of all of these discussions
for Śāntideva, but it is far from the only thing that informs them.

It’s in the later chapter on metaphysical insight (chapter IX), rather
than the chapter Thompson quotes from (chapter VI), where Śāntideva *is*
trying to describe the nature of the world and events in it – where
understanding is his main purpose. But Śāntideva’s primary metaphysical
commitment there, which later tradition often views as the climax of the
book, is not to a cosmology of ethicized rebirth. Rather, it is to the
emptiness of all things, including karma and rebirth themselves. The
upshot of that commitment for our lives is to acknowledge the emptiness
of all those things, including action and its fruits, and respond to it
with a complete detachment from them, a sense of their unworthiness. I
do disagree with Śāntideva on that score as well, [for reasons I’ve
already
noted](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/)
– and it is *that* point, not rebirth or its absence, that is really at
the heart of my disagreement with him and other traditional Indian
Buddhists. Rebirth is less important, to Śāntideva and to me.

Now there *are* some important ways that removing rebirth from
Śāntideva’s worldview poses problems for it. Most important of these is
the [suicide
objection](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/):
if the goal is an end to suffering and there is no rebirth, should we
not just kill ourselves –or even kill others, if we are Mahāyānists? My
own response to that objection, which Śāntideva would disagree with in
my formulation of it, is that there are worthy goods other than the
ending of suffering. But Śāntideva himself does seem to think that
[bodhisattvas overflow with
happiness](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/does-santideva-think-bodhisattvas-are-happy/)
in the life that they have, though he has some other passages to the
contrary; even on his view, the bodhisattva’s life may well be better
than nonexistence, for oneself and for others.

In all, I cannot accept Thompson’s accusation that I am cherry-picking
Śāntideva’s worldview. I am aware that Śāntideva believed firmly in
rebirth. I am *also* aware that there is now significant evidence
indicating that ethicized rebirth, of the sort that Śāntideva believed
in, does not actually happen. I think that my approach of naturalizing
his worldview is considerably *more* faithful to Śāntideva than is an
approach that says “well, everything he says depends on rebirth, so if
rebirth isn’t real then he’s completely wrong and we shouldn’t view our
approach as following his in any way”.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4894)
