+++
title = "The double standard of"
full_title = "The double standard of misinterpretation"
date = "2014-08-31"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/31/the-double-standard-of-misinterpretation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/31/the-double-standard-of-misinterpretation/).

The double standard of misinterpretation

I have recently [welcomed the corrective
force](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/01/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/)
of books like Andrew Nicholson’s [Unifying
Hinduism](http://www.amazon.com/Unifying-Hinduism-Philosophy-Intellectual-Disciplines/dp/0231149867),
which remind us that modern appropriations of Indian tradition have
their own continuity with the evolving past tradition. I now find myself
regularly reminded just how much such a corrective is needed. I have
noted plenty of examples before, as with respect to [Gregory
Schopen](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/)
and [Donald
Lopez](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/05/on-the-genealogy-of-buddhism-and-science/).
But I recently found perhaps the most striking example in the works of
the contemporary Sanskrit scholar [Herman
Tull](https://www.linkedin.com/pub/herman-tull/44/158/a4b).

In a [1991 article on the Indologists Max Müller and A.B.
Keith](http://www.jstor.org.ezproxy.bu.edu/stable/3270003?seq=1&uid=3739696&uid=2&uid=4&uid=3739256&sid=21104489891977),
Tull deconstructed Müller’s and Keith’s privileging of early Vedic
tradition over various Indian traditions that would follow it, such as
Sāyaṇa’s commentary on the Vedas. Tull notes that for Müller

> the original meaning was forgotten and then recreated in a degenerate
> form, a process made famous by Müller’s colorful phrase, the “disease
> of language.”… That Mülller perceived such “misunderstandings” to be a
> disease, rather than a reinvigoration-an adding of new meaning as a
> way of maintaining the health of a tradition that was becoming
> obsolete-reflects his idealization of the ancient Aryans, on the one
> hand, and his disdain for “priestcraft,” on the other
> hand.(42)[1](#f1)

Elsewhere Müller describes the Brāḥmana texts themselves as “twaddle,
and what is worse, theological twaddle.” (quoted on Tull 43) Tull
understandably dislikes Müller’s unkind characterization of the
Brāḥmaṇas and commentaries; in his title he uses Müller’s own
characterization against him, referring to Müller’s privileging of the
ancient over the recent as the “disease of Indology”.

Tull’s criticisms of Müller are all fairly made. But now observe what
happens when Tull turns his gaze on a later interpretation of Indian by
a modern and non-Indian interpreter. If we examine Tull’s [bibliography
on
karma](http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-9780195399318/obo-9780195399318-0029.xml?rskey=M8yiNY&result=49)
in the Oxford Bibliographies series, we find that his description of
[Annie Besant](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annie_Besant)‘s book on
karma appears as follows:

> One of Besant’s manifestos regarding the karma doctrine; beyond her
> observation that karma must be viewed as a fundamental law, this
> booklet is filled with balderdash, such as references to “the Lords of
> Karma, the mighty Angels of Judgement, the Recorders of the Past” and
> so forth.

If there is a difference between “balderdash” and “twaddle”, it is a
small one. Here we find Tull treating a modern Western reinterpretation
of karma with the *exact same contempt* that he criticized as a
“disease” in Müller and Keith. When Sāyaṇa and the authors of the
Brāḥmaṇas reinterpret the Vedas for their times, it is “a
reinvigoration-an adding of new meaning as a way of maintaining the
health of a tradition that was becoming obsolete”. When the Theosophist
Annie Besant does it, it is “balderdash” – and Tull further adds that
“the underlying elements of Theosophy appear today to be outlandish at
best…”

What we have here is a double standard. Tull is of course hardly alone
in exercising this double standard. The [critics of “Protestant
Buddhism”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/)
delight in pointing out the ways in which modern Buddhists
“misinterpret” earlier tradition, but make no such criticisms of
medieval Chinese traditions that deviate far more from the texts they
claim to adhere to. It is just that in Tull we find this double standard
expressed most clearly – even though it is expressed in different
writings, many years apart.

What motivates this double standard? One answer that might leap to mind
is white guilt, or (more charitably) awareness of white privilege:
Besant and Yavanayāna Buddhists come out of a cultural complex (the
West) that wields cultural power over India, in a way that Chinese
Buddhists or medieval Indian commentators did not. ([Deepak Sarma’s
attack](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/11/in-defence-of-white-hindu-converts/)
on “White Hindu Converts” claims to made on such grounds.) Or could
attribute it to the kind of cultural relativism that allows us to
criticize only “our” culture and not others’. But this answer will not
suffice, not in all cases at least. For the criticism of modernized
tradition is [often
applied](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/)
to people like [Anagarika
Dharmapala](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anagarika_Dharmapala), born and
raised as colonial subjects in South Asia.

What else is going on, then? In the particular case of “Protestant
Buddhism”, one may detect a certain [Catholic sectarian
agenda](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/),
but one hesitates to assign such motives to writers like Tull, who do
not throw around the P-word as a term of abuse. One might cite the
inevitable desire of academics to proclaim themselves smarter than
everybody else. One might imagine it a simple desire to criticize
*everything* that comes out of the colonial 19th century. But one might
also cite the [modern
Romantic](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/authenticity-then-and-now/)
[desire for
authenticity](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/authenticity/):
those whose reinterpretations are too close to us in time, like Besant
and the Buddhist modernists, seem tainted by the pandering modern
consumerism we yearn to escape, in a way that Tiantai and Sāyaṇa do not.

I doubt that we can reduce this double standard to a single cause. It
seems likely that several of these factors are operating at once. The
more important point, it seems to me, is to recognize that this double
standard operates – and that, at least as far as I can tell, it is
intellectually unjustified. If we may not dismiss Sāyaṇa as twaddle,
then neither should we dismiss Annie Besant as balderdash. If we *do*
consider ourselves in a position to judge Theosophical writings as
balderdash for their misinterpretations/reinterpretations, then we are
effectively putting ourselves in the position to judge the Brāḥmaṇas the
same way, and we should not have such contempt for those who do.

I have previously expressed [my own
take](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/03/acknowledging-newness/) on
the proper attitude for a philosopher to take to such thinkers who
interpret their predecessors differently from the predecessors’ original
context (one form of [innovation through
conservatism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/05/on-innovation-through-conservatism/)).
It is important to acknowledge innovation as innovation: Sāyaṇa’s Ṛgveda
is not the Ṛgveda as it would be understood by its authors, just as
Annie Besant’s karma doctrine is not the karma doctrine of the classical
Budhist texts. But we may still respect the new systems as systems
worthy of consideration in their own right. Disagreement with their
interpretation of their predecessors does not have to mean disagreement
with the content of their thought.

1. Tull, Herman W.
1991. “F. Max Muller and A.B. Keith: ‘twaddle’, the
‘stupid’ myth, and the disease of Indology.” *Numen* 38(1): 27-58.
