+++
title = "On the (alleged?) Indian"
full_title = "On the (alleged?) Indian lack of distinction between linguistic and external reality"
date = "2014-08-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/14/on-the-alleged-indian-lack-of-distinction-between-linguistic-and-external-reality/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/14/on-the-alleged-indian-lack-of-distinction-between-linguistic-and-external-reality/).

On the (alleged?) Indian lack of distinction between linguistic and external reality

In his contribution to a recent symposium (*Does Asia think differently?
–Symposium zu Ehre Ernst Steinkellners*), as well as in many other
publications of him (e.g., *Langage et Réalité: sur un épisode de la
pensée indienne*, 1999), Johannes Bronkhorst answered that **yes, there
is a substantial difference between “our” thought and the Indian one**,
in so far as the latter does not distinguish between purely linguistic
problems and genuine ones.

For instance, Indians argued for centuries, according to Bronkhorst,
about the ontological status of a linguistic object which is
linguistically present before its actual existence, such as a pot in
“the potter makes the pot”. Westerners would have immediately labeled
the pot as non-existing until it is realised by the potter and would not
have not paused on its ontology, whereas Indians never distinguished
between linguistic and external reality.

This is an interesting insight, and in fact there are several elements
suggesting (as Karl Potter maintained) that the “linguistic turn”
occurred in India much earlier than in Europe (note that I am saying the
same thing Bronkhorst said, but looking at it from a more favourable
perspective), such as the insistence on the analysis of linguistic data
in order to solve epistemological or ontological issues (cf. the
insistence on the linguistic use *śabdaṃ kṛ-* within the debate about
the ontological status of *śabda*).

However, many Buddhist schools seem to aptly distinguish between the two
(e.g., insofar as language is *vikalpa* and only the ultimate
particular, which escapes language, is real). The same applies, as far
as my knowledge reaches, at least also to Mīmāṃsakas. For instance,
Rāmānujācārya speaks of *karman* (the linguistic object) and
*kriyāphala* (the result of the action, as an ontological reality) as
two distinct realities (cf. Tantrarahasya, IV §3.13.2: *kriyāphalaśali
karma*).

**What do you think? Which evidences for or against the self-assumed
equivalence of language and thought did you encounter?**

(Cross-posted, with minor differences, on my
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
