+++
title = "How exactly does one"
full_title = "How exactly does one seize the meaning of a word? K Yoshimizu 2011 (and Kataoka forthc) on Dignāga and Kumārila"
date = "2014-08-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/27/how-exactly-does-one-seize-the-meaning-of-a-word-k-yoshimizu-2011-and-kataoka-forthc-on-dignaga-and-kumarila/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/27/how-exactly-does-one-seize-the-meaning-of-a-word-k-yoshimizu-2011-and-kataoka-forthc-on-dignaga-and-kumarila/).

How exactly does one seize the meaning of a word? K. Yoshimizu 2011 (and Kataoka forthc.) on Dignāga and Kumārila

We all know that for Dignāga the meaning of a word is *apoha*
‘exclusion’. But how does one seize it and avoid the infinite regress of
excluding non-cows because one has understood what “cow” means?
[Kataoka](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/08/19/apoha-in-dignaga-according-to-kataoka/ "First day at the IABS: Apoha in Dignāga according to Kataoka")
at the last IABS maintained (if I understood him correctly) that Dignāga
did not directly face the problem of how could one seize the absence of
non-cows. He also explained that the thesis he attributes to Hattori and
Yoshimizu, which makes the *apoha* depend on the seizing of something
positive (e.g., one seizes the exclusion of non-cows because one seizes
the exclusion of dewlap, etc.) contradicts the negative nature of
*apoha*, since it indirectly posits positive entities, such as dewlaps.
But this leaves the question of how *apoha* can take place in the
worldly experience open. One might object that it is not a problem at
all, since *apoha* explains how language can work a priori and
independent of its actual usage, in which many other factors
cross-influence each other.  
If you are still looking for an every-day way of implementing *apoha*,
you can have a look at Yoshimizu 2011 (JIPh 39), which tries to offer a
viable solution to the application of *apoha* by actual language users.

K. Yoshimizu shows passages of the *Mahābhāṣya* showing that the
denotation of *gauḥ* is described as involving various elements, such as
dewlap, horns, hooves, humpback. According to Yoshimizu, Dignāga
maintains that in actual usage language users acknowledge the presence
of this elements in order to recognise what is a cow (and their absence
in order to recognise what is a non-cow). Yoshimizu says that is process
is akin to what contemporary linguists call “componential analysis”. He
quotes passages from Dignāga’s PS which apply it even to proper names
(since also “Ḍitta” describes a set of qualities, such as being
adulterine, having one-eye only, etc.).

Componential analysis cannot work, by contrast, for the “founder” of
Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā, Kumārila Bhaṭṭa (who knew Dignāga and criticised his
work), since he maintains that the universal “cowness” is directly
perceivable and that this is what allows us to recognise a cow *before*
we recognise its dewlap, etc. In this sense, the meaning of a word
denotes, for Kumārila, a universal, and can only secondarily be analysed
in its sense-components.

This leads Yoshimizu to a further question, namely, how can one perform
an injunction, if this referes to a universal? One would never be able
to bring either the universal cowness, nor all its instantiations (i.e.,
all cows) once one has been enjoined to “Bring the cow!”. Fortunately
enough, the word “cow” in such a command refers to *all* individual
cows, but one by one (so Kumārila in the TV). How is this possible?
Because Kumārila distinguishes two elements in each prescription (what
is *uddeśyamāna* and what is *upādīyamāna* ), which Yoshimizu equates to
what contemporary linguists call “topic” and “comment”. The “comment”
adds new information, whereas the “topic” is what we know already about.
This part is only needed in order to understand what the comment is
about. For instance: “cow” is “comment” and then “topic” in the next two
sentences (the example is mine, no responsibility of Yoshimizu in any
mistake it may contain):

> “That one is my cow” (topic: “That one” (you already know about it
> since a gesture indicates it); comment: “my cow” (you did not know
> before the speaker had a cow))
>
> “Bring the cow” (topic: “the cow” (you already know that the speaker
> has a cow, and which one it is); comment: “Bring \[it\]!”)

Once the “cow” is made into a “topic”, one knows already its number (in
this case, singular) and can identify it easily. Thus, one does no
longer need to bring all possible cows sharing the universal “cowness”.

Yoshimizu’s conclusion is that Kumārila leans towards pragmatics,
whereas Dignāga implicitly presupposes some type of componential
analysis.

![A dewlap is not always sufficient as a probans to infer a
cow](http://m2.i.pbase.com/o6/36/718136/1/73528222.cEBJL7sn.1marty011014030.jpg)

**What do you think of the application of contemporary theories to
classical Indian philosophy? Do they help or bewilder you?**

More on Kataoka’s view of *apoha* can be read
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/08/19/apoha-in-dignaga-according-to-kataoka/ "First day at the IABS: Apoha in Dignāga according to Kataoka")
If you are in Vienna and you want to discuss these topics with
Yoshimizu, consider attending
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/announcements/kiyotaka-yoshimizu-on-semantics-or-pragmatics/)
workshop. (cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com).)
