+++
title = "First day at the IABS"
full_title = "First day at the IABS Apoha in Dignāga according to Kataoka"
date = "2014-08-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/21/apoha-in-dignaga-according-to-kataoka/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/21/apoha-in-dignaga-according-to-kataoka/).

First day at the IABS: Apoha in Dignāga according to Kataoka

I am currently attending the [IABS](https://iabs2014.univie.ac.at/home/)
conference in Vienna. I am trying to keep the few of you who could not
come updated through my impressions of the talks at my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com). I will cross-post here the posts which
are more interesting from a philosophical point of view.  

Kei Kataoka presented his view of how *apoha* works in Dignāga. He first
discussed the interpretation of it by several scholars (Hattori,
Akamatsu, Yoshimizu) and then the criticism of this view by Tanizawa, a
criticism which Kataoka himself endorses and which he sees foreshadowed
by a Sāṅkhya opponent embedded in the *Pramāṇasamuccaya*, namely
Mādhava. According to the first group, Kataoka maintains, we perceive
some characteristics such as dewlap, and on this basis we can identify
what cows are. Tanizawa and Mādhava, instead, observe that this
procedure would contradict the negative nature of the apoha theory,
since it would presuppose the existence of a recognisable universal,
namely dewlap-ness, etc.

I will need to go back to Yoshimizu’s 2011 article, but I am not
completely sure that the componential semantics he proposes (e.g., the
componential analysis of ‘cow’ would have ‘bovine’ ‘adult’ and ‘female’
as its elements) needs to presuppose the existence of the corresponding
universals. To me, it seemed that one could just *more or less*
understand what a dewlap is and proceed on the basis of this preliminary
understanding. In this case, one would avoid the *petitio principii*
(*anyonyāśraya*) that is Kumārila’s main charge against Dignāga, namely:
You cannot exclude non-cows unless you already know what a cow is.
However, Kataoka —if I understood his answer correctly— suggests that
Dignāga was not concerned with answering this possible charge, possibly
because the absences were for him graspable and he did not feel the need
to justify one’s grasping them.

(Let me repeat that this is just *my* impression of a part of Kataoka’s
paper, which was surely much better than my short summary of it)
