+++
title = "On the possibility and"
full_title = "On the possibility and nature of neurophilosophical study of Indic traditions A Guest Post by Chakravarthi RamPrasad"
date = "2014-08-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/25/on-the-possibility-and-nature-of-neurophilosophical-study-of-indic-traditions-a-guest-post-by-chakravarthi-ram-prasad/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/25/on-the-possibility-and-nature-of-neurophilosophical-study-of-indic-traditions-a-guest-post-by-chakravarthi-ram-prasad/).

On the possibility and nature of neurophilosophical study of Indic traditions. A Guest Post by Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad

\[Note that this talk was delivered in the presence of the Dalai Lama
and a large non-specialist audience, on the specific issue of
‘contemplative studies’ and neuroscience; hence the particular angle of
approach. The issues in the main do pertain to the more general question
of classical Indian theories of consciousness and contemporary
neuroscience, although what I have said here would need to be re-phrased
and re-oriented.\]

What we need to ask ourselves is, why is the philosophy of the
contemplative traditions needed for neuroscientific study, and
conversely, what is the need of neuroscience for the philosophy? Let me
try and suggest an answer. Contemplative science, as a discipline, is
rapidly establishing itself, primarily as the bottom-up neuroscientific
study of contemplation, with the added insights of psychological
theories of behaviour and affect, as in Richie Davidson’s
ground-breaking work on positive affect through alterations in brain and
immune functions. This is clearly showing that neuroscience benefits
from the study of contemplation, by treating meditative states as
magnifiers of states of human consciousness, that can then be studied
more directly.

In a profound sense, contemplation does not depend on science – but the
philosophical thinking that informs contemplation could indeed benefit
from both the informative analysis of the science and its explanatory
limitations. To the extent all philosophy should seek to be consistent
with the nature of reality available through scientific inquiry, so too
the philosophy of contemplative traditions. But why should neuroscience
take the philosophy of the contemplative traditions seriously? It is
because we should look for a wider and more equal relationship between
science and contemplation. By this I mean, not just between the science
and the practice of contemplation – after all, much of the current
research in contemplative science is exemplary in the respectful
relationship between contemplative and scientist. Rather, I mean the
relationship between science and the thought that informs contemplative
practice.

Contemplative practices developed in close interaction with an
intellectual tradition of debate. Even when the core of the
contemplative experience was held to be beyond language, these
traditions sought to explain why this was so; and they did this by
carefully presenting their view of the world and human consciousness of
it. It is now agreed that there should be an interaction between
first-person study (what I experience and how I report it) and
third-person study (what it looks like to a scientific observer, in
terms of behaviour and brain states). But Buddhist, Hindu and Jain
contemplation always had this interaction – Indian philosophy is often
the third-person study of transformative experience. In order to
understand the full significance of contemplation, therefore,
neuroscience has to engage with the philosophy through which the
traditions themselves understood contemplation.  
This leads me to the first of four challenges that face contemplative
science – which, if met, can be very fruitful.

1.  The first is that **contemporary neuroscience is actually deeply
    influenced by philosophy – Western philosophy. Many key terms of
    study are drawn from ideas first articulated in the specific context
    of early modern Europe.** In order to attain to the equal
    relationship I mentioned earlier, we should be sensitive to this
    historical fact, and make an effort to gain a better understanding
    of the Indo-Tibetan philosophy that directly informed the
    contemplative traditions. **Terms like ‘mind’, ‘ego’, ‘knowledge’,
    ‘perception’, ‘intention’, ‘awareness’, ‘content’, ‘knowledge’ are
    not theoretically neutral.** They come from specific philosophical
    contexts. All scientists, and not just the unexpectedly open-minded
    ones, must recognise the philosophical origin of scientific terms.
    Then, in the context of contemplative science, they must expand
    their horizons and interpret these terms from Indo-Tibetan
    perspectives as well. The first challenge, therefore, is the
    thorough re-conceptualisation of the terms of contemplative science.

    But there are other challenges, and I will list them from the
    general to the more specific.

2.  **The second challenge has to do with a fundamental assumption of
    much neuroscience, and that is reductionism** (which methodological
    commitment ultimately leads to some version of physicalism).
    Reductionism is the view that our phenomenological perspective, the
    what-it-is-like to think or feel anything, can be reduced to
    physical states. These states are neural. So the sound you hear when
    I speak – perhaps the boredom you are feeling just now – is just a
    matter of neurons firing in the brain. Such reductionism can entails
    physicalism, because it holds that all phenomenology is just
    physical states, that is to say, states of the brain. Treating
    consciousness reductively or physicalistically has led to enormous
    strides in our understanding of some elements of life. But this is a
    problem for respectful scientific engagement with contemplation,
    because, whatever the disagreements amongst themselves, the
    classical Indo-Tibetan traditions were all committed to a spiritual
    answer to life’s suffering, and would not agree that, in the end,
    there is nothing but physical states.  
    Now, the strategy of relying on neural correlates of consciousness
    has taken us quite far. Both scientists and contemplatives can agree
    that phenomenal states are correlated to neural states. But how far
    can contemplative science go with this? **The correlates are between
    first-person or self-reports and the states registered through fMRI
    or PET or other scans. But at least two problems loom. One is that
    because any human state of sufficient complexity (as in
    contemplation) requires report, such report must itself have a
    neural correlate. So an infinite regress threatens,** each new brain
    state requiring a further report to be correlated with. **Another
    problem is that reports, being linguistic, require concepts; but key
    meditative states in most traditions are held to be beyond
    conceptual activity. A major challenge, therefore, is to think of
    how to go beyond the neural correlates of consciousness.** And study
    of behaviour alone will not do that.

3.  The third challenge is related to this. The conceptual vocabulary
    used in neuroscience has to be clarified. To a large extent, we are
    now dependent on proxies – i.e., observables standing in for
    unobservable phenomenal or dispositional states. For example, we
    look at variations in startle reflex for vaguer descriptors like
    calmness. Happiness is taken as certain neurons firing (or ‘getting
    frisky’ as one philosopher put it). But **fMRIs are not what could
    be called ‘cerebrascopes’, machines for reading minds. They just
    read brains. But the relevant states are not so easily read through
    neural correlates or other physical correlates (like gaze saccades).
    The contemplative traditions make many distinctions between
    different types of happiness or tranquillity.** A great deal of
    clarification of the concepts is needed.

4.  The final, and very technical challenge concerns the domination of
    computationalism in the standard theory of mind that informs
    top-down cognitive scientific theory. This is based on
    **philosophical arguments that bet that the mind indeed works in
    ways that replicate formal logic (that is to say, like a computer
    does).** Even if computationalism is re-thought as analogical rather
    than digital, so that its algorithmic functions are somehow less
    like computers and more like organisms, there are grounds for being
    pessimistic about organic consciousness being computational in any
    sense. Now, classical Indian reasoning structures cognitive
    processes in ways that are not captured by computational logic. Such
    classical Indian theories of reasoning are foundational to the Hindu
    and Buddhist approaches to the nature of consciousness – and
    therefore of the contemplative techniques for the transformation of
    consciousness. While syntactical processing may indeed be found in
    sets of synaptic structures, **it is not at all clear that the
    symbolic representations used in computationalism capture the way we
    are conscious**. A smoother theoretical flow between contemplative
    practices, the understanding of consciousness that informs them, and
    the appropriate approach to the neuroscientific data, is therefore
    required.

Let me end with an example of the sort of research that an Indo-Tibetan
philosopher would dream of, if contemplative science meets these
challenges, and becomes more integrated in future. Wolf Singer has
hypothesised that phenomenal consciousness emerges from the formation of
meta-representations through the coding of widely distributed neurons.
We could pursue this line by looking for satisfactory answers to the
following questions: is some kind of computation required to
operationalise the study of contemplative states along these lines?
Could there be alternative ways of operationalising the study of
dynamical assemblies that seem to produce that heightened unity of
awareness that contemplation appears to produce? And could such unity be
better theorised through, say, Yogacara or Advaita accounts of
consciousness?

**Postscript**: As I look back at this determined effort to be
optimistic about such possibilities (given the context in which it was
delivered, I felt I was pushing my questioning far enough already!), I
wonder whether it even makes sense to attempt such bridging language.
The trouble seems to be that we put into such language precisely such
key concepts as already presuppose the possibility of bridging, whereas
the fundamental question that has to be asked is whether what happens in
these different domains is even bridgeable.  
Finally, I need to make a key distinction. I am not particularly
confident that neuroscience in its current paradigm and practice settles
anything about the nature and content of the discourse of these
contemplative practices. On the other hand, if the presuppositions of
neuroscientific language are freighted with the terminology of modern
European philosophy, one can at least try and imagine what it would be
like to reconceptualize the vocabulary of that language through a
translational philosophy of the classical Indian traditions. But that
then leads us into the different, and perhaps larger intellectual
question of inter-translatability as well as the pragmatic question of
how scientific hegemonies are re-structured.

\[Note by EF: The post is entirely by Ram-Prasad, I only added some
formatting, hoping that it does not disturb its author.\]
