+++
title = "Hindu Shahi Maharaja Anandpal: The Battle of Chhuchh"
date = "2020-05-12"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/12/hindu-shahi-maharaja-anandpal-the-battle-of-chhuchh/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/12/hindu-shahi-maharaja-anandpal-the-battle-of-chhuchh/).

In a previous post titled [“Hindu Shahi Maharaja Jaipal and the Islamic
Invasion”](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/03/11/hindu-shahi-maharaja-jaipal-and-the-islamic-invasion/)
we learnt about the resistance offered by the guardians of the
north-west of our civilization, how a myth has been created that it was
an easy path for the barbaric Islamic hordes into this ancient landmass.
This post carries the events from there and describes the strong
resistance put up by son and successor of Maharaja Jaipal – Anandpal.

After the self-immolation by Maharaja Jaipal, Anandpal ascended the
throne in 1002 C.E. Just like his father, the king was well aware of the
dangers that lurked his kingdom. Mehmud of Ghazni had been busy in
subjugating the fort of Bhatiya and Multan and had even appointed a man
named Nawasa Shah to oversee his conquered territories in India. Nawasa
was a new convert to Islam, earlier named Sukhpal, he was a maternal
grandson of Jaipal and had been “taken prisoner at the battle of
Peshawar in 1001-02 C.E.” Although, later he had tried to renounce Islam
and rule as an independent ruler, unfortunately he remained
unsuccessful. But, discussion of these events are for another day.

Bottomline is Mehmud knew that the Hindu Shahis were “the most
formidable stumbling block” if he wanted to invade further inside India
and Anandpal was aware of the situation. In 1008-09 C.E., Mahmud invaded
the kingdom with all his might. Maharaja had demanded help from other
rulers of India. Rulers of Gwalior, Kannauj, Kalinjar didn’t dissappoint
and provided help and aid to the Maharaja. Effort was quite
comprehensive to face the invader.

Mehmud had made his own preparations. *“With back to the Khyber Pass
firmly secured and made safe for retreat in case of defeat, he
entrenched his main army in the plain of Chhachh near Hazru on the east
of the Indus.”* But, there was a long wait. Both the armies weren’t
ready to make the first move. For nearly forty days, no one moved and
the armies remained encamped.

Mehmud decided to send 6000 archers to provoke Maharaja Anandpal’s
forces to fight and thus a great battle ensued. The army of Hindu Shahis
fought valiantly, with special contribution of the tribe of valorous
Gakhars/Khokhars. *“To quote Ferishta, ‘during the heat of the battle,
30,000 infidel Khokhars, with their heads and feet bare, armed with
spears and other weapons, penetrated on two sides – and forcing their
way into the midst of the cavalry – slaughtered three or four thousand
Mohammedans. They carried their success so far, that the Sultan,
observing their fury, retreated from the thick of the fight that he
might stop the battle for that day.’ Defeat stared him in the face..”*

Unforutnately, the victory that was firmly under the hands of Hindu
Shahis was taken away. The wounded elephant of Maharaja Anandpal lost
his control and fled the battlefield, taking the Maharaja with himself.
A panic ran through the forces and affected their morale. The thought of
their leader leaving the battlefield created chaos in the army and the
engagement broke. Many of these soldiers were killed in the retreat.
Waihand, the seat of the Hindu Shahis was captured and the entire upper
valley of Indus was brought under the invading armies of the barbarians.
Anandpal lost a lot of territory and after a few years was succeeded by
his son Trilochanpal.

While resisting the Islamic onslaught there were various kinds of
reactions by our rulers. They certainly made it very hard for the
invaders to succeed, even completely foiling their earlier attempts in
seventh and eighth centuries. There was never a time during or after the
Islamic invasions when one or the other attempts were not being made by
our rulers or even the general public to free themselves of the
barbarians. Many were successful and the result was that the Islamic
armies could make a solid seat for their conquered landmass only in late
12th century. We should never forget the indefatigable resistance by the
valorous Rajputs, the glorious Empire of Vijaynagar, the Maratha Empire,
the valorous kingdoms of Jats, the Sikh Kingdom, and many a times
unfortunately neglected in this discourse, the glories of the Oriya
Kingdom, the Ahoms and many others about whom I hope to write in near
future. Some compromised but such bad apples are found everywhere and in
every civilization. Some did blunders but many of them provided heroic
resistance even though loosing in the end like the Hindu Shahis.

What we as a country need is to learn about these attempts, every
resistance which was successful so that we learn what our ancestors were
capable of, every unsuccessful attempt so that we learn from those
mistakes. By not acknowledging our mistakes, we our destined to repeat
them but by not acknowledging our glorious resistance and our victories
we our destined to become pale shadows of our ancestors, suffering from
the inferiority complex about our capabilities. Unfortunately, even
after 1947, we neither accepted our mistakes nor our victories when what
we desperately needed was to avoid both these scenarios. But, a new dawn
is upon us and by the grace of *devas*, we still have time to learn and
correct. After all, we still are fighting similar enemies, outside our
boundaries and inside.

**References**:

*Advanced Study in The History of Medieval India Vol 1,* J L Mehta

