+++
title = "SUHRAWARDY AND THE BENGAL FAMINE OF 1943"
date = "2020-05-18"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/18/suhrawardy-and-the-bengal-famine-of-1943/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/18/suhrawardy-and-the-bengal-famine-of-1943/).

Every single life lost, especially due to hunger, is a tragedy which is
completely avoidable, but, unfortunately famines were very much a
frequent occuring phenomenon in pre-independence India. Ancient India
had fewer instances and the rulers of that time took various measures to
provide relief to the affected but, by the eve of Islamic invasions, the
frequency of famines had definitely increased.

After the Islamic invasions, the medieval India suffered various famines
the intensity of which increased manifolds compared to the earlier
times. And it is during the medieval times that we see the start of
proper misconducts from the upper echelons of the state. Delhi saw a
devastating famine in 1335-1342 but, the Sultan Muhammad bin Tughlaq
offered no relief. The Deccan Famine of 1630-32 was even more
devastating. Though the Mughal state did take some actions but the fact
that almost 7-8 million people lost their lives and the Mughal, Shah
Jahan was busy in spending on the construction of the Taj Mahal, speaks
a lot for the seriousness of the effort.

India under the colonialism of the British saw the frequency and
intensity of famines increase even further. The dessication of the
farming lands due to frequent droughts, the revenue policy of the
British, lackadaisical attitude of the British in which they were not
that different from the Islmic rulers of India, all were a contributing
factor.

The tragedy of the famine in Bengal in the year 1943 which took the
lives of nearly 3 million of its population needs special mention. The
reason is not the death toll. Unfortunately, from the medieval times
onward, India had seen the death toll reaching even 8-11 million during
some famines, for example, during the great Bengal famine of 1769-70 and
the great famine of 1876-1878. The Famine codes of 1883 enacted by the
British did provide some relief, due to which from 1902 until 1943 there
was no major famine in India.

That’s why the Bengal Famine of 1943 is so different. The reason for the
start of this famine may have been bad harvests but the situation was
worsened by the actions of the authorities involved. Japan’s occupation
of Rangoon in March 1942 had cut off the supply of rice from Burma. A
cyclone in the October of the same year that hit Bengal destroyed almost
30% of the winter rice crop. Situation was already grim. The trio of
Amery (Secretary of State for India) – Linlithgow (Governor General of
India) – Herbert (Governor of Bengal) were particularly responsible
along with the overarching obstinate and racist attitude of Churchill,
the British Prime Minister. The policy of “denial of rice” of the
Linlithgow headed British government aggravated the scenario by
confiscating the surplus rice from some coastal districts in the
apprehension of the invading Japanese. Even boats, which were an
important part of the transportation and communication of Bengal, were
confiscated by the government for the same fear of a probable Japanese
invasion.

Now, here comes the very interesting role of Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy.
An important leader of the All India Muslim League, he was born in a
rich Bengali Muslim family and went on to become a barrister in Oxford.
After dilly dallying under the Swaraj Party for some time, he became a
proper proponent of the two-nation theory of the Muslim League. He went
on to become the Prime Minister of Pakistan in 1956-57. He was also the
villainous head of the provincial government in Bengal during the
ghastly Direct Action Day – 16^(th) August 1946.

![**H.S.Suhrawardy**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/220px-h_s_suhrawardy.jpg?w=220)

But, there was another very important post that he held, by the power of
which he played a significant role in aggravating the Bengal Famine of
1943. This needs to be cleared that the famine which started with the
bad harvests and was exacerbated every step of the way by the British
policies, was clearly not Suhrawardy’s creation. But, his very
questionable role being in a very significant position needs to be put
into light to the readers. His actions though are not very known outside
Bengal. And this aspect is what we are going to address in this article.

During the peak of the Bengal Famine, the provincial government was
headed by Khwaja Nazimuddin and Suhrawardy was the Minister of Civil
Supplies, a very important post during the time of a famine, one would
think. Another curious role was of M. A. S. Ispahani of the Ispahani
business family of Bengal, but we’ll come to that later.

After being appointed the Governor General of India in 1943, Lord Wavell
within a week went to Calcutta to see the tragedy unfolding himself,
something which should have been done by Linlithgow. He described his
experience in the cable to Amery and Churchill as *“ Bengal famine is
one of the greatest disasters that has befallen any people under British
rule..”.* He *“saw the dying in the streets outside the gates of houses
and the glass fronts of the restaurants and bakeries…”*. In the
countryside he saw corpses *“scythed down at height of their hunger by
the cholera and smallpox, and lying in the roads and ditches”* a sight
which *“disturbed him profoundly.”*

Lord Wavell accused Nazimuddin for his incapacity, and described him as
*“exactly the sort of man of whom the corrupt take advantage …Suhrawardy
it was claimed siphoned money from every project that was undertaken to
ease the famine and awarded to his associated contracts for
warehousing, the sale of grain to the governments, and transportation.”*

But what Suhrawardy said about these charges? For him the blame was on
Hindus. He said thet he himself had worked his best to establish food
kitchens and wanted to punish the black marketeers and hoarders-*“mainly
Hindus he was careful to point out with confiscation of their produce.”*
He also said that he went to Delhi many a times for the supply of rice
*“ but found he said that Hindus did not want to send rice to a region
they saw as largely Muslim.”* These are quite outlandish claims
considering the fact that Hindus and Muslims were equally getting
affected by the famine and the final decision was in the hands of the
British who by no means were anti-Muslim. Lord Wavell who levels serious
charges against Suhrawardy was not by a long shot, prejudiced against
the Muslims. Infact, during Second World War, in his role as Commander
-in- chief Middle East, he had very favourable views for the Arab
nationalism. So, Suhrawardy’s defence seems quiet weak.

Fazlul Huq, previous Premier of the provincial government of Bengal also
said that denial policy of the British had caused the crisis but,
Suhrawardy disagreed and *“reiterated that there was no shortage of rice
in Bengal…The following day the Civil supplies department seized large
stocks of rice in Narayangunge, Dinajpur, Bankura, Pabna and Barisal .”*
The reason given was that the merchants breached the *“Food Grains
Control Order…having not properly declared their stocks..The public was
shaken.”* Fazlul Huq quipped that *“each time Mr. Suhrawardy made a
statement food prices went up.”*

In fact when Suhrawardy became the Premier of Bengal in 1946, the
sentiments among the Hindus of Bengal were expressed in words of a
Bengali who *“reported to the Congress High Command as – it is very
painful to find the same person who is responsible for taking lives of
about four million persons of Bengal in 1943 has again been seen as the
Premier of Bengal.”* The crisis that had genesis in the bad harvests and
the wartime panicked knee jerk reaction of the British was inflamed by
the personal misdeeds of Suhrawardy and utter incompetence of
Nazimuddin.

Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, a strong leader of the Hindu Mahasabha
vehemently criticised Suhrawardy for his misdeeds as the Minister of
Civil Supplies. He was *“condemned not only for the bungling of the
famine relief arrangements , but also for the blatant partiality and
disregard for norms of spending public money that he showed in respect
of a known Muslim League benefactor called Ispahani.”*

This Ispahani played a very important role through which the corruption
of the famine supplies was conducted. Born in a rich Bengali Muslim
family which owned the M.M.Ispahani Ltd., Mirza Abol Hassan Ispahani,
was a Pakistani legislator and diplomat.

The company is a big Bangladeshi conglomerate even today, headquartered
in Chittagong. Ispahani held various important positions as a Muslim
League member and benefactor. He was also very close to M.A.Jinnah.
Infact, a book was even published in 1976 titled “M.A.Jinnah and
Ispahani Correspondence 1936-48” which showed how he used to apprise
Jinnah about the situation in Bengal and keep Bengal Muslim population
sympathetic to the cause of Pakistan.

Suhrawardy appointed M.M.Ispahani Ltd. As the Sole Purchasing Agent of
the Government of Bengal for the purchase of foodgrains from the
neighbouring provinces. The company was supposed to distribute them via
rations. *“Incredible as it may seem today, Suhrawardy did this without
any competitive bidding, without negotiations, without negotiations
either with Ispahani or any other agent, without taking the assembly ino
confidence as if he was dishing out some largesse from his personal
funds…Government under Suhrawardy’s orders made an advance of Rs.
20,000,000 – Twenty Million or Two Crores of Rupees, a huge sum in those
days – to the Ispahani without any contract, without a single scrap of
paper.”*

Ispahanis even refused to *“pay any security as demanded by the
Governmant of Bengal”.* Such arrangement basically looks like an
invitation for no holds barred corruption. With Ispahani as one of the
main benefactors of the Muslim League *“it should not be difficult to
imagine where a part of money went and why Suhrawardy did what he did.”*
Ispahani on his part denied all the accusations made against them by Dr.
Mukherjee and considered these charges baseless.

Dr. Mukherjee also criticized the Ministry under Suhrawardy for
“promulgating the price control of rice without making suitable
provisions for supply” which aggravated the misery of the people. Dr.
Mukherjee gives further points in support of his claims- *“ it appears
that the Bengal government has been making a profit of 10 Lakhs of
Rupees by selling wheat to the hungry and starving people of Bengal at a
rate which is much higher than the rate at which it was purchasing in
the Punjab. Why is this profiteering on part of the Bengal government at
the cost of millions of Bengal’s starving and dying people?….More than 4
and half crores of rupees, not from Suhrawardy’s bank account but from
public funds have been paid to the Ispahanis”*

As has been rightly said that the Bengal Famine of 1943 was a man-made
famine, the intensity of which could had definitely been controlled but
for *“the apathy of an Amery, the cynicism of a Linlithgow, the
vengefulness of a Herbert, sick in mind and body, and the ineptitude and
the bumbling of a Suhrawardy.”*

**References** **and** **quoted** **excerpts:**

1.*Three Famines: Starvation and Politics*, Thomas Keneally.

2\. *Hungry Bengal*, Janam Mukherjee.

3.*Bengal Divided*, Joya Chatterjee.

*4.The Life and Times of Shyama Prasad Mookerjee,* Tathagata Roy*.*

Read this post on
[IndiaFacts](https://www.indiafacts.org.in/archives/suhrawardy-and-the-bengal-famine-of-1943/)
as well.

