+++
title = "The Naga Dynasties in Ancient India"
date = "2020-05-25"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/25/the-naga-dynasties-in-ancient-india/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/25/the-naga-dynasties-in-ancient-india/).

How many of us remember reading about how the great Gupta Emperor
Samudragupta established his empire in north India? Do we remember
reading about one Ganapatinaga? I am talking about the Naga dynasty of
ancient India and there fascinating though still somewhat obscure
history.

The Nagas came into prominence on the political map of India probably
towards the close of second century C.E. Though there is still a lot of
confusion about their origin but that much is certain that they arose
when Kushana power was in decline and the Nagas played a significant
role in finishing off the Kushana empire.

After collapse of the Mauryan Empire, some stability and protection to
the subcontinent was provided by the Shunga Empire. But, the period
after that was of rise of many smaller republics, particularly to the
west of the core of the empire. “This was the time when a number of
indigenous powers, like the Yaudheya, Arjunayana, the Malava were
gaining strength.”

The Nagas do not seem to be from a single dynasty. Most likely they were
a group of families. Their power centre were these four ancient cities –
Mathura, Vidisha (Besnagar in Madhya Pradesh), Padmavati (Pawaya in
Madhya Pradesh) and Kantipuri (Probably Kutwar in Gwalior, Madhya
Pradesh).

The Naga dynasties at these places themselves unfortunately, did not
leave any epigraphic record. The sources from which the history of Nagas
comes to light are mainly the numismatic evidence and the Puranas. There
are also some inscriptions of the Vakatakas that mention one of the Naga
dynasty, the Bhara Shivas.

![**Illustrative Map of Naga
territory**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/naga-territory.jpg?w=208)

The Puranas which enlighten us about the Nagas are Vishnu and Vayu
Purana. On their own, the evidence from only one Purana might seem a in
sufficient but when cross checked with the other Puranas, a clearer
picture emerges. These sources give us even the number of kings at these
places.

***“The Vishnu Purana discloses the existence of nine Naga Kings who
ruled at Padmavati, Kantipuri, Mathura and the evidence is corroborated
by Vayu Purana, which mentions two houses of Nagas, one at Padmavati.
and the other at Mathura. The number of Kings at each of the places
being stated to be nine and seven respectively.”***

Bhogi, Sada-chandra/ Chandramsha (Candrāṃśa) /Vama-chandra
(Rama-chandra), Dhana-dharma/ Dhana-Varma, Vangara and Bhuti-nanda are
some of the kings of the Naga house of Vidisha after which the lineage
was carried forward by king Shishunandi and his descendents after
overthrow of the Sungas.

The reputed scholar K.P.Jayaswal had done comprehensive research on this
in his “History of India 150 – 350 A.D.” He tried to connect the Datta
lineage coins of Mathura which are of an earlier period of 100 B.C.E.-50
C.E., with the Nagas of Vidisha. But he was strongly opposed by another
scholar A.S.Altekar on this point. Altekar had the majority opinion with
him, reason being that not only the Datta coins are found only in and
around the territory of Mathura but also when Cunningham and later Dr.
R.G.Bhandarkar carried out their excavations in Vidisha, the coins of
the rulers of the Mathura series were conspicuous by their absence.

The Nagas of Padmavati were another very important dynasty which even
had close relations with the royal house of Vakatakas. H.V. Trivedi had
done extensive research on the Naga coinage in his “Catalogue of the
Coins of the Naga Kings of Padmavati” published in 1957. He stipulates
that the Naga kingdom extended from the areas like Morena and Jhansi to
Vidisha. The first prominent king of the Nagas of Padmavati is
Bhavanaga, from the Bhara Shiva lineage. He probably ruled from around
310 – 335 C.E.

The credit of limiting the Kushana empire to the west of the country
after it’s weakening goes to the Bhara Shivas. Whenever an empire
weakens, the latent ambitions of the other smaller ruling houses always
result in strengthening their power at the cost of an already weakened
empire. The same phenomenon seems to have happened after the Kushanas.
It’s been asserted that the Bhara Shivas performed many ashwamedha
sacrifices. They had to in a strong position for successful completion
of sacrifices of this magnitude. Bhara Shivas were also precursors to
the illustrious house of Vakatakas.

According to Jayaswal, Vakatakas had “inherited that paramountcy from
the Bhara Shivas whose dynasty had performed no less than ten
ashvamedhas on the Ganges – a repeated assertion of their imperial
position in Aryavarta. It is needless to state that the ashvamedhas were
at the cost of the Kushana Empire. That history written in the orthodox
Hindu fashion sums up the breaking of the Kushana Empire and driving of
the Kushans further and further north-west towards the confines of the
Salt Range.”

As stated above, Bhara Shivas also had matrimonial connections with the
Vakatakas. The daughter of Bharasiva king, Bhava Naga was married to the
son of Vakataka king Pravarasena I, Gautamiputra. The significance of
this marriage can be gauged from the fact that it was meticulously
recorded in the inscriptions by the Vakatakas. This marriage provided a
solid foundation to an emerging dynasty.

***“This event was so important in the history of Vakataka dynasty that
it was incorporated in their dynastic history and repeated in all the
official deeds of the Vakatakas.”***

Territorial expansion of the Bhara Shivas seems to be starting from the
Baghelkhand in Uttar Pradesh and some part of Madhya Pradesh and
reaching all the way to the current town of Goddess Vindhyavasini
*i*.*e*. Mirzapur in U.P & thus following the ‘Ancient Deccan Road’. The
famous ghat of Varanasi, Dashashvamedha Ghat also has a fascinating
connection with this Nagas house. The literal meaning of the ghat itself
gives us this hint – the ghat where ten ashwamedha sacrifices were
performed. The same Vakataka inscription which talks about the
matrimonial alliance between the Bhara Shivas and the Vakatakas also
gives us information about these ten horse sacrifices.

***“There it is recorded that before this political marriage the
rajavamsha (dynasty of the Bharasivas) had performed ten asvamedha
sacrifices on the Ganges which they had acquired by valour, that with
the holy water of the Ganges seems to me to be the sacred site come down
to us as Dasasvamedha at Benares, the earthly home of Lord Shiva.”***

Jayaswal also opines that the Bhara Shivas and the Vakatakas were most
probably neighbours and that for them (Bhara Shivas) to have conducted
the said ten ashvamedhas, their existence must have been at the least a
century earlier than the reign of Pravarasena I. Thus, he dates the rise
of the Bhara Sivas to about 150 C.E.

As to why the Bhara Shivas had this peculiar nomenclature, again we have
to refer to the interesting Vakatakas inscription. Apparently, Bhara
Shivas get their family name on account of a religious practice. The
inscription of the Vakatakas describes the Bhara Sivas and the reason of
their distinct nomenclature in these glorious terms –

***“Of (the Dynasty of) the Bhara Sivas whose royal line owed its origin
to the great satisfaction of Siva on account of their carrying the load
of the symbol of Siva on their shoulders – the Bhara Sivas who were
anointed to the sovereignty with the holy water of the Bhagirathi which
had been obtained by their valour – the Bhara Sivas who performed their
sacred bath on the completion of their Ten Asvamedhas”***

![**Naga
Coinage**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/naga-coinage.jpg?w=265)

By the time of the illustrious Samudragupta (335-375 C.E.), it seems
that the Naga power was headquartered at two places, Mathura and
Padmavati. The famous Prayag Prashasti or the Allahabad Pillar
Inscription composed by Harishena gives us insight into this. The
inscription talks about how Samudragupta “violently exterminated” nine
kings of the Aryavarta, probably during his second campaign in northern
India. The given names of the kings defeated are Rudradeva, Mattila,
Nagadatta, Chandravarman, Ganapatinaga, Nagasena, Achyuta, Nandin and
Balavarman.

***“The occurrence of four Naga names in the list indicates the serious
nature of the threat to the Guptas from the power of the Nagas.”***

Here we have a very interesting and ammusing connection between the
Guptas, the Nagas of Padmavati and Mathura with the Vakatakas. As we
read above, the Vakataka ruler Pravarasena I had his son, Gautamiputra
marry a Naga princess of Padmavati, daughter of Bhara Shiva king Bhava
Naga and the son of this couple, Rudrasena became the next ruler
Rudrasena I of Vakatakas. When Samudragupta eliminated the Naga power at
Mathura, the princess of the royal house, Naga Princess Kuberanaga was
given in marriage to Chandragupta II, son and successor of Samudragupta.
Offspring of this union was Prabhavati Gupta who was later married to
the Vakataka king Rudrasena II.

Bana Bhatta in his “Harshcharita” also talks about one Nagasena in these
words,”the doom of Nagasena, born of the Naga lineage, occured at
Padmavati because he was foolish enough to have discussed his policy in
the presence of a mynah bird who declared them out loud”.

A lot is still very obscure about the Nagas, so much so that scholars
are not even unanimous about whether they were one family that sprung
into Mathura, Padmavati, Kantipuri and Vidisha or they were different
families sharing the Naga surname. One can only hope that some more
reseasrch can clear these questions.

**References:**

1.*History of India 150* *– 350 A*.*D*, K. P. Jayaswal

2.*Ancient India*: *History and Culture*, Balkrishna Govind Gokhale

3.*Dimensions of Human Cultures in* *Central India*, A.A.Abbasi

This post can be read on
[MyVoiceOpIndia](https://myvoice.opindia.com/2020/05/the-naga-dynasties-in-ancient-india/)
as well.

