+++
title = "Wild Part Two"
full_title = "Wild Part Two"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2017/08/21/wild-part-two/"
date = "2017-08-21"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2017/08/21/wild-part-two/).

Wild: Part Two

Read part one [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2017/08/18/wild-part-one/)

Jay’s words in *Wild* have pounded in my head as we negotiate a difficult crossroads in our life. It has been more than a month since Uppu and I left Sakleshpur, and we have for most of the time been in Bangalore, living together as a family once more in our flat in Fraser Town. There has been plenty to enjoy – birthday parties, cycling picnics in Cubbon Park and Lal Bagh, camping with friends. It has though also been a difficult and confusing time for Gautam and me. Ultimately it boils down to a single question: do the benefits of living on the farm outweigh the downside of us not living full time as a family?

Then there are all of the regular challenges hurled at as from all sides: when will Uppu go to school? do we really want him to grow up a village kid? if so many billions of people can manage to live, and bring up their children, in Bangalore, why can’t we? surely it is better to be together as a family, wherever that might be?

And in addition, being back in the city has underlined to me just how much easier life is here, easier, more convenient, more comfortable. The washing machine, vim soap for greasy plates, hot water at the flip of a switch, the mixer-blender which reduces the time it makes juice from 30 minutes to 3, the shop a quick walk away and our gas-fired hob for cooking or heating anything anytime we want it. The rubbish and the dog poo, the noise that assaults your ears all day and all night, the smell of the sewers and the fumes of the traffic can all be shut out with double glazing, air conditioning and loud speakers. Even the traffic can now be circumvented: for Rs 2,500 you can now take a helicopter from Bangalore airport to Electronic City, a journey which takes two hours by road. After all who needs civic services in India when you have money?

But, (and naturally there has to be a but) tempting though it is, logical, sensible even, though it might sound, we do not want to prolong our stay here.

And this brings me back to *Wild,* because it is the ability to be at one with the world we live in that the city deprives us of. It is not the city itself that I dislike; it is hard to actively dislike a slab of concrete. It is what the city does to us. Humans are designed to walk, run, jump, climb; to be warmed and burnt by the sun, to be cooled and pounded by the rain, to be refreshed and chilled by the wind; to seek and create food and shelter; and to heed their body’s needs. (Jay meets one Amazonian elder who tells her who his people used to have sex up trees, by the river, in canoes, wherever, whenever, until the missionaries told them this was absolutely unacceptable and that they must do it inside, in private, and with the woman lying sedately underneath. I cannot help but think that the massive rise in infertility is in part linked to our increasingly unnatural, unnatured, existence. The giant panda in China, living now mainly in captivity, is infamously almost unable to reproduce without help; we’re not far behind.) Cities make life comfortable for their inhabitants by controlling, improving upon or excluding nature to the greatest degree possible: reducing our exposure and vulnerability to the elements, minimising our contact with potentially dangerous flora and fauna, artificially re-creating useful natural phenomena such as light, fire and locomotion. And yet instead of thriving in such a seemingly perfect environment, we are subject to so many new kinds of physical and mental ailments that our quality of life, despite (?) our new-found longevity, is perhaps worse than ever.

Are we really so different from the pet dog who has to be house-trained, to learn to walk slowly and steadily (no sniffing and scampering) at the end of a lead on an unending treadmill of flat pavement, to eat only what is given, to mate only when and with whom his owner decrees. Put that same dog as a puppy out in the open, where he can pee on every tree and chase every fluttering leaf, and you will see him raging and roaming and happy. It only takes a year or two though of city life for him to become almost incapable of living anywhere else. And so with us. Life in the city robs us of our natural abilities and impulses to the point where we can no longer survive without shops, electricity, cars, comfy beds, proper loos and, most important of all, the smart phone.

Is that such a bad thing, you might ask. So what if we can’t live without these things? We have them in abundance, so what’s the issue? The issue is, as Jay so eloquently describes, that we have lost more than the physical ability to live as our species was intended to live; we have also in the process lost the very thing that made us whole, fulfilled human beings. And thus we modern civilised peoples are endlessly searching for something to make us whole again: new shoes, a better job, a more fulfilling relationship. In vain.

The question that burns in my mind is this: can an individual ever recover this completeness by returning to the wilderness to which we belong? Or are we too far gone? And if not adults, what about children? Could a modern-day ‘civilised’ child brought up in as wild an environment as possible naturally attain that completeness? If she had the space to play and to learn, to do things at her own pace, to be herself; if she were embraced by a clan of humans, animals and plants; if she was not subject to the enervating barrage of noise, light, device, device, device; if her connection to the world was never interrupted or severed would she then flourish as a whole, happy human being?

I don’t know but I can try. While we’re not planning to move lock, stock and barrel to the Amazon (although Uppu was definitely keen on the idea and ready to leave right away), we can at least approximate a wilderness complete with community on the farm. Whether or not such a life will ever transform either Gautam or me, it will certainly impact our children. And such thoughts have only become more urgent recently because it is no longer only Uppu we must think about. Early next year we will, insha’Allah, bring another baby into this world.
