+++
title = "Tales of Made Gowda of"
full_title = "Tales of Made Gowda of Mandya – Religious and Social Views"
date = "2019-12-09"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/12/09/tales-of-made-gowda-of-mandya-religious-and-social-views/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/12/09/tales-of-made-gowda-of-mandya-religious-and-social-views/).

Tales of Made Gowda of Mandya – Religious and Social Views

mAdegauDa is familiar with brAhmaNa-s. Been around them all his life.
Visits temples. Likes them to the extant that they’re hindu-s, but
dislikes their mores due to several predictable factors.

As a lingAyata convert, he is big on all jAti-s being equal, and
humanity being the only jAti. He proudly says: “I fed that sewage
clearance jAti person who came asking for food in a plate outside my
house as he insisted – but prohibited him from eating off a banana
leaf.” He blames the existence of jAti-divisions on brAhmaNa-s; and
further blames the perceived inability to resist the Islamic conquest on
jAti-divisions. An amusing story he relates is how in the past
brAhmaNa-s used to claim that only they could digest bhUta-kumbaLakAyi
pumpkin and not others, and fool other people off the benefits of
brain-enriching pumpkin vitamins.

He enumerates cross-religion and cross-jAti marriages in the
neighborhoods, quotes an appropriate basavaNNa vachana and story. When
challenged, he says that he wouldn’t object to his grandchildren
marrying cross-jAti and goes on to relate a tale about a brAhmin
headmistress who married a muslim, remains hindu, basically earns for
the family, with a pair of kids with the elder having a muslim name and
the younger having a hindu name.

He speaks with sentiment and pride about the siddagangA institution
where 20k poor folks are served food and given education; and his
lingAyata gurus who care not for jAti. By contrast, he mocks the
pejAvara svAmI quite artistically, and says sarcastically that he gives
his blessings and tIrtha to dalit-s while maintaining jAti bheda in
practice, not anything materially significant. He does not spare the
shrIngeri jagadguru, but concedes that he’s better because of greater
tapas and less participation in politics.

He finds the ritual purity rules of the brAhmaNa-s quite amusing and
sometimes infuriating (such as that time when he was turned away despite
being invited to collect jackfruits by a brAhmaNa neighbor after
visiting a corpse in another neighbor’s house to pay respects). Still,
he offers use of banana-leaves (since “you brAhmaNas are so fond of
it”). He keeps objecting to pankti-bheda.

Similarly, he keeps saying “there is only one God, whatever the name”,
with a jibe about brAhmaNa-s “creating innumerable Gods for the sake of
their stomach, creating so much conflict and confusion”. When one
disagrees, affirms that diversity in Gods and worship is natural and
challenges him as to why then he doesn’t become a muslim and worship
allah; he is stumped and ends up quoting the verse: “ಅವರವರ ಭಾವಕ್ಕೆ ಅವರವರ
ಭಕುತಿಗೆ ಅವರವರ ತೆರನಾಗಿ ಇರುತಿಹನು ಶಿವಯೋಗಿ ಹರಿಯ ಭಕ್ತರಿಗೆ ಹರಿ, ಹರನ ಭಕ್ತರಿಗೆ
ಹರ, ನರರೇನು ಭಾವಿಸುವರದರಂತೆ ಕಾಣುವನು” (“the same entity appears in a form
appropriate to the sentiment and devotion of his followers – hari to
devotees of hari, hara to devotees of hara”). Of course, he forgets all
about it and the same refrain gets repeated the next time we meet.

As he knowingly asks a brAhmaNa child with a shikhA whether he is a boy
or a girl, he relates, as if to apologize a bit, a childhood tale of how
his naughty schoolmates playfully distracting and cutting off the shikhA
of his mAdhva school teacher, leading to great distress and sorrow when
he found out.

He goes on and relates a tale of the neighborhood purohita family, whose
daughter was distressed one day on finding a peeping tom peering into
the bathroom. How she came to him for help on the advice of her mother
(rather than her father), how he set up an ambush and thrashed the
culprit (from the muslim puncture-walla shop). Then goes on to lecture
how brAhmaNa-s are too timid due to their upbringing, but need not be so
– taking for an example that brAhmaNa father in the park who was scared
of his son falling down doing monkey bars unlike his grandchild.

Despite all the brAhmaNa-bashing, his good nature forces him to
periodically apologize (“I think you must be both angry at me and
appreciative of me, while not understanding how to scold me, but you
should excuse me if I said anything wrong.”) and inject some
half-sincere flattery (“brAhmaNa-s are very intelligent – they have to
earn their livelihood with their intellect”).

