+++
title = "Eclipse at Bettadapura –"
full_title = "Eclipse at Bettadapura – archaka’s compromise"
date = "2019-12-30"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/12/30/eclipse-at-bettadapura-archakas-compromise/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/12/30/eclipse-at-bettadapura-archakas-compromise/).

Eclipse at Bettadapura – archaka’s compromise

## “Hill Village”

Bettadapura (“hill village”) is a pretty famous village – a whole branch
of sanketi brAhmaNa-s come from there. They, just as in the case of
mattUru or kaushika, are apparently not the oldest brAhmaNas there,
though. There is often a vaikhAnasa or pAncharAtra or (hoysaLa)
karNATaka brAhmaNa family residing since older times, officiating at the
medieval temples therein. As such, the sanketi-s, who have moved on to
cities turning the erstwhile agrahAra-s to old-age-homes or v4
settlements, are a transient pheonomenon. It is these original Archaka
families which hold on for good – unless of course, even their children
are lured into v3 or v4 professions – abandoning their dear deity to the
hands of far less rigorous v4-s (such as lingAyatas) .

![](https://i.imgur.com/7NrHfcl.jpg)

The most important temple seems to be one of siDlu mallikArjuna
(Lightening Rudra), adored via his linga. As we returned from our mostly
unsuccessful (cloudy sky) annular solar eclipse viewing expedition to
the harmonious tibhoTa nAstika refugee settlement at bailakuppe,
periodically recalling the morning breakfast chants of the tAntrika
bauddha-s, we stopped by this village temple, curious due to its sanketi
connection.

![](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/3oXSz_37lZoSYwIB24SYYAASReGsKoZcy-lO_tNULA4wu91x5l9UEv7KLXLcy0Nso4SbbcPW7hlJ4tOOSRXY6XkSHyafb4Y-wF0dF02gx8vEDRwkrip8Y0KAY9n4Pr_seA8mg10hOdhDyrSpbondMMEKMMQPP2QXWLlODsTvCPojgjNjBiCTfeIvxyR5jk1SV5IW9mBY1Z1NYXPFq4GMcgAwzCnKYJyKdYYqfX8wkDtHj8y7gB-Cn-U4AdAj83Cwcfy9iHM3Cr-Z3rybJgg62zu4HYMyOv1RDYMTqe2GX50R3zaWOT84b3D95lxOl3obpIEekYyhtGuSfjt0VOkOzkuLp8D5KbUgW5cpJYS3FBpdowjgrIAPyt9-57BCwe4bPufpRREtV3kRRZDuj7h9ViSSJTFOBJawaXEdunU82eNVPwN2CAT8Bq4PeJw315INZvW8rg2z_SSypMQpbneoJJfttLtAc0UXj-gr0-2-qC2UxXvwAxnO4Oeb7O-Se322JASFhqCShqBz8Sc1wn6B8ciZCISFuUMeYoSlfEmcD2DDuB2OwAKaNJiMwpotVruwLvTXVblXos6FrwnO3SIyOVMDk4W4OyE9gr2bBh639MSEdjhzoMo-7tuOnX5Z26sASFkqsZFR9_EZPddF_peIFP4ULyolVsO_rZAi7ZH7mEwA8Y_jJBvD59Yf=w1268-h952-no)

The archaka pair, expectedly, are a pair of kAshyapa-s belonging to the
(hoysaLa) karNATaka brAhmaNa community. On top of the garbhagRha door,
there hung a board with a shloka, which had two errors (a misplaced
mAtrA in the second pAdA, and an extra word in the final one.) This
board was apparently a donation from a local V2 family (urs or arasu
lords) – from a place with an awesome name: beTTada tunga (loftness of
the hill). The other end of the temple, curiously, contained a locked up
shrine to the lingAyata prophet basavaNNa.

## The pUjA

We were the only ones apart from the two archaka-s (one very fat senior,
one lean junior), who had already taken bath and readying for the
post-eclipse temple rituals. The junior was mopping the floor and
bathing the navagraha idols, even as the senior proceeded with ridding
himself of the final traces of eclpise related ashaucha by changing his
yajJNOpavIta. We greeted them and confirmed the sanketi connection (we
were just past a duplicate village named hemmige, which turned out to be
the wrong one). The seriousness and sincerity with which they were
proceeding with their rituals – quite unhurriedly and with confidence
(village style) – told me that it was not for mere show (“ध्यानपूजादिकं
लोके द्रष्टर्येव करोति यः। पारमार्थिकधीहीनः स दम्भाचार उच्यते॥”). This
was magnetic – we decided to stay for the ritual – though senior family
members wanted to hurry to lunch. (We were mostly fasting for the
eclipse).

How lucky we were! This being the dhanurmAsa, we suspected temple
closure due to rituals being performed before dawn – forgetting or
rather being ignorant about the eclipse temple rituals. With excitement,
I gave myself a mantra-snAna and performed Achamana ritual to purify
myself. Our infant, just fed, spouted out some of his milk due to an
excited tummy press. No matter – just then the junior had climbed the
temple roof and washing it. We cleaned out the infant and even ourselves
with the sacred shower coming down the drain pipe.

Slowly local V4 devotees started trickling in – first a male, then a
couple. Then another young chap (who was sent off to buy some oil). They
made small talk with us: “budd(h)i, where do you come from?”. The wife
did a japa repeating the shloka hung on the door – albeit confirming the
errors with me. None of this really concerned the archaka pair who just
went about their sacred business with contentment broken only by an
occasional incoming phone call. Slowly and surely, the senior proceeded
with a long sequence of rituals in the garbhagRha (core shrine),
starting with a japa by placing his hand on his water pot, proceeding
through an inital water bath, followed by a milk bath, followed by
another water bath, repeating the same for the viShNu, pArvatI and
gaNapati idols outside, dressing them with (new?) clothes, offering
fruits and flowers that the gathered devotees had brought to the
lightning lord, periodically chanting in bold voices appropriate vedic
mantras. When it came time, he asked if anyone was interested in getting
an archanA done. We expressed our interest – he uttered a standard
sankalpa with our particulars. Giving akShata-s in our hand he asked us
to go salute the gaNapati to the side and asked our little boy to take
off his cap (to receive sacred water sprinkling? To preserve appropriate
form?). The archanA done, he wound up (again, unhurriedly) the rituals.
We requested an opportunity to do namaskAra to him – but he deferred
that to later – “devotees to attend to right now”.

## The objection

Just then a few more devotees arrived from another village – sAligrAma –
to offer their eclipse obeisances to their family deity. Alas – they
were too late. the senior archaka told them to come again in the
evening. They pleaded that they had come from afar – to no avail. The
senior archaka was firm in his devotion to his tradition. A lady
objected, and so the archaka told his junior to offer up their flowers
to the lightning rudra. The lady kept objecting: “Why so inconsiderate?
What will happen if you oblige them? Would you do this if ayyanavaru
(brAhmaNa-s from distant places) came?”.

The archaka must have thought many things – “Doesn’t she know tradition?
How can they experience the full benefits of the post grahaNa pUjA if
they come after it is done? Does it make any sense to trouble my lord
again after this detailed sevA? Does she not realize that this arbitrary
repetition will cheapen the otherwise powerful pUjA?”. But all he could
do was go on the defensive: “No! No matter who came I would say the
same. No where is such a thing done. Respect tradition! You want a
challenge? I will hire a car for you – go and get a pUjA done at
nanjanagUDu at 2PM.” He even sarcastically asked for forgiveness doing
a sAShTAnga namaskAra. No matter – the lady had have her final say and
left. The archakas were resigned to let it go.

## Departure

Once others had mostly left, I requested again for permission to do a
namaskAra. It was granted this time, and saluted him reciting our prime
ancestors and clan. Asked if we’d paid the 40 Rs for archanA, we
requested him to accept a 10x+ bigger amount as dAna – he happily
obliged. We asked him a few questions and received some illuminating
answers –

-   the axeman figure outside – that’s chaNDIsha. Nearly every shiva
    temple has it. The lord is immersed in his strange penance, so
    devotees ask him to notify shiva later, before leaving.
-   that figure in the midst of a big snake – that’s subrahmaNya of
    course.
-   that joDi-linga – it supposedly has all 33 crore deities around it.

We asked him for hotel recommendations and left. (Not before me stepping
on dog poop and being supplied with cleaning water by the solicitous
archaka.) It was around 2PM. After an hour or two of driving, spying
crowds of common people taking ritual baths at river banks, we finally
got to eat – myself happily gorging on oats mixed with curds and fruits
(नापणीयमन्नमश्नीयात्) whilst those with looser practice ordered hotel
food. I kept recalling this remarkable experience, mentally singing the
three sAmans derived from the Rk (क ईं व्यक्ता नरः सनीडा रुद्रस्य मर्या
अथ स्वश्वाः॥) honoring the rudra’s astounding wild maruts. Much did our
surprising fortune in arriving at just the right temple at just the
right time awe me.

*May the lightning lord and his apt kAshyapa servants long light up this
hamlet!*



