+++
title = "Tales of Made Gowda of"
full_title = "Tales of Made Gowda of Mandya – 0 (Intro)"
date = "2019-12-09"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/12/09/tales-of-made-gowda-of-mandya-0-intro/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/12/09/tales-of-made-gowda-of-mandya-0-intro/).

Tales of Made Gowda of Mandya – 0 (Intro)

mAdegauDa is an interesting person. Very loquacious – to a fault, infact
– like a typical villager of this region. While a vokkaliga (locally
dominant farmer jAti), his grandpa had become a lingAyata. Since then
his family gave up meat, and became lingavat-s (ie lingAyata-s). He
considers himself to be a follower of the siddhagangA maTha.

He is aged 80+, but quite active – maintains a garden around the
compound of his urban house. Sits out and greets all passers buy, buys
cow milk and manure from the neighborhood. He has a rich repository of
verses and sayings he has memorized (mostly kannaDa, from basavaNNa,
sarvajJNa and the like; but even a sprinkling of sanskrit sayings). He
easily and appropriately quotes these to buttress the points he makes.

In his younger years in the village, he must have been quite the hero.
He has a scar in one hand where he claims he grabbed the sickle of his
attacker before counter-attacking during a land quarrel. (His treatment?
Tying the finger with a cloth and urinating on it daily.) There is a
dent in his head due to a falling coconut (which is perhaps why he makes
it a point not to stand under a coconut tree).

This fits with other tales from later life which help elucidate his
overall personality. Such as – that time when he quarreled with the
Bangalore railway station counter to open a senior citizens counter. Or
that time when he chased away Christian missionaries proselytizing door
to door with a sickle (machchu) a few months ago. Or that time a few
years ago when he made the muslim sofa maker who crashed his two wheeler
into a brAhmin lady’s scooter apologize by creating a ruckus involving
the use of anti-muslim invectives. Or that time when he confronted that
aforementioned lady’s husband who was opposing another brAhmin neighbor
from conducting RSS shkAkhA in the ground accross the street (mostly
composed of neighborhood construction workers’ kids).

The tales are told with great style and dramatic flourish, using
village-worthy curse-words judiciously (in just the right proportion).
Whether or not one agrees with his pronouncements, one will definitely
be entertained. Swinging from tale to tale like a monkey, though, can
place demands on time which irritates some people (not myself, though).
While I won’t try to match the drama of the well-told tale, I might
present a few interesting tales and views in further posts.

