+++
title = "The struggle for truth"
full_title = "The struggle for truth"
date = "2017-05-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/05/25/the-struggle-for-truth/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/05/25/the-struggle-for-truth/).

The struggle for truth

Milton said ‘who ever knew Truth put to the worse, in a free and open
encounter? ‘ – but he was wrong. I’ve seen it put to the worse time and
time again. A major fraction of western universities are dominated by
various kinds of lunatics – much more so than 50 years ago – and the
situation is deteriorating. Sometimes the bad guys win the arguments,
not least because there are a million lies for every truth, and it’s not
surprising that some of those lies are more attractive. People aren’t
logic machines.

Searching for truth via open debate works sometimes, on some subjects,
with some people. But on many topics falsehoods prevail. In war, though,
there is a systematic bias towards truth. It helps you win. A tendency,
one that can often be overwhelmed by disparities in material or
population, or by chance events, but is nonetheless real.

When one side is really crazy – drastically misaligned with reality –
even big numerical advantages are sometimes not enough.

Being the strongest power gives you more latitude to indulge your
fantasies. Women aren’t ever going to make useful Army Rangers: if we
were fighting a war of survival, one in which that kind of infantry
combat was key and against a foe with comparable resources, we would
either shed that delusion or lose. War, serious war, keeps your head on
straight \[or chops it off\] . That’s one reason that governments in
Europe generally didn’t get as goofy as sometimes happened in China ,
late in a dynasty. Not for long.

The South didn’t want to use black soldiers- if they were effective, it
would be a strike against their whole social theory. But winners are
interested in winning, not some silly proposition.

