+++
title = "Positively wrong"
full_title = "Positively wrong"
date = "2017-05-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/05/02/positively-wrong/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/05/02/positively-wrong/).

Positively wrong

Wanting something to be true doesn’t make it true – but sometimes,
desperately wanting something to be true pays off. Sometimes because
you’re actually right (by luck), and that passion helps you put in the
work required to establish it, sometimes because your deluded quest ends
up finding something else of actual value – sometimes far more valuable
than what you were looking for.

Columbus wanted to sail to the Indies. Since the earth was 25,000 miles
around, that was impractical – the trip would be around 10,000 miles
one-way. Too far. So Columbus believed whatever he had to believe in
order to make the voyage practical. He shopped around for a smaller
estimate of the size of the Earth: the one he picked, about 18,000
miles, appears to have been the lowest ever made. Only the Spanish
monarchs were rubes enough to support him. All wrong, but it led to the
biggest success in the last millenium,

Kepler conceived the delightfully loony notion that the orbits of the
planets could be explained by nesting the Platonic solids, each encased
in a sphere, within one another. Five Platonic solids, six planets:
obvious! Hard to fit Uranus into this, but it wasn’t definitively
discovered until after Kepler’s death. Anyhow, his loony idea somehow
led to his discovery of Kepler’s three laws – quite a haul.

On the other hand, in the social sciences, this seems to be the dominant
theme: most of their tenets are what the practitioners wish were true.
So far, no New World, no three laws as byproducts.

