+++
title = "Sack of Chittor by Akbar:1567-68CE"
date = "2020-03-29"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/03/29/sack-of-chittor-by-akbar1567-68ce/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/03/29/sack-of-chittor-by-akbar1567-68ce/).

There are many aspects which define a ruler’s character and how he/she
should be judged by the history. How they treat the non-combatant
population of their opponent during or after the battle is one of them.
While it is true that in the latter part of his reign, Mughal Emperor
Akbar (1556 – 1605 CE) changed his policy towards the Rajputs, probably
realising that to rule India, he had to be a lot more accommodative to
its native rulers, its inhabitants and its religion but, the early part
of his reign paint a different picture. The best example of it is, his
sack of Chittor.

**Background :**

Chittor had been a symbol of the Rajput pride , the jewel fort of the
mighty Sisodias of Mewar whose glory had risen to new heights under the
illustrious Rana Sanga. Though the Rajputs lost the heated battle of
Khanua to Babur in 1527, the House of Mewar remained defiant as ever.
During the nine years after that, Mewar was ruled by three Ranas one
after the other when the throne passed to Uday Singh, minor son of Rana
Sanga in 1537 under the regency of a council. During this time, Rajput
nobles considered it pragmatic to accept the nominal suzerainty of Sher
Shah Sur after his victory over Jodhpur in 1544. But after attaining
majority, Rana Uday Singh proved true to his blood by pursuing a
successful military career and placed Mewar again on the top of the
hierarchy of Rajputana.

Akbar on the other hand wanted to capture Chittor for more than one
reason. Though financially not that attractive, Chittor was situated on
route to Gujarat and Gujarat was a financially rich maritime province.
Chittor also controlled lines of communication between Delhi and the
Arabian Sea. Rana Uday Singh had also given shelter to Baz Bahadur,
fugitive ruler of Malwa. These reasons were enough to spark Akbar’s
interest. But, most importantly, the symbolism of capturing the pride of
Rajputana, Chittor was too attractive an opportunity for Akbar to let
go.

**The Siege :**

It was a mammoth affair for which preparartions were done on a massive
scale. The Mughals were personally commanded by Akbar and the huge army
included various military generals of high calibre. On October 20, 1567
the army reached the outskirts of Chittor. And just as the army reached,
the Rajputs realized the futility of endangering the lives of Rana and
the royal family by keeping them in Chittor and thus, Rana Uday Singh
along with his family was sent away, somewhere in the Aravali Hills,
making it hard for him to be traced. He was accompanied by the best of
his army and treasure.

Now, Chittor’s defence came under Jaimal Rathor. Jaimal was the chief of
Merta and a vassal of Rao Maldev of Jodhpur when Merta was conquered by
the Mughals in 1562. After that, Rana Uday Singh gave refuge to Jaimal
Rathor. It was a humongous task to defend Chittor which Jaimal took on
his shoulders. He had barely eight thousand men under him against the
might of the entire Mughal army. Even after that the Mughals took almost
a month to lay the siege of Chittor. The situation of the fort also
made it difficult for the Mughals as it was a huge fort and was situated
on a separate hill with plenty of supplies. The Rajput soldiers gave a
tough fight to the Mughal commanders whenever they took to fight.
Everyday, the Mughals were losing almost 200 men on an average. At last,
Akbar decided to change his strategy and gave order to construct
*sabat,* a sort of an underground tunnel which is partly above the
surface with a covered pathway. The construction was done by almost 5000
labourers. In December, when the tunnel was ready, the Mughal miners
made two excavations under the wall and put gunpowder in them but, when
the gunpowder was lit, the explosion resulted in an accident in which a
lot of soldiers on both sides lost their lives. Rajputs continued to
fight despite all odds and in a short time raised another wall to defend
the fort.

**Chittor Falls :**

Akbar gave the orders of an all out attack on the night of February 22,
and the fort wa surrounded and breached by the army. Jaimal was shot by
Akbar using a matchlock when he was busy supervising the repairs of the
breached wall of the fort. This affected the morale of the Rajputs and
they decided that it was the time to do or die. In true Rajput spirit,
the ladies committed Jauhar and men opened the gates of the fort.
Wearing saffron robes, Rajput men took offensive and fought till the
last man. Other than Jaimal, the hero immortalized in the annals of
Indian and especially Rajput history is Phatta or Fateh Singh Sisodia. A
young man of only sixteen, who along with his mother and wife, he fell
with all his fury on the enemy and fought valiantly with the Mughals but
was crushed to death by an elephant.

![**An Akbarnama painting depicting the Jauhar by the Rajput women,
during the siege of Chittor ( From
Wikipedia)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/345px-the_burning_of_the_rajput_women_during_the_siege_of_chitor.jpg?w=345)

**The Massacre :**

What happened after this is tragic. Akbar ordered a general massacre.
Every single soul inside the fort was killed by the Mughal army and
almost 30,000 people perished. The slained included non-combatant
civilians. Women, children, infirm men, all were killed in cold blood.
Akbar measured the success by weighing the quantity of zinar taken from
the necks of the fallen Rajputs. It measured 74 and a half *mans* . To
this day, numerals 74.5 are considered accursed by the Rajputs as they
signify slaughter of Chittor.

When Akbar entered Chittor, there was no one left to gave submission of
the fort to the Mughals. Only one man came forward named Isar Das
Chauhan. With all his courage, he attacked the elephant of Akbar and
commented sarcastically, “Be good enough to convey my rescpect to the
world adorning appreciator of merit”.

Akbar put Khwaja Abdul Majid Asaf Khan as incharge of the *sarkar* of
Chittor. Akbar even put statues of Jaimal and Phatta seated on elephants
at the gate of Agra fort, apparently to commemorate their valour. But,
it’s a bit rich to massacre an entire polulation of the fort including
thosands of civilians and then put statues to signify the valour of its
defenders. Chittor fell but, the fight was continued by the House of
Mewar in the leadership of the illustrious Rana Pratap.

As written in the start of this article, it is true that Akbar later
followed a different policy, especially when taken in context of what
the Islamic invaders and conquerors had followed till then. But, what is
also true is that Akbar ordered a general massacre of civilians of fort
of Chittor in which innocents were slained. Why is this not general
knowledge? Telling about it would not take away the positive changes he
made later in his reign. Whether he genuinely changed his mindset
towards the majority or he considered it pragmatic to change his policy
in order to successfully rule such a vast country. Whatever were his
reasons, why not discuss this aspect of his policy as well. Why this
need to keep the Chittor massacre under the cover? Probably, because it
does not fit in the grand scheme of his “greatness”.

**References**:

1.  Advanced Study in the History of Medieval India. Volume ii. By
    J.L.Mehta
2.  The History of India as told by its own Historians by Elliot and
    Dowson.
3.  Akbarnama by Abul Fazal.
4.  Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan by Col. James Tod.

This article was originally published on
[IndiaFacts](https://www.indiafacts.org.in/archives/the-sack-of-chittor-by-akbar/).

