+++
title = "Hindu Shahi Maharaja Jaipal and the Islamic Invasion"
date = "2020-03-11"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/03/11/hindu-shahi-maharaja-jaipal-and-the-islamic-invasion/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/03/11/hindu-shahi-maharaja-jaipal-and-the-islamic-invasion/).

There is a widespread myth about Indian history that the Islamic
invaders from the central Asia who descended upon Afghanistan, then part
of the Indian civilization had sort of a free pass in capturing it, that
the native rulers were such dumb puppets that they gave no resistance
and were also not given support by the rulers of mainland India. But,
when one looks through the history, such accusations prove to be
baseless. Indeed, Hindu rulers of Afghanistan did loose to the Islamic
invaders. But, that was the result and a lot happened before the
unfortunate conclusion of this struggle. Neither it was a free pass to
the Islamic hordes, nor the Hindu rulers were support less from their
peers from the mainland India. This is a short account of the Hindu
Shahi ruler – Maharaja Jaipal, who ruled the present south-eastern
Afghanistan and parts of Pakistan from 964 to 1001 CE and encountered
numerous Islamic invasions.

Today’s Afghanistan was very much a part of the Indian civilization.
Around the early medieval period, the territory had two regional names
i.e. Kabul and Zabul, the northern and southern regions respectively. In
late seventh century, both these regions had faced the Islamic armies
sent by the Caliph Al-Hajjaj in which though sometimes defeated by them,
at the end, the native rulers had emerged victorious and as a result,
the Kabul and the Zabul kingdoms remained independent and unmolested for
almost 150 years. This part of history needs special attention as the
kingdoms not only defeated the Arab armies but also kept two important
passes (Khyber and Gomal) secured for a long time. But for the time
being, lets take our attention towards the eighth century Kabul which
was governed by a Buddhist dynasty. In 865 CE, the last Buddhist ruler,
Lagaturman was deposed by a Brahmin whose name is mentioned as Lalliya
by Kalhana, the esteemed Kashmiri historian. Zabul on the other hand was
ruled by the Rajput rulers of Bhatti clan.

Though securing the country for almost two centuries, Zabulistan
unfortunately fell to an Arab named Yaqub ibn Lais, the founder of
Saffarid dynasty during 867-870 CE. He even snatched fort of Kabul from
Lalliya in 871 CE. He also reportedly laid the foundation of Ghazni.
But, the Kabul valley was still under the control of Hindu Shahis.

![***Illustrative Map of Hindu Shahi Kingdom as of 900
CE***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/hindu-shahi-map-900-ad.png?w=602)

Alptagin, the turkish general conquered Ghazni from the Arab Abu Bakr
Lawik in 962 CE. Alptagin and his successors became a source of constant
nuisance for Maharaja Jaipal. Important point to note is that throughout
history, such attacks on the Indian civilization were always unprovoked
and the Kingdom of Hindu Shahis was no exception to this rule.
Piretagin, one of the successors of Alpatagin was the one to launch
first organised attack on the Hindu Shahis in 977 CE. And when
Sabuktagin became the ruler of Ghazni, he plundered Kabul valley and
amassed a huge booty.

Jaipal quite understood what was happening and was very much worried
with the events. He knew Ghazni was growing in power. The constant raids
by the Islamic barbarians into the Lamghan/ Laghman area had alerted
him. Now, in order to take the offensive, Jaipal made a huge organized
attack on Ghazni in 986-987 CE. Though, the step was very strategic but
with lack of planning and also bad luck to his side, his army suffered
due to sudden hailstorm and heavy rainfall.

Knowing what he had to do to survive, he sued for peace on very
unfavourable conditions but went back on it after reaching his dominion.
This didn’t go down well with Sabuktagin and he launched another raid
into Lamghan. Jaipal immediately called for help from the other Indian
rulers and many rulers provided the same. This fact is usually
overlooked but needs to be popularised that when needed, the mainland
rulers of India didn’t disappoint. Including the armies of Chauhans of
Ajmer, Chandelas of Kalinjar and the Pratiharas of Kannauj, a total of
almost 100,000 troops marched on Ghazni. But alas, the army was defeated
and Jaipal was taken prisoner.

The Maharaja secured his release by giving up a large part of his
territory upto the banks of Indus. Under immense pressure, he even had
to shift his capital from Kabul to Udabhandapur (Waihand, near Peshawar)
in 995 CE. In the meantime, Sabuktagin was succeeded by his son Mahmud
who was later, probably first time in history even, given the title of
‘Sultan’ by the Caliph Al Qadir Billah. Mahmud took a vow to wage
*jihad* and annually commit raids on the *kafirs*.

Maharaja Jaipal during this time tried to construct pathways and roads
in the eastern border of his kingdom. After suppressing a revolt in
Khurasan, in 1000-1001 CE, Mahmud descended upon the Indian territory
and invaded by crossing the Khyber pass. He even reached near Peshawar
and snatched some fortresses. Mahmud quite smartly garrisoned the pass
and after some time, marched on the Hindu Shahis. He had with himself
15,000 strong cavalry and almost 10,000 ghazis, ready to wage Jihad.
Maharaja Jaipal on the other hand had 12,000 cavalry, 30,000 infantry
and almost 300 elephants. Jaipal crossing the Indus, met the invader and
a huge battle ensued on 27 November 1001 CE. But, the Hindu Shahis were
defeated.

Almost all of our army lay dead on the ground. The Maharaja was taken
prisoner along with his kinsmen and chief nobles. Andrew Bostom tells us
from the account of Utbi that Jaipal, the Hindu Shahiya king of Kabul
*“his children, his grand children, his nephews and the chief men of his
tribe and his relatives, were taken prisoners and being strongly bound
with ropes were carried before the Sultan like common evil-doers…Some
had their arms forcibly tied behind their backs, some were seized by the
cheek, some were driven by blows on their neck.”* Bostom continues from
the writings of Hodivala about details of humiliation of Jaipal by
Mahmud, *“publicly exposed at one of the slave auctions in some market
in Khurasan, just like thousands of other Hindu captives….(He) was
paraded about so that his sons and chieftains might see him in that
conditions of shame, bond and disgrace…inflicting upon him the public
indignity of commingling him in one common servitude.”*

Anandpal, son of Jaipal bravely rose up to the unfortunate occassion and
took matters in his hands. He was successful in securing the release of
his father and some of the relatives by giving a heavy ransom. But
Jaipal couldn’t bear it. He lit a pyre and burnt himself to death. A.
Bostom says that *“no wonder Jaipal immolated himself for such
humiliation was inflicted deliberately to smash the morale of the
captives.”* The prisoners of Islamic barbarians once captured, *“young
or old, ugly or handsome, princes or commoners, could be flogged,
converted, sold for a tuppence or made to wok as menials.”* But, from
here on, a lot more fighting was yet to happen and the resistance was
continued by Anandpal. Mahmud, on the other hand amassed a huge booty
and took it to Ghazni.

Here, there are certain points to keep in mind. As mentioned above, the
rulers of our frontiers need to be given credit that they fought and
kept the Islamic hoards at bay for a very long time. At a time when
entire kingdoms and civilizations were falling like dominoes in front of
the Islamic attack, our rulers including the Chalukyas, the Pratiharas,
the Hindu Shahis etc kept fighting them. The Caliphate had started to
attack firstly from the sea and were successfully repulsed. Even when
Sindh Rajputs succumbed under the attack of Muhammad bin Qasim, it was a
combination of good military strategy mixed with a lot of treachery on
part of Qasim and even some natives. So, sometimes we successfully
defeated them and sometimes we were defeated by better military skills
with zealous attitude of a new religion whose believers were hell bent
on spreading it by sword. Islamic hordes had been trying since the
seventh century, 637 CE to be precise when the first expedition was sent
by the Caliphate to Thane and was successfully repulsed by our rulers.
Keeping this fact in mind, the gap is of almost five centuries when
India came under Islamic rule by the end of twelfth century, with the
exception of Sindh.

But, we also have to accept that despite giving a tough fight, we were
defeated and scholars suggest various reasons for it. Some say it was
part was our lack of military strategy. Some blame our over dependence
on elephants as elephants were very unpredictable and some say that our
sub-par cavalry in front of the superior cavalry of the Islamic hordes
from Central Asia was our bane. One reason that is pushed is our
insistence on following morals of knightly fighting when none was
followed by our enemy and that it has always been our disadvantage.
Although, it can be argued that much of this criticism is very basic and
with more research it does emerge that a lot of it is over emphasized
and good examples contrary to this image are found in our history. After
all, we did keep on giving incessant fight to our invaders and won many
battles even after their rule was established. But we certainly need
more research as to study and apprise ourselves of actual weaknesses so
that we can learn from history, all of the pros and the obvious cons of
our conduct.

**References**:

1.  Elliot and Dowson, *The History of India as told by its Historians.*
2.  J. L. Mehta, *Advanced Study in the History of Medieval India, Vol.
    I*
3.  Andrew G*.* Bostom*, The Legacy of Jihad: Islamic Holy War and the
    Fate of Non-Muslims.*

Read my post on Hindu Shahi Maharaja Anandapal
[here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/05/12/hindu-shahi-maharaja-anandpal-the-battle-of-chhuchh/).

Read this article on
[MyVoiceOpIndia](https://myvoice.opindia.com/2020/03/hindu-shahi-maharaja-jaipal-and-the-islamic-invasion/)
as well.

