+++
title = "Getting Started in"
full_title = "Getting Started in Indian Philosophy Part 2"
date = "2015-03-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/28/getting-started-in-indian-philosophy-part-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/28/getting-started-in-indian-philosophy-part-2/).

Getting Started in Indian Philosophy: Part 2

[Elisa Freschi has linked
to](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/27/1355/)an
unfortunate[set of
notes](https://www.academia.edu/11677921/Notes_on_Indian_philosophy)on
Indian philosophy that have been making the rounds on Academia.edu. The
author (whose name I’ll omit to avoid it coming up in searches) wrote a
paper as an attempt to learn about Indian philosophy. However, the
result was an odd mishmash of unrepresentative views and
mischaracterizations–and it is now getting bookmarked as if it were a
useful resource.

I’d like to reflect on how things could have gone better for this
person, since his heart was in the right place, even if the results were
poor. We all start somewhere, and for those of us who are drawn to
Indian philosophy from within the Western philosophical tradition, we
may not have a good idea of how to address our misperceptions (or even
to identify that we have them!). This post is meant to be read in
conjunction with the post “[Getting Started in Indian
Philosophy](http://malcolmkeating.blogspot.com/2015/02/getting-started-in-indian-philosophy.html),”
which lists some useful texts. In it, I note some methodological points
for philosophers looking to expand their understanding.

So you want to learn more about Indian Philosophy? Where should you
start? What pitfalls should you watch out for?

**1. Don’t just pick up any survey book or reader. Start with an
annotated bibliography, course syllabus, or encyclopedia article.**

Both the[Internet Encyclopedia of
Philosophy](https://www.blogger.com/blogger.g?blogID=1363145605095635904#editor/target=post;postID=603646083681617905;onPublishedMenu=allposts;onClosedMenu=allposts;postNum=4;src=postname)and
the[Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy](http://plato.stanford.edu/)are good places to start. You
can find more sources by browsing Karl Potter’s[Encyclopedia of Indian
Philosophies](http://faculty.washington.edu/kpotter/)as well as[Oxford
Bibliographies Online](http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/). Once you
have an idea of a topic you’re interested in and some of the major
secondary sources available, try searching to see if any living
philosophers have syllabi online you can use. For example, say you are
interested in Madhyamaka. You can look at syllabi written by[Dan
Arnold](http://home.uchicago.edu/~daarnold/courses.html),[Jay
Garfield](http://jaygarfield.org/buddhist-philosophy-seminar-syllabus/),
and so on.

**2. As you read, be cautious about drawing analogies.**On the one
hand, it’s helpful for learning to be able to put new ideas into
existing frameworks. So as you learn about Buddhist theories of the
self, you will naturally think about varieties of reductionism found in
contemporary philosophy and which Buddhist views “map” onto which.
However, be careful to look out for differences. Are arguments being put
to the same dialectical purposes? Are there tacit assumptions that are
substantially different? Chances are that the mapping you think is so
obvious is contentious, so look to see if this is an area of research
for philosophers working in the area.

**3. Hesitate whenever you start a sentence that reads, “Indian
philosophers think that…” or “Buddhists think that…”**This is not to
say that there are no worthwhile generalizations, but that often they
are misleading or even pernicious. For instance, you may commonly hear
that Indian philosophy is concerned with soteriology in a way that
Western philosophy is not, and thus Indian philosophy is religiously
motivated. This does not do justice to the complex relationship between
religion and Indian philosophy and it draws too sharp a distinction
between Indian and Western thought.

**4 Be aware of philological issues.**If you are engaging with thinkers
writing in a language you cannot read, you need to at minimum, (1) read
their texts in translation and cite them in your work, (2) read the
texts in more than one translation where possible, (3) take extra care
with spelling, diacritics, and remarks about meanings. Be wary of
overstepping your abilities (for instance, claiming that a word has no
equivalent in your native tongue). If you want to engage Indian thinkers
philosophically, you can do so without being an expert in Pāli,
Sanskrit, or other languages, but don’t think you can do it well without
reading a few primary sources in translation.

**5. Make sure you are not de-contextualizing unfairly.**If you are
engaging with thinkers who are separated by a temporal and cultural
distance, you need to take extra care that you are attentive to the
original context so as to get the arguments correct, even if your
primary concern is not historical. For instance, again supposing your
interest is in Indian Buddhist philosophy, the claim “There is no self”
has a positive interpretation that will differ depending on the thinker
whose work you are reading.

**6. Reflect on what your purpose is in reading Indian philosophy.**Is
your goal to be able to teach an introduction to philosophy course that
is not limited to Western materials? Is your goal to include Indian
philosophy in a project you are working on? Is your goal to satisfy your
intellectual curiosity? (These are not exclusive nor exhaustive
categories.) These distinctions are importance since one can teach an
intro course without extensive mastery of*all of Indian
philosophy*(which I daresay is a goal not many of us can reach,
anyway). But if you want to incorporate Indian philosophy into your
project, you will need to have a higher standard.

Further, while I do not want to dissuade anyone from doing work in
Indian philosophy, I think that those of us who do who are presenting
Buddhism and other Indian philosophies to a Western-educated audience
have the responsibility to do so faithfully. Contemporary culture is
full of highly mystical, “Eastern kitchen sink” versions of Indian
intellectual traditions and it is against this background that we are
working. So we have a responsibility to ensure we are not employing an
oversimplified version just to give “flavor” to our philosophical
project or marshall some kind of evidence that our view is found
elsewhere. This will require doing some reflection on your methodology,
whether by reading about comparative philosophy or just being very
attentive to how the contemporary philosophers you’re reading engage
with these texts.

**7. Find other people to talk to!**There are blogs online like the
Indian philosophy blog where you can engage with scholars working in
these areas. Your philosophy department may have someone working in one
of these areas who you can talk to, or perhaps you could email someone
whose work you’ve been reading for pointers for research. This may seem
like obvious advice, but I can’t overemphasize the importance of having
a teacher to guide you through the literature when you’re starting out.
And while I can’t speak for others, I know I am excited to hear when
other philosophers are interested in non-Western philosophy, and I’m
happy to give advice where I can.

*Any other methodological suggestions for philosophers looking to start
out in Indian philosophy?*

([Cross-posted at my personal
blog](http://malcolmkeating.blogspot.com/2015/03/getting-started-indian-philosophy-part-2.html#more "Getting Started in Indian Philosophy: Part 2").)
