+++
title = "Call for Papers Is"
full_title = "Call for Papers Is Theology Comparable? (Rome, September 17–19 2015)"
date = "2015-03-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/23/call-for-papers-is-theology-comparable-rome-september-17-19-2015/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/23/call-for-papers-is-theology-comparable-rome-september-17-19-2015/).

Call for Papers: Is Theology Comparable? (Rome, September 17–19  2015)

Recently a few articles (see
[here](http://prosblogion.ektopos.com/2013/12/31/results-of-my-qualitative-study-of-attitudes-and-religious-motivations-of-philosophers-of-religion/),
[here](http://crucialconsiderations.org/rationality/theism-and-expert-knowledge/)
and
[here](http://philosopherscocoon.typepad.com/blog/2015/01/on-philosophers-of-religion-focusing-on-their-own-religion-only.html))
have raised the issue of whether philosophy of religion is not really
little more than Christian apologetics. A straightforward answer would
be that it is not, but an output of the question is what it means for
philosophy of religion (and theology) not to be confined to Christianity
only. On the one hand, in fact, one might say that to be “apologetic” is
not a bad thing, insofar as it really amounts to taking problems at
heart and creating sound arguments about difficult issues (I, for one,
am inclined to think that little or no philosophical, mathematical and
logical problem at all would have been solved if it were not for one’s
determination to take it at heart and consider all possible solutions).
On the other, makes it at all sense to look beyond the precinct of the
religion(s) we know best while working on a given theological or
philosophical issue?  
This range of questions lies at the basis of
[this](https://asiaticacoffeebreak.wordpress.com/2015-2/god-as-person-god-and-persons/)
panel. **A legitimate answer** to the questions mentioned above **could
be that** one should focus on one religion only and that **all
comparison might be misleading** —and it would be interesting to see why
this is the case. **Another possibly legitimate answer would be to show
that theological topics can be better understood once perceived from a
different point of view**, as it
[frequently](http://philosopherscocoon.typepad.com/blog/2015/01/why-testing-logic-or-philosophy-in-general-on-non-western-ideas.html)
[happens](http://philosopherscocoon.typepad.com/blog/2015/02/guest-post-playing-outside-of-your-wheelhouse.html)
with other philosophical categories. If the latter is the case, this
should lead to the result that, e.g., the relationship between God’s
Wisdom (the OT Sapientia) and the second person of the Godhead (are they
ontologically identical or is one a property of the other? If the
former, should this mean that God is not like an (Aristotelian)
substance but rather like an action?…) could be better understood or
throw light on the relationship between God and his Potency in
Śrīvaiṣṇavism (Śrīvaiṣṇavas also claim to be strictly monotheistics,
although they admit the presence of God’s Potency beside God Himself).
Please note that a sheer juxtaposition of two topics does not make a
comparison. We do not expect contributors to be able to shape a
comparative contribution themselves, but we expect them to be open for a
comparative discussion.

Just as an example, let me attempt to sketch a discussion about God as
person which can be rooted in more than one tradition:  
Is God a person? If yes, is S/He a person in the same way as we are
such? And what does “being a person” imply? Do persons need to
correspond to a substrate? Does this substrate coincide with their body?
And is such a body a material abode or rather the substrate of
experience?  
The problem can be developed in different ways, ranging from the
co-existence of three persons in one God in Christianity (in which sense
are they distinct? In which sense are they the same?) to similar
problems in other theologies (e.g., the role of God’s personality in
Indian theology). Further, is God’s personality an essential part of
Him/Her or does it only regard the devotional level?

Each discussion within the panel (although not necessarily each paper)
will cross through geographical boundaries (as usual in the [Coffee
Break Conference](https://asiaticacoffeebreak.wordpress.com/2015-2/)
model), showing how philosophical (and theological) problems can be
debated together from different perspectives. Participants are
encouraged to focus on the philosophical significance of the ideas at
stake, rather than on a sheer description of a narrow topic.

The theologies to be dealt with by the contributors who have already
confirmed their participation range from the Catholic one to the
ŚrīVaiṣṇava (don’t look at me…I will not be the only one speaking from
this perspective), the Islamic and the Śaiva one. Contributors from this
blog would be especially welcome.
