+++
title = "Some common prejudices"
full_title = "Some common prejudices about Indian Philosophy It is time to give them up"
date = "2015-03-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/27/1355/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/27/1355/).

Some common prejudices about Indian Philosophy: It is time to give them up

Is Indian Philosophy “caste-ish”? Yes and no, in the sense that each
philosophy is also the result of its sociological milieu, but it is not
only that.  
Is Indian Philosophy only focused on “the Self”? Surely not.

Why am I asking these questions? Because —no matter how sophisticated
*our* discussions of specific topics of philosophy can be— one still
encounters these prejudices in secondary literature…and consequently
also in the writings of many colleagues who do not have access to direct
sources. They cannot be blamed for that, but I hope that they will be
grateful to receive some advice concerning what they believe on the
basis of surpassed or unreliable sources. The last example for me was a
[collection](https://www.academia.edu/11677921/Notes_on_Indian_philosophy)
of notes on Academia.edu. Its author starts with the good intention
“I’ve had enough of ignorance about Indian philosophy” and overall he
sounds engaged and interesting. Unfortunately, however, he has received
bad advices and/or chose badly among them. The result is a short summary
of the usual suspects, with a strong bias in favour of Advaita Vedānta
mistaken to be “Indian Philosophy” sic et simpliciter (bold passages are
the author’s ones, followed by my comments):

1.  **“‘See the Self’ is the keynote of all schools of Indian
    philosophy. And this is the reason why most of the schools are also
    religious sects”** (p. 1). I thought that B.K. Matilal had done
    enough to defeat this prejudice, but this seems not to be the case.
    Thus, I am afraid I will not be able to defeat it myself. Let me
    just note that this is a short summary of what some schools of
    Vedānta could be said to do but it has little or nothing to do with
    the vast majority of Indian philosophers. There is no “religious
    sect” called “Mīmāṃsā” or “Nyāya” or “Vaiśeṣika” and so on. Not to
    speak of Buddhist schools of philosophy, who tend to be anātmavādin
    \`deniers of the existence of a \[permanent\] Self’.
2.  **Self-forgetful service of others is a Christian, not a Hindu
    idea** (p. 1). Well, one might argue that self-forgetful service of
    others is difficult to attain for human beings. And one is reminded
    of Hegel’s critique of Kant’s concept of morality. Moreover,
    self-forgetful service of others is exactly the Bodhisattva ideal
    —which the author himself mentions at p. 9.
3.  **(Evidently all the life-denying aspects of Indian tradition, as
    well as the superstitious and degrading religious practices, proceed
    largely from the caste system, its lack of dynamism, its oppressive
    structure, its eternal unchangingness. A society that worships
    Hanuman the monkey and Sabbala the cow, that countenances the
    burning of wives after their husband’s death, is an inhuman one, in
    which man is subjugated both by the earth and especially by a
    caste-structured povert)** (pp.1–2). My personal position is not
    consistent with strict Marxism as for the idea that philosophy were
    only a superstructure of economic relationships. But in any case, I
    am strongly suspicious about such summaries highlighting an
    a-historical laundry list of shameful acts of Indians (not Indian
    philosophers) without any effort to understand (worshipping Hanuman
    is not like worshipping a monkey, just like believing in St. Mary
    does not amount to beliving that virginal births are possible in
    general).
4.  **Hegel, Hegel, Hegel (except for the mysticism)** (p.3). No,
    thanks. Again, the author is speaking of Advaita Vedānta and thinks
    of “Indian Philosophy” as if Advaita Vedānta were its only
    representative. In fact, Advaita Vedānta, as discussed by Daya
    Krishna (*Three Myths of Indian Philosophy*), is virtually absent
    from the philosophical arena until almost the end of the first
    Millennium AD. And, one might add, its role in the second Millennium
    AD has been possibly overemphasised by well-known activists of
    Advaita Vedānta such as Vivekānanda who looked at Indian Philosophy
    through these lenses.
5.  **Hinayana, a religion without a God, emphasizes self-help \[…\].
    Mahayana, on the other hand, is less egoistic and negative \[…\]. In
    this sect Buddha is transformed into God and worshipped as such.
    \[…\] The Mahayana religion has more missionary zeal than the
    Hinayana; it is more progressive and dynamic** (p. 9). “Hinayana” is
    already a bad start, since it is a pejorative term (literally
    meaning ‘small vehicle’, opposed to Mahāyāna ‘big vehicle’) applied
    by Mahāyāna Buddhists to their forerunners. “God” seems to me here a
    misleading category. If one thinks at the Western and Indian concept
    of God as creator of the world, dispenser of mercy, etc., then the
    Buddha is surely *not* a God, not even in Mahāyāna. And so on.
6.  **The original teachings of Buddha were not incompatible with the
    Upanishads—for instance, he emphasized Atman, the Great Self, and
    encouraged people to act under the light of that Self, to seek union
    with it—but his early Hinayana disciples (of the Sarvastivada, or
    Vaibhasika, school) changed that** (p. 9). This is a neo-Vedāntic
    interpretation of Buddhism, which uses a fundamentalistic device
    (“the origins were good, the successors mixed all up”) in order to
    suggest that the Buddha was in fact a crypto Vedāntin.
7.  **Idealism is obviously the philosophy of choice for most Indian
    thinkers** (p. 10). This is not so, and surely not “obviously” so.
    Which schools would one count among the Idealist ones? I can only
    think of Advaita Vedānta, Yogācāra and perhaps some trends of
    Pratyabhijñā philosophy. Which schools are closer to Realism,
    Representationalism, etc.? Mīmāṃsā, Vaiśeṣika, Sāṅkhya,
    Śaivasiddhānta, Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, Dvaita Vedānta… (all of them
    are never mentioned in the “Notes”), Nyāya, Yoga both schools of
    Jaina philosophy, most schools of Buddhist Philosophy, Cārvākas, and
    so on.

Long story short: **Perhaps we have really to do something to spread
some better-funded knowledge on Indian Philosophy** (and perhaps
interested scholars should make some efforts in selecting their
sources). **Which misconceptions do you encounter more frequently?**

Should you have arrived here for the first time: Please read
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/02/welcome-to-the-indian-philosophy-blog/ "About this blog")
page about the purposes of this blog before feeling offended. I want to
initiate discussions, not to offend anyone.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
