+++
title = "Philosophy and Cultural"
full_title = "Philosophy and Cultural Diversity A Follow Up On Keating’s Questions"
date = "2015-03-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/16/philosophy-and-cultural-diversity-a-follow-up-on-keatings-questions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/16/philosophy-and-cultural-diversity-a-follow-up-on-keatings-questions/).

Philosophy and Cultural Diversity: A Follow Up On Keating’s Questions

The *Philosophy Meets Cultural Diversity**Conference* has now ended.
And I wanted to return to Malcolm Keating’s
[Questions](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/08/philosophy-meets-cultural-diversity/).
I won’t address his questions directly, although some of what I say will
hit on issues his questions raise. I will begin by talking about my
impression of what Stephen Phillips had to say. I have asked him to do a
reply post, so as to present his own counter-balanced version of what
was said. Here are some basic points I got from his presentation:

\(i\) It is very important to study Indian thoughts about knowledge and
agency through a traditional study of classical Indian philosophy
informed by knowledge of Sanskrit and educated intuitions formed through
engagement with traditional texts guided by masters of these texts. This
method is to be preferred to single empirical tests of folk intuitions
about the nature of knowledge by native Hindi or Bengali speakers that
some experimental philosophy involves itself in.

\(ii\) In general, and cross-culturally, philosophy is a first-person
response to the cultural heritage from which one is trained in.
Philosophy is not identical to or involved in the same type of inquiry
as science. Paying attention to science is important for general
inquiry, but it may not be that informative for an investigation of, for
example, the nature of reasoning, as discussed in the *Nyāyasutras.*

\(iii\) Bilingualism understood as both fluency in multiple languages
and in multiple traditions is the preferred way to pursue comparative
and global philosophy. Experimental philosophy will not add to a deeper
understanding of either of these traditions. And the data that is
produced may not be that interesting for the amount of work that is put
into gathering the data.

\(iv\) Some traditions of philosophy are quite rich and involved. Others
are not so rich and involved. The classical Indian tradition of
philosophy is rich and involved, and it takes a lot of time to
understand the deep intricacies of what is going on in the development,
for example, of*pramāṇa*in Nyāya from the early period to the later
period. Moreover, the folk probably don’t have refined thoughts about
realism and idealism, so a study of classical Indian texts is to be
preferred to asking the folk in Bengali what they think about object
persistence.

I found almost all of what Stephen said to be eye-opening, helpful, and
worthy of engagement. Some of the crowd pushed back taking a negative
message from his points. I read them in a more positive way. I thought
the encouragement was, as he said, to take the plunge into classical
Indian philosophy. I read this message as being: Do both A and B, where
A = classical Indian philosophy, and B = experimental philosophy. I read
this as a way of improving experimental philosophy by studying classical
Indian philosophy seriously. The message being: it is a bad idea to just
study the intuitions of folk speakers of the language, such as Bengali
folk intuitions about knowledge by students at a university in Indian.
Some people took his comments as suggesting that one should not do
experimental philosophy, but rather just do classical Indian philosophy,
since there won’t be that much that comes out of experimental
philosophy. It might best for him to clarify exactly what the message
is.

Moving off of his points I will now add in some of my own.

\(i\) Indian philosophy is an enterprise that is wholly nondependent on
experimental philosophy or anthropology or cognitive psychology.
However, experimental philosophy is dependent on Sanskrit, classical
Indian philosophy, and cross-cultural linguistics.

\(ii\) Those interested in classical Indian philosophy do not need to be
keeping up with the literature from experimental philosophy and, for
example, anthropology, when investigating classical Indian philosophy.
Anthropologist, likewise, need not be worrying about classical Indian
philosophy. However, they may want to take note of Sanskrit studies.

\(iii\) There is an interesting and engaging enterprise that can come
from combining comparative philosophy and experimental philosophy. The
combined philosophy, call it TCE involves the following.**T** =
theoretical: identifying a phenomenon in the human condition, such as
knowledge or agency, and presenting a question about it conceptually,
such as does knowledge require truth.**C**= cross-cultural:
articulating a cross-cultural investigation of the phenomenon, such as
knowledge and agency, through comparative philosophy. **E** =
experimental / empirical: adumbrating the comparative work with relevant
material from experimental philosophy, anthropology, neuroscience,
cognitive psychology, social psychology. The complete package functions
in the space of*public philosophy*and not in the space of*academic
philosophy*. The aim is collective enrichment through cross-cultural and
multidisciplinary inquiry. Of course classical Indian philosophy in the
hands of those that are bilingual in Phillips’ sense have a lot to
contribute to the **T** and**C**components of the project. And in
collaboration with**E**-stye specialists, there is much to be gained.
However, I think the gain is most relevant on the public philosophy
side, not on the academic side. For example, classical Indian philosophy
is not going to be improved by research from cross-cultural linguistics
or experimental philosophy, since classical Indian philosophy requires
more Sanskrit research and more knowledge of the core texts
non-experimentally studied.

\(iv\) Variation in intuitions between native Hindi and Bengali speakers
in contrast to U.S. college students is problematic for a number of
reasons, some of these reasons are well known, and people are working on
how to ameliorate the problem. Here there are two that need to be
distinguished: (a)*access to quality data*vs. (b)*what quality data
would show*.

Concerning (a) there are also two issues. First, there is the
*underdetermination problem.* A response to a question on a survey about
whether a case presented in Hindi is a case of knowledge or simply a
case of mere belief*does not*uniquely determine what is driving the
response. In order for the response to matter, it must be the case that
the respondent is being sincere, attentive in their reading, and
responsive for the right reasons (i.e. not simply trying to get the
right answer but actually giving their answer to the question based on
their intuitive response). Second, there is the much discussed
individuation problem. If two communities of speakers, for example,
native Bengali vs. native English, give different answers (in their own
language) to the question*Does A know X or Merely Believe X*, then one
could simply say that the speakers don’t share a common concept. The
general issue is the following. For divergence in responses between two
speakers, A and B, to show variation under the same concept, it must
also be true that A and B agree over certain other features, and
sufficiently many. For example, Suppose A, B, and C have the following
profile:

A: Thinks that knowledge does not require justification, but it requires
truth.

B: Thinks that knowledge does require justification, and it requires
truth.

C: Thinks that knowledge does not require justification or truth.

Now depending on what parameter the investigator thinks is important we
get different answers about variation. Suppose truth is dominant, then A
and B share a concept, but differ over justification. So, knowledge,
varies cross-culturally with respect to justification. But, suppose that
justification is dominant, then A and C share a concept, but differ over
truth. So, knowledge, varies cross-culturally with respect to truth.

In general, this could be called the investigator-dependence problem.
Given a data set with sufficient variation, the investigator must impose
a criterion for selecting what concept is in common, such that variation
can be discovered.

Some people argue that this problem puts an end to the possibility of
experimental philosophy. There is a wide literature on this problem, and
some of my earlier papers deal with this issue. But again, there is a
lot on this problem.

But suppose we could avoid these issues, and actually get quality data,
what would that show? Suppose it turned out that there is variation over
some parameters. We could then potentially discover what the common core
of our concept of knowledge is, by seeing what parameter stayed in
common, if any. Consider the example of A, B, C, from that case, there
is no common core to knowledge. However, it could turn out otherwise,
say that C actually thought truth mattered, then A, B, and C would share
a common notion of knowledge with respect to truth, but vary over the
importance of justification. Along these lines one of the speakers (Eve
Danzinger) argued that perhaps the common core of knowledge is *being
held accountable.* The idea being that when someone says they know
something, they are putting themselves out there as being held
accountable for what they have said.

Ultimately, I thought that the conference was eye-opening in that it
raised a lot of old issues, concept individuation, in a new way and a
new place. I felt that there is a lot to learn from cross-cultural and
multi-disciplinary philosophy. Thus: If the question is: how should
classical Indian philosophers modify their practice and research in
light of these ideas and new ways of engaging things? I would say: don’t
worry. Nothing here changes classical Indian philosophical practice.
However, if the question is: Can classical Indian philosophers
contribute to a new enterprise that will help present important ideas
from the tradition to the public and to other parts of academia? I would
say: absolutely. So the real issue is one of involvement. Do you want to
be involved in a new direction of collaborative engagement?Where you can
help control how Indian philosophy may make its way into other parts of
academia and the public? Many of the experimental philosophers expressed
a strong interest to learn from comparative philosophers and classical
Indian philosophers in order to practice their discipline in a more
informed way.

I will post more in the replies. Enough for now.
