+++
title = "Necessity in Mīmāṃsā"
full_title = "Necessity in Mīmāṃsā philosophy"
date = "2015-03-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/13/necessity-in-mima%e1%b9%83sa-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/13/necessity-in-mima%e1%b9%83sa-philosophy/).

Necessity in Mīmāṃsā philosophy

Our Anand Vaidya has recently raised a very intriguing discussion on
modality in Indian philosophy. His
[post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/30/the-epistemology-of-modality-setting-up-the-question-for-classical-indian-philosophy-a-guest-post-by-anand-vaidya/)
started with the suggestion that modality is less central in Indian
philosophy than it is in Western thought. In the comments, several
scholars suggested examples hinting at reflections on modality also in
Indian thought but, now that I think again about them, they mostly
discussed the modality of possibility in Indian thought. What about
necessity?

Mark Siderits, in his *Nyāya Realism, Buddhist Critique* (in *The
Empirical and the Transcendental*, edited by Bina Gupta), mentions
without further elaboration that Nyāya philosophers were “innocent of
the notion of necessity” (p.
[223](https://books.google.at/books?id=1_wnvrMUV2QC&pg=PA223&lpg=PA223&dq=%22innocent+of+the+notion+of+necessity%22&source=bl&ots=_is2ii_fc7&sig=btsw9tmufFUUxALjf_kPGe0XJuk&hl=en&sa=X&ei=9u8BVaj2OunhywO744H4Aw&ved=0CCAQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=%22innocent%20of%20the%20notion%20of%20necessity%22&f=false)).
I think he is making or hinting at a valid point, in the sense that
realist schools like Nyāya are much less inclined than Buddhist
Pramāṇavāda to stress the need of logical necessity. In other words,
Buddhist Pramāṇavādins will stress points such as the fact that the
coexistence of (seemingly) conflicting characteristics in the same
entity is logically impossible and that, consequently, the existence of
atoms (which should be basic units but also extended in space) is
impossible and that the non-existence of atoms is therefore a logical
necessity.  
By contrast, realist authors are much more committed to the existence of
what sense perception attests to and would thus not subscribe to the
idea that the lack of logical consistency can cause one to deny the
existence of what we experience in the world. This is even more true in
the case of Mīmāṃsā, since Mīmāṃsā authors are programmatically
committed to worldly experience (*lokavyavahāra*). Thus, it is hardly
the case that Mīmāṃsā authors will ever speak of logical necessity as
contradicting worldly experience. Worldly experience is the primary
instrument of knowledge (*pramāṇa*) and it cannot be contradicted
because of purely logical reasons. By contrast, if there seems to be
logical reasons contradicting our sense perception, it is our logical
reasons which need reconsidering since they have probably led to a
fallacy.  
Moreover, the principle of self validity (*svataḥ prāmāṇya*) basically
makes data count as if they were necessarily true, unless and until they
are contradicted by a later, more precise, cognition.

(Cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
