+++
title = "Why is Evan Thompson not"
full_title = "Why is Evan Thompson not a Buddhist? (2)"
date = "2020-04-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/).

Why is Evan Thompson not a Buddhist? (2)

[Last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-1/)
I noted that Evan Thompson’s *Why I Am Not A Buddhist* does not
establish a case against being a Buddhist in Asian traditions, including
Asian Buddhist modernist traditions. His critique focuses instead on
Western Buddhist modernists. I do count myself among the latter, so the
critique is intended to apply to Buddhists like me. Yet I do not think
it hits its target. Thompson’s critique, as described last time, focuses
on a neuroscience-linked, supposedly empirical variety of Buddhism that
he calls “neural Budddhism”, exemplified by Robert Wright and Alan
Wallace. But neural Buddhism does not exhaust Western Buddhist
modernism.

Many of us Western Buddhists are modernists in that we do place
meditation above traditional rituals and emphasize scientific
rationality –and that rationality means avoiding the supernatural
elements that many would call “metaphysical”, including traditional
cosmology and especially rebirth. So we fit Thompson’s definition of
Buddhist modernism as what “downplays the metaphysical and ritual
elements of traditional Asian Buddhism, while emphasizing personal
meditative experience and scientific rationality.” But that *doesn’t*
mean we commit the errors Thompson attributes to Wright and Wallace,
with the [list of “core
tenets”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-1/)
that he provides and that goes beyond that downplaying. We may or may
not subscribe to some of the tenets Thompson criticizes, but they are
not *core*.

Rather, my own Buddhist modernism is of a *eudaimonist* strain, of the
sort probably first articulated by a different Wright, [Dale
Wright](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/),
and more recently expounded in works by [Seth
Segall](https://www.palgrave.com/gp/book/9783030370268) and to some
extent [Ken
McLeod](https://www.harpercollins.com/9780062516817/wake-up-to-your-life/).
We Buddhist eudaimonists are modernists in that we reject
[unscientific](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/from-supernatural-to-unscientific/)
views – views that seem implausible given the findings of
natural-scientific research. Foremost among these views, in a Buddhist
context, is rebirth. Observational evidence seems to indicate that,
contrary to most of past Buddhist tradition, consciousness does not
survive bodily death. But while we reject rebirth, we do *not* reject
karma, for we believe that [the core idea of karma is also the core idea
of
eudaimonism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/):
that an agent’s good actions and good states of character typically
improve that agent’s well-being (flourishing, eudaimonia).

This is the strain of Buddhist modernism that I find most persuasive,
and it is not mentioned in Thompson’s book. Thompson gives himself, or
anyone else, little reason not to be *this* kind of modernist Buddhist,
Western or otherwise. Where his critique comes closest to hitting
Buddhist eudaimonism is probably on the concept of “enlightenment” (that
pervasive English mistranslation of concepts like *bodhi*, whose
Sanskrit and Pali meanings are closer to “awakening” or “liberation”).
Segall, for example, says:

> The enlightenment that most modern Western Buddhists *really* believe
> in is neither the cessation of rebirth, nor the complete and total end
> to suffering and sense desires, but the amelioration of suffering and
> the development of discerning wisdom regarding desire. (Segall 64,
> emphasis his)

Here awakening comes down to a well-being (eudaimonia) that is something
of a psychological state. This part of eudaimonist Buddhism, Thompson
does have some criticisms of. He claims:

> the easy idea of liberation as a psychological state seems flat. Do we
> really need Buddhism for the idea that craving is maladaptive? Isn’t
> it common knowledge that to be psychologically well adjusted is to be
> aware of emotions and not be unduly influenced by them? (83)

I don’t think the question of whether we “need Buddhism” for the idea of
psychological liberation is entirely fair. There is plenty more that we
Buddhist modernists draw from Buddhism that goes well outside of Western
common sense – [the rejection of righteous
anger](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/),
for example. Not everything in Buddhism needs to be distinctively
Buddhist and only Buddhist; if it were, it would be barely intelligible
to non-Buddhists at all.

My own Buddhist modernism is not strongly committed to the idea of full
awakening or complete liberation from suffering –and this in part
because traditional Asian Buddhisms have often likewise [not been so
committed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/)
[in
practice](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/).
For them, the ethically operational concept is karma rather than nirvana
–and I am committed to a Buddhist modernism that [interprets
*karma*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/),
rather than nirvana, in psychological (and to a lesser extent social)
terms. I suspect that overall karma is considerably more amenable than
nirvana to such an interpretation.

In other places where Thompson refers to such a Buddhism, he sometimes
appears to rely on assertion over argument. As when he says: “Indeed,
without the Buddhist religious commitment to awakening and liberation,
the Buddhist ethics of knowledge has no solid philosophical basis and
therefore has no power to reflect back critically on science.” (185)
Neither the previous nor the following sentences do anything to justify
this claim. It seems to me that it is false.

Where does all this lead us? In his last chapter Thompson urges a
“conversation” between Buddhism and science. That is something I’m [all
in favour
of](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/whose-religion-which-science/).
But such a conversation does not preclude one’s *being* a Buddhist – any
more than it precludes being a scientist! Thompson rightly agrees that
neither Buddhism nor science has all the answers – but given that point,
how is affiliating oneself with Buddhism any less conversational, or any
less cosmopolitan, than affiliating oneself with science? It seems to me
that we have good reason to follow both – recognizing that there are
points where they disagree, and striving to [resolve those
inconsistencies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/09/how-can-traditions-be-commensurable/).
I think naturalizing karma is a good example of how to do the latter and
do it well.

Thompson says, “The question I would pose to Buddhists is whether they
can find other ways to be modern besides being Buddhist modernists (or
fundamentalists).” (189) It seems to me that this question has been
answered. If “Buddhist modernists” are defined in terms of the specific
tenets of “Buddhist modernist discourse” that Thompson has articulated
(aka neural Buddhism), then I think that Buddhists like Dale Wright and
Seth Segall and myself have already done so, and I wish Thompson’s book
had paid more attention to this alternative.

All this implies to me that Thompson hasn’t offered sufficient reason to
not be a modernist Buddhist. [As we saw last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-1/),
he also hasn’t offered sufficient reason to not be a non-modernist
Buddhist. I would like to recommend that he give both these options
another look.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
