+++
title = "What I Have Learned from"
full_title = "What I Have Learned from Indian Philosophy A “Conversion” Story"
date = "2020-04-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/what-i-have-learned-from-indian-philosophy-a-conversion-story/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/what-i-have-learned-from-indian-philosophy-a-conversion-story/).

What I Have Learned from Indian Philosophy: A “Conversion” Story

The Indian philosophical tradition, as everyone familiar with it knows
well, is abundant with robust and brilliantly defended metaphysical,
epistemological and ethical positions of all varieties. Its several
millennia of development have featured stalwart defenders and innovators
of scholastic views, independent and encyclopedic thinkers, trenchant
critics of established doctrines and assumptions, mystics, ritualists,
grammarians and anti-religious, worldly sages. There may be many who,
for good reasons, find themselves drawn to a particular school, thinker
or persuasion in the rich spectrum of ideas in Indian thought, who then
become compelled to embrace and enhance one of these available
perspectives. Others may find room for great syntheses of views under a
broadly overarching system, and indeed the penchant for synthesis is one
of the powerful achievements of South Asian genius. Still others might,
in the long course of exploring the contesting arguments of Indian
thought, become “converts,” abandoning an initially favored
philosophical orientation for another one that has become more
convincing. I am one of those converts. In this second of my planned
three posts this month to the *Indian Philosophy Blog*, I will briefly
recall that process of conversion.

As noted in my last post, my initial draw toward the Indian
philosophical tradition, during my undergraduate studies, was through
the works of Schopenhauer. His own appropriation of 19^(th) century
Orientalist depictions of early and medieval Indian texts resulted in
several major features of his system. First, his reading of the early
*Upaniṣads* and some Vedāntic glosses inspired him to interpret Kantian
transcendental idealism as the way our cognitive processes falsify our
knowledge of the world, creating what he called a “veil of *māyā*.”
Instead of being sensorally or conceptually aware of the unitary
metaphysical nature of the world as one homogeneous will, we take the
world to be filled with heterogeneous phenomena, individuated as “this
and that” and “I’ and “other.” Second, his understanding of the
formulations of *tat tvam asi* in the *Upaniṣads* and the *Gitā*
impelled him to take it as an ethical maxim, a move that, as Paul Hacker
showed, had much influence on Vivekanada through Paul Deussen. In this
construal, genuine ethical motives are infused with the insight that we
are not of different fundamental natures, but are all manifestations of
one and the same will, and this insight fuels the compassion required to
alleviate one another’s suffering. Third, Jain and Buddhist forms of
renunciation were for Schopenhauer manifestations of the “denial of the
will,” a final mystical turning away from the violence and conflict to
which the will drives all individuated beings.

Though I had misgivings regarding Schopenhauer’s characterizations of
renunciation from the start, I found, at first, his construal of
idealism fascinating and his thematization of the “*tat tvam asi*” ethic
moving. As I entered my graduate studies, I set out to learn in greater
detail the schools, texts and arguments that I thought could bolster
idealism, monism and an ethic of compassion akin to Schopenhauer’s. I
dove into modern scholarly renditions and interpretations of the
*Upaniṣads* themselves, as well as the rather wide-ranging classical and
modern readings of Śańkara’s Advaita, early Buddhist texts and
Vijńānavāda Buddhist thought. The overriding commitments which fired
these early studies were a strong sense that our proclivities for
drawing distinctions between things and self were shaped not by
perceptual recognition but by our own cognitive processes and that we
are fundamentally desirous beings who can only find solace in compassion
and equanimity. I was following a path through Indian thought upon
which many Westerners find themselves when they are given primarily
Orientalist and Orientalist-inspired directions.

Over the course of my studies, these convictions began to loosen. Both
hermeneutic criticism of Schopenhauer’s reception of Indian thought and
well-considered Western philosophical critiques of Schopenhauer’s own
system helped me to become more objective about this so-called “sage of
Frankfurt” and his legacy. During the same period, the appeal of
Śańkara’s Advaita to me was progressively undermined. The first
weakening was facilitated for me by the 12^(th) century’s Ramānuja and
then the 20^(th) century’s J.N. Mohanty and Sengaku Mayeda. Their
analyses and critiques of the inconsistencies in Śańkara’s attempt to
reconcile the unity of the *ātman* with his description of the
perceptual process brought problems into sharp relief. Next came a
brilliant short essay by Daya Krishna, making the case that Śańkara was
not a monist at all, but more akin to a Sāḿkhya philosopher who believed
in a single metaphysical self. Finally, 20^(th) century critics of
Advaita like B.S. Yadav and Francis Clooney revealed an extremely
conservative positions on caste taken by Vedāntins, which threw into
great question the entire supposition that anything like a modern *tat
tvam asi* ethic prevailed among them. The withering Buddhist arguments
against the notion of a fixed *ātman* as well as Nāgārjuna’s incisive
analyses of causation, which seem to destroy both idealist or realist
views, also dug the roots out of my youthful attraction to classical
Indian “non-dualism.”

In my later graduate work under Mohanty and Yadav, and in the early
years of my own teaching career, I began to study the classical Nyāya
philosophers, primarily Gautama, Vātsyāyana, Uddyotakara, Udayana and
the Nyāya commentary of Vācaspati Miśra. Initially, their texts needed
to be understood in order to evaluate the centuries of debates over
knowledge, metaphysics, logic and language that were waged against the
Naiyāyikas by centuries of Buddhists. At the beginning, neither the
Nyāya brand of realism, nor any brand of philosophical realism, were
ever appealing to me. Though I have been a lifelong admirer or science,
philosophical realism for the young me appeared unraveled by Hume’s
skepticism, the verification debates of 20^(th) century analytic thought
and the findings of modern quantum theory itself, which suggest that, at
the micro-level of reality, our acts of observation alter what we
perceive and measure instead of reflecting a static reality. In the
classical Indian context, the Vijńānavāda refutations of atomism and Śri
Harṣa’s relation regress criticisms did not appear to leave much room
for realism either. But then, something important happened. Two of my
mentors strongly recommended that I read the late B.K. Matilal’s 1986
masterpiece, *Perception: An Essay on Classical Indian Theories of
Knowledge*. To put the matter simply, Matilal made me into a realist. A
qualified realist, to be sure, but a realist nonetheless.

In the years that have passed since my early career, my two main foci of
interest in the Indian tradition have been classical Nyāya philosophers
and the works of the Madhyamaka Buddhist preceptor Nāgārjuna.
Ultimately, I think the formidable criticisms that Nāgārjuna brings
against the Nyāya theory of knowing in his *Vigrahavyāvartani* are
satisfactorily met by the ensuing centuries of Naiyāyikas. I am in no
way committed to the larger Nyāya ontology, which is certainly too
extravagantly furnished, nor to their intermittent theism. However,
their characterizations of the perceptual and imaginative processes,
their rebuttals of regress arguments, Buddhist part-whole analyses and
attempts to destroy externalism still seem to me quite powerfully
articulated, not just within the Indian context but beyond it. Nyāya
stands as a robust defender, contra Buddhist forms of reductionism, of
the view that compound phenomena need not be considered any less real
than simple phenomena, and this vindicates the heterogeneity and
complexity of existence. On the other hand, despite his epistemological
vagueness and at times incomplete argumentation, Nāgārjuna offers us a
profound understanding of interdependent causation. His notion of
causation is one I consider to be an advancement on early Buddhist
theories, to the degree that Nāgārjuna does not merely insist that every
event must be causally conditioned, but that causality is multi- and not
unu-directional. This has lasting implications not only for our
understanding of reality, but for our orientations and responsibilities
toward one another. Though Nāgārjuna’s Madhyamaka and classical Nyāya
are fierce opponents of one another, I find in both systems of thought
philosophical insights of lasting and shaping value.

To return to the larger topic of this review of my journeys in classical
Indian thought, I can say that it is those journeys, primarily, that
have facilitated one of the great “conversions” I have undergone in my
philosophical career. I have in the course of my three decades of
interest in Indian thought been changed from an idealist in search of an
underlying metaphysical unity of all beings tino a qualified realist who
values the heterogeneity and plurality of the world. But that
heterogeneity and plurality is tied together not by a nebulous,
mysterious unity, but instead by the complex but discernable bonds of
causal inter-relation. That inter-relation can indeed be seen as an
even stronger basis for compassion than an abstract fundamental unity.
This is what I have learned, and continue to learn, from the Indian
philosophical tradition.

But, happily, my journeys continue, and may easily lead to further
realizations and conversions. Learning never ceases, and changing one’s
mind is not a defect, but a sign of growth. And, even more happily, the
Indian philosophical tradition is replete with incredible resources for
a plethora of insightful philosophical debates and views. And that is
why it will always remain a wellspring of ideas and practices for
philosophers in the future.
