+++
title = "My Introduction to and"
full_title = "My Introduction to and Journeys in Indian Philosophy"
date = "2020-04-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/05/my-introduction-to-and-journeys-in-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/05/my-introduction-to-and-journeys-in-indian-philosophy/).

My Introduction to and Journeys in Indian Philosophy

Dear Indian Philosophy Blog readers,

The board of the Indian Philosophy Blog has asked me to contribute three
or four posts within the span of a month here, in order to enhance
discussions on the site. I will therefore begin with a post on my
introduction to and journeys in the Indian philosophical tradition. I
will follow up with a post on what I have learned and appreciate most
from my explorations of Indian thought. My third post will then offer
some of my ideas regarding challenges to this field in the modern
academic environment and some of my ideas for meeting them.

I was born in a part of the United States which I always joke in
“get-to-know-you” conversations as not exactly the likeliest place from
which a fan of ancient India might hail. That was southwest North
Dakota. No, not the state with Mt. Rushmore, the other Dakota. Anyway,
my first encounters with ancient Indian religious and philosophical
traditions occurred during the spring term of 1990, in a sophomore
English literature class on mythology in which the instructor showed us
the video series of Joseph Campbell’s interviews with Bill Moyers. I
began reading what scant resources I could find in my tiny hometown
university and public libraries. About a year later, in the midst of
taking what few philosophy electives there were in my hometown, all of
which were unsurprisingly focused on the West, I happened to read
through the major works of Arthur Schopenhauer. I discovered what his
own philosophical investments were in the early Brāhmiṇical and Buddhist
traditions. I eventually decided to change college majors, first from
computer science to history and literature, and then to philosophy and
religion. For the latter double-major, I had to transfer to the
University of North Dakota in Grand Forks. There were no classes as such
on Indian thought there, but I continued my own research nonetheless,
with somewhat more plentiful library resources. I finished my
undergraduate majors in May of 1993, and moved to the Religious Studies
Department at Temple University in Philadelphia for my graduate work.
Back then, there were only two places in the United States where one
could study Asian thought in Philosophy departments at the graduate
level, and due to financial shortfalls and failure of admission on my
part, I had to opt to pursue philosophical work on Asia in a Religion
program. As it happily turned out, Temple University was an outstanding
place to do this.

As is clear to probably all the blog’s readers now but was hardly
obvious to me at the time, my greatest obstacles to discovering the
abundant treasures and diversity of the Indian tradition were the ways
in which Indian thought, then and now, is often popularly presented in
the West. Whether under the guise of Campbell’s mythological musings,
Eliade’s comparative labyrinths or Schopenhauer’s projections, English
language-only readers (well, ok, at this point I had German too)
generally find themselves introduced to Indian thought either directly
through scholarly works and translations that were produced by classical
Western Orientalists or through works that were heavily influenced by
them. Finding one’s way through the web of interpretive and political
problems and complexities of the Orientalist frames of reference, and
the influence of these same problems on the thinkers of the Bengali
Renaissance and its intellectual and religious inheritors, was not easy.
I could not honestly claim to be free of all of these legacies even
today. But Temple University and the Philadelphia academic environment
were incredible locales for ameliorating these challenges. Bibhuti Singh
Yadav of Temple’s Religious Studies Department at once insisted that I
dive into the details of the debates between the Buddhist schools of
Madhyamaka, Vijńānavāda and the Brāhmiṇical lineages of Nyāya, Vedānta
and Mimamsā as well as tackle the fraught relationship between Western
Orientalist and modern neo-Vedāntic thinkers. He also challenged his
students to immerse themselves in the modern critical and Buddhist
writings of B.R. Ambedkar. Though he sadly passed away at the
all-too-early age of 56, and only two and a half months before my
dissertation defence, this brilliant, animated and generous teacher
continues to inform my work. In the Philosophy program at Temple, one
floor above the Religious Studies department, I had the absolute
privilege of taking the classes of J.N. Mohanty for six years, as he
masterfully discoursed on the debates between Nyāya, Buddhist and
Vedāntic philosophers. Work outside of Temple, with Wilhelm Halbfass at
the University of Pennsylvania and the scholar who patiently and
skilfully tutored me in Sanskrit there also inspired and enabled me. I
needed up doing a dissertation on the hermeneutic completes of
Schopenhauer’s encounter with early Indian thought through the
Orientalist literature he was familiar with, which turned into a first
book. But the magnificent history of Nyāya-Buddhist debates on the
nature of the world, knowledge and ethics became the lasting center of
my scholarly work in the Indian tradition.

I moved though several different programs at Temple University, a small
college in suburban Chicago and then started my eleven-year stint at
Southern Illinois University in Carbondale, In these places, I found
that, while specialised expertise in Indian traditions was of course
wanted and valued in the American academic environment, that value was
persistently joined to the expectation that Indian thought would always
be presented in a “comparative” light, so that it could remain
accessible to students of Western thought. So, in the early years of my
teaching and scholarly career, from 2000-2007, while I did write pieces
that focused quite exclusively on traditional Indian philosophical
debates, I also wrote essays about the hermeneutic reception of Indian
thought by Western thinkers as well as comparative pieces in the
“classical” style. For the latter, I began to become interested in
possible areas of dialogue between classical Nyāya notions of mind and
its relationship to bodily experience and the variety of views
articulated in modern Western philosophy of mind. However, this
fascination of mine was somewhat short-lived. In what I would describe
as the next definitively transforming moment of my career, a paper I
presented on Nyāya and emergentism at a conference in the fall of 2007
was roundly criticised by two senior scholars in the field, for whom I
have enormous respect. Beyond the details of the comparative analysis I
was offering, they lamented that the approach I was adopting had been
tried by scholars for thirty to forty years without having made many
inroads into Western philosophical interest. Though I was initially
shaken by and somewhat indignant of this criticism, further calm
reflection on it convinced me that, even with all my good training, I
had not yet escaped the tentacles of Orientalist influence. I decided
from that point on to, as much as I could, present ancient Indian ideas
and debates in the categories and frameworks of those traditions
themselves, rather than try to meld them into modern Western
philosophical vocabulary. The philosophical riches, contributions and
insights of a tradition, I thought, could only be gauged when first
understood in their own terms.

Of course, the comparative bug has not left me entirely, but has instead
taken on a different form. Though I had certainly attended ample courses
in East Asian philosophical traditions at Temple University and taught a
number of courses on Chinese philosophy in my early career, early
Chinese philosophy and medieval Chinese Buddhist thought gripped me
powerfully from 2003-2004. A whole new and exciting context for
understanding personhood, bodily existence, social relatedness and the
natural world was opened to me through these two years. I took it upon
myself to learn how to read Classical Chinese, as I already had some
familiarity with modern Chinese, and launched into a period of teaching
advanced undergraduate and graduate courses and advising dissertations
in the areas of Confucian, Mohist, Daoist and Chan Buddhist thought, and
began to write my own essays in the field. As I became involved with the
Board of the Society of Asian and Comparative Philosophy from 2009-2013,
and served as its president from 2014-16, I became dedicated to the
proposition that doing genuine comparative philosophy in the
contemporary context requires that we not persist in considering the
West as the center of philosophical gravity and compare other thinkers
and traditions one-by-one with figureheads from the Western canon.
Instead, philosophical traditions of the globe should be put into
conversation with one another, creating a multi-polar and immeasurably
enriched conversation. Within the SACP, I tried to accomplish this by
re-arranging panel structures, making them, as often as I could,
thematic discussions between scholarly representatives of different
traditions. In my own work, I began to re-explore issues that continued
to puzzle me about the transmission of Buddhism from South Asia to
China, which found expression in my second independent monograph,
*Encounters of Mind*.

In my next blog post, I will write in more detail about that
philosophical developments I have made through my explorations in
classical Indian thought. In the most significant of these
transformations, my original quest for philosophical perspectives of
unity and oneness in certain strands of Brāhmiṇical philosophy and
certain interpretations of Buddhist thought has given way to a profound
appreciation for classical arguments in both of these traditions for
definitively existing plurality, heterogeneity and causal connectedness.
But this brief retrospective at the three decades during which I have
been drawn to and endlessly fascinated by Indian thought has put me in
mind of a refrain that students in this tradition recite in honour of
all those who have guided them. That is a refrain that I can say with
complete honesty. In the work I have done in Indian thought so far, all
of the virtues that can be found therein have come from my teachers, and
all the mistakes are mine. I have been unusually blessed to have lived
in a time when so much can be learned from Indian philosophy at the
behest of so many gifted preceptors.
