+++
title = "Indian Philosophy During"
full_title = "Indian Philosophy During the Pandemic A Call for Examples and Ideas"
date = "2020-04-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/17/indian-philosophy-during-the-pandemic-a-call-for-examples-and-ideas/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/17/indian-philosophy-during-the-pandemic-a-call-for-examples-and-ideas/).

Indian Philosophy During the Pandemic: A Call for Examples and Ideas

During the current pandemic almost all academic conferences have been
canceled or postponed. In my own case, for instance, I was planning to
have a busy April and May. I was supposed to present on [women
philosophers in ancient
India](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/02/05/learning-from-gargis-silence/)
last week at a student workshop at Kennesaw State University in Georgia,
I was planning to present on impermanence in Buddhist philosophy at the
[History of Philosophy Society](https://histofphil.org/) Conference in
Salt Lake City, Utah this weekend, and I was scheduled to present on
Ratnakīrti’s arguments about other minds at the [East-West Philosophers’
Conference in Honolulu,
Hawaii](http://hawaii.edu/phil/call-for-proposals-12th-east-west-philosophers-conference/)
in late May. All of these events have been canceled or rescheduled, and
wisely so given the current global pandemic.

I was lucky to receive an invitation from Oren Hanner, whom I had met at
a [workshop on Buddhism and skepticism in Hamburg in
2017](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/02/reflections-on-the-hamburg-buddhism-and-scepticism-workshop/).
He invited me to present on April 10 on Nāgārjuna for his Buddhist
Philosophy course at the University of California, Berkeley. I spoke to
his students (via Zoom) about the skeptical of interpretation of
Nāgārjuna from my 2018 book *[Three Pillars of Skepticism in Classical
India: Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi, and Śrī
Harṣa](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/06/21/book-announcement-three-pillars-of-skepticism-in-classical-india-by-ethan-mills/).*
I’ve been missing philosophy conferences, so it was great to interact
with these excellent students. Unfortunately we didn’t document the
event via photo or video, so you will have to accept our testimony
(whether this is a *pramāṇa* I will let readers decide).

I share all this not merely to inform the blog’s readers of my erstwhile
plans and recent online interactions, but I’m hoping we might use this
space to share examples for how we as scholars and teachers of Indian
philosophy are proceeding during the present worldwide crisis as well as
ideas for how we might move into the future.

**Are you making use of new technologies to present your work and share
ideas with others?**

**Are there any upcoming online conferences or other online activities
you’d like to share with readers of this blog?**

**How has the pandemic affected your ability to do your research?**

**What other conferences and events have been canceled? Are there plans
to reschedule?**

**What would you like to see on this blog?** **What would be most
helpful to the field and to a general audience at this time?**

(This is also a good chance to remind readers that we are accepting
[book reviews](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/book-reviews/) and are
interested in [guest
posts](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/call-for-guest-posts/), so that
you can be the change you want to see on the blog.)

Lastly, I hope that you, dear reader, are staying healthy and safe and
are as well as can be expected given our difficult circumstances. The
intellectual traditions of South Asia often discuss concepts such as
loving kindness, compassion, and wisdom, which are all things I think
the world could use right now. Take care.
