+++
title = "Some Reflections on the"
full_title = "Some Reflections on the Field"
date = "2020-04-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/21/some-reflections-on-the-field/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/21/some-reflections-on-the-field/).

Some Reflections on the Field

In this final of my three installments to the *Indian Philosophy Blog*
this month, I would like to address some general, and admittedly quite
subjective, impressions I have about where the field of Indian
Philosophy stands in English-language scholarship and discussion. I
will also offer some ideas about approaches that might be considered to
present challenges. The reader will notice that suggestions both for
greater specialisation and more broad-based general engagement are
mentioned here, and I don’t think these approaches need to be considered
at cross-purposes, but instead can be complimentary. I write this
installment without necessarily believing that my impressions may all be
justified nor that I have ready-at-hand solutions. The post is more
about sharing my general impressions and sparking discussion among those
wiser than I am, which, obviously, is a formidably large contingent.

When I was receiving my graduate education at Temple University in
Philadelphia and partly at Tübingen University in Germany, there was a
peculiarity about the secondary English-language scholarship on Indian
philosophy that made it even more challenging to learn than it is via
close textual analysis. With the exception of some major, and at times
“trendy” individual philosophes like Nāgārjuna, Śańkara and even
Bhatṛhari, who received dedicated studies of their own thought, most of
the secondary literature took broad-ranging “scholastic” approaches to
classical Indian thought, which were then further generalized by
focusing on thematic debates. While many of these general and
encyclopedic treatments were brilliant and insightful, one found oneself
constantly navigating through narratives of what Nyāya held about this
issue, what the Buddhists held about that issue, and Bhaṭṭa and
Prabhākara Mimamsikas debated about the other issue. (I too often still
write in such terms.) And this tendency could at times become a
criterion for whether or not something was published. I once wrote a
lengthy and detailed explication of classical Nyāya with some reference
to innovations made by Gańgeṣa, an essay that was supposed to be a
general introductory survey for non-specialists, but the piece was
rejected because I did not follow up with coverage into the 17^(th)
century. As if writing an introductory essay on Nyāya had to explicate
every thinker and text the tradition featured. To some degree, modern
scholarship on Chinese thought has emulated habits along these
lines–speaking of arguments between Confucians, Daoists, Mohists and
Legalists, but that does not preclude the production of translations,
commentaries and secondary focuses on individual texts and authors. It
seems to me we would do well in the field to produce more on individual
texts or thinkers, giving a thorough explanation of their systematic
ideas, whether in root text, commentarial or specialized treatise form.
No one would think the Western tradition could be adequately covered
were the only pieces of scholarship to appear about it merely give broad
overviews of debates between rationalists and empiricists, idealists and
phenomenologists or virtue ethicists and utilitarians. Individual
philosophers deserve robust attention, even when they present themselves
as commentators, for as we all know, a great deal of innovation takes
place in the Indian tradition through commentary. On top of this,
translations of Indian philosophical primary literature tend to fall out
of print very quickly, and so both up-to-date translations and
explications of a wide variety of texts are sorely needed in the field.
And, as Ethan Mills quite rightly noted in response to my first post,
these works on individual philosophers would often be most fruitful if
they were collaborations involving at least one rigorous Sanskritist,
for example, and another philosopher with investment in the material.
We should push our institutions in this field to extend to such
collaborative projects full publication credit, for translations of
these sorts are not only translations, but significantly are
interpretive presentations too. And, even regarding more general
treatment for popular audiences, why should there not be a mini-series
on major Indian philosophers in the *Cambridge Companion* series, or a
comparable venue? Happily, some of these glaring needs for focus on
individual texts and commentarial material are being met through the
Hackett series as well as through collaborative ventures such as those
between Stephen Phillips and N.S. Ramanuja Tatacharya, Mark Siderits and
Shoryu Katsura as well as others. But we should continue the trend, I
think.

In remembering the days of my graduate studies and early career, I can
say that a young scholar coming up then had plenty of reasons to feel
quite intimidated in Indian philosophical circles. Trenchant debates
tended to be dominated by a half-dozen or so major figures, who
addressed only one another. Listservs that combined religious and
philosophical discussions were often highly charged because of the quite
sensitive political character of many issues. The best journals in the
field had quite high standards for independent translation skills. And
conferences featuring panels or plenaries of Indian philosophy scholars
often saw those discussions quickly turn sharp and polemical. It is
entirely possible that the sense of timidity I often felt in these
circumstances was exclusively mine. Still, there may have been other
factors that contributed to the sharp-edged and somewhat cliquish nature
of the environment I was experiencing. Perhaps the long-term
hermeneutic attempts to interpret Indian thought through Western
analytic frameworks, the precision demanded by accurate Sanskrit
grammatical analysis, and the increasingly technical fine-points of
Indian philosophical debates as they developed and continue to develop
all converge to create an exacting intellectual environment. And, to be
sure, there are advantages to this, not the least of which are that sort
of environment’s incentives for participants to continually improve
their skills and to mentally toughen up. However, there are costs to
this approach as well. When I began to immerse myself into the study of
Chinese thought about seventeen years ago, while there certainly were
serious and sometimes cliquish encounters in that area too, on the
whole, the intellectual environment was more inviting and the culture of
Chinese philosophical societies tended to promote far easier interaction
between new and veteran scholars in the field. Perhaps because
learning, *xue*, is an essential activity for philosophy in that
environment, so the participants in it seemed to me to act more often
like communities of learners. As I became increasingly involved in the
management of various professional societies in intercultural
philosophy, I could not escape the distinct impression that, while all
the economic and intellectual trends were helping Chinese philosophy
rise with the tides, those of us in Indian philosophy could be working
harder to make the intellectual environment more inviting and widely
interactive. Fortunately, from what I can tell, things have been
improving on this front. Younger scholars are taking up more active and
prominent roles in Indian philosophical debate in a variety of forums,
and in Europe, more solidarity fills the air of Indian philosophical
events, perhaps because a united struggle is still necessary to win
support for the entire field of research. All the same, I think we need
to continually find the right balance between lofty standards of
philosophical debate and broader inclusiveness. Just as *prajńa and
karuna* work best together, so logical felicity and *ahimsa* are both
intellectual virtues, and, functioning in partnership, they will make
our field better. 

A third hope for the field in the future would of course be an
ever-increasing inclusion of Islamic and Sikh thinkers, both traditional
and modern, into the comprehensive treatment of Indian thought. Both
traditions are venerably Indian, and if we are to include studies of
Navya-Nyāya, early modern Vedānta and neo-Vedāntic thinkers into our
surveys and forums, than surely Islamic and Sikh thinkers belong fully
in the discussion as well. My own contributions in this area are quite
modest, as I have published but one essay on Dārā Shikøh’s hermeneutic
readings of the *Upaniṣads*. But far more could be done with Indian
Islamic thought, from the features of *Din-i-Illahi* of Akbar through
its syncretic offshoots to the curricular developments of the
eighteenth-century Shah Waliullah Dehlawi to the 17^(th) and 18^(th)
century translation movements of Danishmand Khan and Tazzaful Hussein
Khan and on through to important modern thinkers like Wahiduddin Khan,
and many others. In the Sikh tradition, though I am woefully less
informed about philosophical works and commentaries here, what
immediately come to mind are not merely the thought of some of the gurus
but also the works of Teja Singh, Jaswant Singh Neki and Bhai Khan Singh
and others. Such broadening of inclusion would serve as yet another
justification for more collaborative work.

And finally, recalling an earlier post advocating for the broadening of
intercultural philosophy to make it more genuinely global in scope, I
hope to see more engagement between the Indian philosophical tradition
and other traditions throughout the world. Since the onset of Western
colonization and even stretching into the so-called post-colonial
period, the ventures of “comparative philosophy” have generally taken
the guise of weighing Indian against predominantly Western philosophical
thinkers and systems, which perpetuates the assumption that the
standards of gravity of comparison emanate from the “West,” which itself
is an overgeneralized category. There have already been happy
exceptions to this rule. For decades, scholarship dealing with the
relationships between South and East Asian Buddhisms has flourished.
More recently, a series of American Academy of Religion panels
spearheaded by Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad and Jiang Tao has carved out more
space for India-China dialogue, the journals *Sophia* and *World
Philosophies* have opened environments for a wider range of
intercultural philosophical debate, and the last decade of meetings of
the Society of Asian and Comparative Philosophy have structurally tended
in this direction as well. And certainly the field of post-colonial
studies itself has provided fruitful opportunities for mutual
reinforcement between modern Indian, Global South and African
perspectives. While we are making slow but discernible progress in
diversifying philosophy curricula, there remains stalwart institutional
opposition or reluctance in many places to abandon the Western parochial
domination of philosophical discourse, equating its quite modern
conceptions of rationality with “cosmopolitan thinking.” While
specilizations in other individual traditions is one effective way to
address this persistent difficulty, another is a growing prevalence of
multi-directional philosophical engagement. The latter can demonstrate
to what extent philosophical reflection and debate are human, and not
merely regional, activities

And with those reflections, I bring my three-post series for this month
on the *Indian Philosophy Blog* to a close. I would like to thank Elisa
Freschi, Amod Lele, Ethan Mills and Matthew Dasti for their invitation
to contribute to this month’s forums. I also warmly thank those of you
who have carried out most illuminating conversations about important
topics and debates in Indian thought in reply to my posts. Taking part
in this exercise has given me the fortunate chance tolearn from all of
you.
