+++
title = "Bright College Days Part"
full_title = "Bright College Days Part II"
date = "2018-02-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/02/05/bright-college-days-part-ii/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/02/05/bright-college-days-part-ii/).

Bright College Days: Part II

According to Caplan, employers are looking for conformity,
conscientiousness, and intelligence. They use completion of high school,
or completion of college as a sign of conformity and conscientiousness.
College certainly looks as if it’s mostly signaling, and it’s hugely
expensive signaling, in terms of college costs and foregone earnings.

But inserting conformity into the merit function is tricky: things
become important signals… because they’re important signals. Otherwise
useful actions are contraindicated because they’re “not done”. For
example, test scores convey useful information. They could help show
that an applicant is smart even though he attended a mediocre school –
the same role they play in college admissions. But employers seldom
request test scores, and although applicants may provide them, few do.
Caplan says ” The word on the street: putting high scores on your resume
suggests you’re smart but socially inept. ” Who would understand that
better than Bryan? So valuing conformity leads to totally arbitrary
standards – they exist because they exist. Let me suggest another
possibility: flaunting high scores risks irritating the drones in HR. HR
tends be packed with underperformers and people that the corporation
felt compelled to hire (AA). Few people in HR have high scores on
standardized tests. Other employees routinely express contempt for
HR/Personnel. In the immortal words of Lieutenant Callahan: ” Personnel?
That’s for assholes. ”

In the long run, who you hire is truly important, so it seems odd that
companies would routinely allot this task to feebs. Yet it happens. The
same thing is true for college admissions – the people doing it are not
that [special](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/27/us/27mit.html).

I think Bryan Caplan is more or less correct in his description of how
companies hire, particularly for fresh college graduates and non-STEM
majors. But he thinks that companies know what they’re doing (more or
less), when it comes to hiring. ” Employers are greedy but not stupid.”
I don’t see much evidence of that. Evidence would consist of careful
statistical studies showing what worked best. Most companies have never
done that, nor do they make use of similar studies from other companies.
There are exceptions: Procter and Gamble puts a lot of thought into
hiring, but they’re probably obeying a direct command from their Dark
Lord. Google is apparently nutty enough to fire employees for
*endorsing* their hiring system – along with pushing for a form of
ideological conformity that is guaranteed to royally piss off at least
half the population and all three branches of the Federal Government.

Let me give an example. Once upon a time, there was a Federal civil
service exam, the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB), a measure of
general cognitive ability. That test was developed by the Feds. with
considerable effort. The test had decent predictive value. It makes more
sense for a huge organization to make that kind of investment – the
development costs can be spread out over zillions of hires. Many state
civil service exams also used the GATB, along with a number of private
employers.

There was a catch: the results from the GATB were cooked. Race-normed.
They gave your percentile rank *for your ethnic group*. “For example,
three applicants might each earn a raw score of 300. But their converted
scores would look quite different: the black test-taker would score in
the 83 percentile of his group, the Hispanic would rank in the 67th
percentile and the white or Asian in the 45th percentile.” It’s as if
someone told you that you were a great jumper, for a funky white boy.
The test-makers didn’t mention this little fact: most users weren’t
aware of it.

My point is that it took almost ten years for this fact to come out. If
HR was on the ball, you’d think they would have noticed.

Another point, which Caplan mentions in a review of Garrett Jones’s book
[Hive
Mind](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/150360067X/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=150360067X&linkId=9640d6d9ad0dbec1a0470e204af40687):
“At the individual level, IQ is much more highly correlated with job
performance than income.” Which suggests that employers systematically
undervalue intelligence. Why? Come to think of it, if Jones is correct,
the effects are not limited to productivity at the individual level.
Companies with a higher average IQ should be capable of performing more
complex tasks – that is, companies in the O-ring sector of the economy –
those where a single mistake can destroy much of the value. Useful tip
for [Paine-Webber](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paine_Webber),
[UBS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_UBS_rogue_trader_scandal), and
[Barings Bank](http://Nick%20Leeson), if a bit late.

You’d think that companies – almost all of them – would have realized
this and avidly seek out unusually smart (and honest) workers (
depending on task complexity) . Along the same line of thought, baseball
owners must have carefully analyzed the game and discovered all the
important lessons of sabermetrics many years ago. Except that they
didn’t. Bill James outdid them all while on the night shift as a
security guard at the Stokely-Van Camp’s pork and beans cannery.

If the way most corporations hire new grads were close to optimal, it
might be difficult to find a way of cutting through the useless and
expensive signaling. We might be trapped in a local optimum. But since
they apparently hire by intuition, or possibly sense of smell,
improvements may not be impossibly difficult.

