+++
title = "Plague of Frogs"
full_title = "Plague of Frogs"
date = "2018-02-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/02/15/plague-of-frogs/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/02/15/plague-of-frogs/).

Plague of Frogs

Starting in late 80s, herpetologists began noticing that various kinds
of frogs were
[declining](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decline_in_amphibian_populations)
and/or disappearing. There was & is a geographical pattern: Wiki says
“Declines have been particularly intense in the western United States,
Central America, South America, eastern Australia and Fiji. ” Many were
hard to understand in terms of human impact. “For example, the Golden
toad (Bufo periglenes) endemic to Monteverde, Costa Rica, featured
prominently. It was the subject of scientific research until populations
suddenly crashed in 1987 and it had disappeared completely by 1989.\[9\]
Other species at Monteverde, including the Monteverde Harlequin Frog
(Atelopus varius), also disappeared at the same time. Because these
species were located in the pristine Monteverde Cloud Forest Reserve,
and these extinctions could not be related to local human activities. ”

For a few years the herpetologists were concerned yet happy. Concerned,
because many frog populations were crashing and some were going extinct.
Happy, because confused puppies in Washington were giving them money,
something that hardly ever happens to frogmen. The theory was that
amphibians were ‘canaries in a coal mine’, uniquely sensitive to
environmental degradation.  
Possibly frogs were being killed by an increase in UV radiation (from
CFCs). Of course you could always put out a fucking ultraviolet
photometer and measure the UV anywhere and anytime you wanted, but that
would be the *easy* way out. Why do that when you could be paying
graduate students to play with frogs?

In 1993, people discovered an odd fungus \[ [Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chytridiomycosis)\]
infecting frogs in Queensland. Since then it has been linked to many
dramatic population declines in “western North America, Central America,
South America, eastern Australia, East Africa (Tanzania) and Dominica
and Montserrat.” Some species it bops, others it exterminates. Frog
species with few offspring and high parental investment, such as
mouth-breeding frogs, seem particularly vulnerable. It works like an
STD, which can propagate when population density is low. Frogs
congregate in ponds to mate, which allows transmission, as long as the
frogs mate at all.

It took some time for herpetologists to admit that this chytrid fungus
is the main culprit – some are still resisting. First, it was a lot like
how doctors resisted Semmelweiss’ discoveries about the cause of
puerperal fever – since doctors were the main method of transmission.
How did this fungus get to the cloud forests of Costa Rica? On the boots
of herpetologists, of course.

The second problem is Occam’s butterknife: even though this chytrid
fungus is the main culprit, [it’s just *got* to be more complicated than
that](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2829317/). Even if it
isn’t. People in the life sciences – biology and medicine – routinely
reject simple hypotheses that do a good job of explaining the data for
more complex hypotheses that don’t. College taught them to think –
unwisely.

It looks if it infected the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis) for a
long time, well before the current epidemic, and was spread by worldwide
use of that frog in human pregnancy testing.

Look at the broad pattern of areas affected: the Americas, Australia,
islands. Amphibians in those areas were profoundly isolated from the Old
World, just as their human inhabitants were. North America is not
isolated when it comes to birds or mammals – there has often been an
exchange of species thru Beringia, during glacial periods – but
amphibians can’t survive salt water or glaciers. They’ve been isolated
from Old World amphibians for a long long time – more than 100 million
years, looks like. And since the Old World is bigger, with more intense
biological competition\*, invasive biological trouble is more likely to
originate there than in the Americas or Australia.

People are still talking about environmental factors. Used to be UV
(wasn’t true), herbicides ( also untrue – kind of silly way out in the
jungle). Now, of course, it has to be [climate
change](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/wp-admin/edit-comments.php?s=marginal+for+Norse&comment_status=all&pagegen_timestamp=2018-02-15+10%3A32%3A53&_total=47993&_per_page=20&_page=1&paged=1&_ajax_fetch_list_nonce=93477f1981&action=-1&comment_type&action2=-1)
.

\* if you can make it there, you can make it anywhere!

