+++
title = "Defining Hindudharma The"
full_title = "Defining Hindudharma The Tānūnaptra Metaphor"
date = "2021-03-28"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2021/03/28/defining-hindudharma-the-tanunaptra-metaphor/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2021/03/28/defining-hindudharma-the-tanunaptra-metaphor/).


					Defining Hindudharma: The Tānūnaptra Metaphor				



[ March 28, 2021 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2021/03/28/defining-hindudharma-the-tanunaptra-metaphor/ "Permalink to Defining Hindudharma: The TānūnaptraMetaphor")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [1
    Comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2021/03/28/defining-hindudharma-the-tanunaptra-metaphor/#comments)

# Defining Hindudharma: The TānūnaptraMetaphor

How can we understand Hindudharma’s unity? Why is it not artificial but
theologically and divinely meaningful?

At the outset it must be stated that this piece is not an exercise in
discursive reasoning, or some carefully worked argument based on some
first principles or axioms. The “reasoning” here is rather analogous and
more amenable to those with the intuition to grasp ideas through
analogies.

In the Somayāga, following the Ātithyeṣṭi (where the god Soma is
received as a royal guest), we have the Tānūnaptra rite, where the
leftovers of the ājya (ghee) from Ātithyeṣṭi in the dhruva ladle are cut
out in either four or five portions and then fed into a special camasa
(a cup), known as the Tānūnaptra-camasa. The Ṛtvijaḥ (the sixteen
priests of the Soma sacrifice) and the Yajamāna will touch this ghee,
with an undertaking to not betray one another and act for mutual
benefit.

In the Taittirīya-Saṃhitā, we have an account of the story behind the
Tānūnaptra rite as follows:  
  
6.2.2.1

*“devāsurāḥ saṃyattā āsan*

*te devā mitho vipriyā āsan*

*te ‘nyo’nyasmai jyaiṣṭhyāyātiṣṭhamānāḥ pañcadhā vy akrāmann agnir
vasubhiḥ somo rudrair indro marudbhir varuṇa ādityair bṛhaspatir viśvair
devais*

*te ‘manyanta \| asurebhyo vā idam bhrātṛ vyebhyo radhyāmo yan mitho
vipriyāḥ smo yā na imāḥ priyās tanuvas tāḥ samavadyāmahai tābhyaḥ sa nir
ṛchād yaḥ\|\|”*

6.2.2.2

“*naḥ prathamo ‘nyo’nyasmai druhyād iti*

*tasmād yaḥ satānūnaptriṇām prathamo druhyati sa ārtim ārchati*”

The Deva-s and Asura-s were in conflict.

They, the Deva-s, were mutually hostile.

They, one another’s seniority, not conceding, fivefoldly diverged; Agni
with the Vasu-s, Soma with the Rudra-s, Indra with the Marut-s, Varuṇa
with the Āditya-s and Bṛhaspati with the Viśvedeva-s.

They thought: “To the Asura-s, to these foes \[of ours\], we have
succumbed, as we are mutually hostile; whatsoever are our, these,
beloved bodies, them we gather together; from these \[bodies\] he will
be lost, who is the first of us to aggress upon/make hostile with/betray
one another.”

Therefore, who, among those \[who have covenanted\] with the Tānūnaptra,
first aggresses/makes hostile/betrays, to pain he passes.

The Aitareya-Brāhmaṇa (1.4.7; 1^(st) Pañcikā, 4^(th) Adhyāyaḥ, 7^(th)
khaṇḍaḥ) gives a similar account, which we will not translate literally
in a full-fledged manner as above but simply note the additional points.

*“ते देवा अबिभयुर्। अस्माकं विप्रेमाणम् अन्व् इदम् असुरा आभविष्यन्तीति।
ते व्युत्क्रम्यामन्त्रयन्ता अग्निर् वसुभिर् उदक्रामद् ईन्द्रो रुद्रैर्
वरुण आदित्यैर् बृहस्पतिर् विश्वैर् देवैस्। ते तथा
व्युत्क्रम्यामन्त्रयन्त ते ब्रुवन्।”*

*“te devā abibhayur\| asmākaṃ vipremāṇam anv idam asurā ābhaviṣyantīti\|
te vyutkramyāmantrayantā agnir vasubhir udakrāmad īndro rudrair varuṇa
ādityair bṛhaspatir viśvair devais\| te tathā vyutkramyāmantrayanta te
bruvan\|“*

The Devas feared and reflected how due to their disunity, the Asuras are
thriving. The Devas go as separate groups in their separate ways to take
counsel (four groups as opposed to five in the Taittirīya version).
Having taken counsel in their respective parties, they came to a
decision.

*“हन्त या एव न इमाः प्रियतमास् तन्वस् ता अस्य वरुणस्य राज्ञो गृहे
संनिदधामहै; ताभिर् एव नः स न संगछातै यो न एतद् अतिक्रामाद्, य
आलुलोभयिषाद्” इति तथेति ते वरुणस्य राज्ञो गृहे तनूः संन्यदधत।*

*“hanta yā eva na imāḥ priyatamās tanvas tā asya varuṇasya rājño gṛhe
saṃnidadhāmahai; tābhir eva naḥ sa na saṃgachātai yo na etad atikrāmād,
ya ālulobhayiṣād” iti tatheti te varuṇasya rājño gṛhe tanūḥ
saṃnyadadhata\|*

The Devas thus arrive at a consensus that they should deposit their
dearest bodies in the house of King Varuṇa, saying, “With those bodies,
he will not be united; who transgresses this, who causes \[the
Tānūnaptra\] to frustrate”. They then deposit their bodies in the house
of King Varuṇa.

*ते यद् वरुणस्य राज्ञो गृहे तनूः संन्यदधत तत् तानूनप्त्रम् अभवत् तत्
तानूनप्त्रस्य तानूनप्त्रत्वं। तस्माद् आहुर् न सतानूनप्त्रिणे
द्रोग्धव्यम् इति तस्माद् व् इदम् असुरा नान्वाभवन्ति*

*te yad varuṇasya rājño gṛhe tanūḥ saṃnyadadhata tat tānūnaptram abhavat
tat tānūnaptrasya tānūnaptratvaṃ\| tasmād āhur na satānūnaptriṇe
drogdhavyam iti tasmād v idam asurā nānvābhavanti*

The bodies being deposited in that house is what marks the
“Tānūnaptra-ness” of the Tānūnaptra. They say that to the one \[who has
covenanted\] with the Tānūnaptra, no aggression/betrayal is to be
allowed. Therefore, the Asuras have perished.

The Aitareya version implies at the end that there is a direct link
between the covenant to not betray or aggress upon one another with the
defeat of the Asuras. Thus, it is not merely a covenant to not harm one
another but effectively a covenant to fight together against anyone who
threatens any one of them.

Now we shall see the mādhyandina-śākhā’s Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa (3.4.2;
3^(rd) Kāṇḍa, 4^(th) Adhyāya, 2^(nd) Brāhmaṇa) version, which further
adds several distinctive, interesting nuances into the Tānūnaptra lore.

*ātithyena vai devā iṣṭvā। tāntsamadavindat te caturdhā vyadravannanyo
‘nyasya śriyā atiṣṭhamānā agnirvasubhiḥ somo rudrairvaruṇa ādityairindro
marudbhirbṛhaspatirviśvairdevairityu haika āhurete ha tveva te viśve
devā ye te caturdhā vyádravaṃstānvidrutānasurarakṣānyanuvyaveyuḥ॥ 1*

“The Devas having sacrificed with the Ātithya (i.e. Ātithyeṣṭi);
\[among\] them strife entered. They fourfoldly separated; not conceding
one another’s glory.”

Note: The text then goes on to state the four groups, making a sly
reference to the Taittirīya version’s inclusion of a fifth group
(Bṛhaspati and the Viśvedeva-s) and pointing out its apparent
inconsistency, before ending with a reference to how an Asura-Rakṣa
alliance came after and between the Devas, entering the Devas’ ranks.
Further note that this version of the text directly links the usual
Tānūnaptra lore with the actual ritual context in which the Tānūnaptra
is performed (i.e. after the Ātithyeṣṭi).

*te ‘viduḥ। pāpīyāṃso vai bhavāmo ‘surarakṣasāni vaí no
‘nuvyavāgurdviṣadbhyo vai radhyāmo hanta saṃjānāmahā ekasya śriyai
tiṣṭhāmahā iti ta indrasya śriyā atiṣṭhanta tasmādāhurindraḥ sarvā
devatā indraśreṣṭhā devā iti॥ 2*

They know: “Wretched verily we have become; the Asura- Rakṣa-s have come
between us; to \[our\] enemies we will succumb, alas! Let us agree; of
one \[of us\]. let us concede the glory!”, thus \[saying\] they conceded
the glory of Indra; therefore, they say, “Indra is all the Devas; with
Indra as their eminent one the Devas are.”

*tasmādu ha na svā ṛtīyeran। ya eṣām parastarāmiva bhavati sa
enānanuvyavaiti te priyaṃ dviṣatāṃ kurvanti dviṣadbhyo radhyanti
tasmānna ‘rtīyerantsa yo haivaṃ vidvānna ‘rtīyate ‘priyaṃ dviṣatāṃ
karoti na dviṣadbhyo radhyati tasmānna ‘rtīyeta॥ 3*

Therefore, let one’s own not quarrel. Whoever \[is an enemy\] of theirs,
\[who is\] far from them, he enters between them; they (i.e. those who
allow discord to foment) do a favourable \[deed\] for the enemies and,
to the enemies, succumb. Therefore, he shall not quarrel. He, who
knowing this \[truth\], does not quarrel, does an unfavourable \[deed\]
for the enemies and does not, to the enemies, succumb. Therefore, let
him not quarrel.

*te hocuḥ। hantedaṃ tathā karavāmahai yathā na
idamāpradivamevājaryamasaditi॥ 4*

They (the Devas) said: Hanta! Let us do this, by that which this
\[agreement\] of ours shall become an everlasting friendship.

*te devāḥ। juṣṭāstanūḥ priyāṇi dhāmāni sārdhaṃ samavadadire te
hocuretena naḥ sa nānāsadetena viṣvaṅyo na etadatikrāmāditi
kasyopadraṣṭuriti tanūnaptureva śākvarasyeti yo vā ayam pavate eṣa
tanūnapāchākvaraḥ so ‘yam prajānāmupadraṣṭā praviṣṭastāvimau prāṇodānau॥
5*

They, the Deva-s, gathered together their favourite bodies and beloved
abodes; they said, “Thereby from us he shall become separate (i.e. no
longer one among us), he shall become scattered; who transgresses this
\[covenant\] of ours!” – “Whose, what witness’s, is \[this covenant\]?”
– “\[This covenant is\] Tanūnapāt’s the strong one’s. Who is that
purifies/blows here (i.e. Vāyu), he is the witness of creatures here,
entering \[creatures\]; they (Two) here are the prāṇa and udāna breaths
(in and out breaths).

*te devāḥ। juṣṭāstanūḥ priyāṇi dhāmāni sārdhaṃ samavadadire ‘thaita
ājyānyeva gṛhṇānā juṣṭāstanūḥ priyāṇi dhāmāni sārdhaṃ samavadyante
tasmādu ha na sarveṇeva samabhyaveyānnenme juṣṭāstanvaḥ priyāṇi dhāmāni
sārdhaṃ samabhyavāyāniti yeno ha samabhyaveyānnāsmai druhyedidaṃ
hyāhurna satānunaptriṇe drogdhavyamiti॥ 9*

They, the Deva-s, gathered together their favourite bodies and beloved
abodes; now, by taking hold of the ghee\[-portions\] they (the
Ṛtvijaḥ/priests) gather together their favourite bodies and beloved
abodes; therefore, let him not commit \[to the Tānūnaptra covenant\]
with all and sundry unless the favourite bodies and beloved abodes are
commingled. Whosoever he covenants with, to him he shall not betray;
verily they say, “To the one \[who has covenanted\] with the Tānūnaptra,
no aggression/betrayal is to be allowed.”

Let us surmise the ten key points of the multiple narratives of the TS,
AB and ŚB:

1 The Devas are not able to admit to each other’s pre-eminence and are
thus mutually hostile, causing them to go in their separate ways as four
or five different parties. They realize that this discord has allowed
the Asuras to overpower them or enter their ranks. (TS, AB and ŚB)

2 The Devas first take counsel within their own respective parties to
discuss what they ought to do to resolve the conflict. (AB)

3 The Devas conclude that they ought to admit, by consensus, to the
pre-eminence of one person among them. (ŚB)

4 The Devas separately agree that the way to remain bound to this
decision is only if there is a price to pay for going back on it. (ŚB)

5 The Devas agree that their most cherished bodies/forms and abodes must
all be deposited into a common pool (TS, AB and ŚB) and this common pool
is entrusted to the guardianship of a leader deity. (AB).

6 The Devas also appoint a witness for the binding agreement, apart from
the leader to whom the common pool of assets is entrusted. (ŚB)

7 Whichever Deva betrays the covenant will suffer pain (TS) and will be
deprived of all shares in the common pool of assets, including whatever
of his own that he had deposited in the first place. (TS, AB and ŚB)

8 No betrayal of or hostility towards one another is allowed under the
Tānūnaptra covenant. (TS, AB and ŚB).

9 The Asuras perish because no hostility to any one of them is tolerated
under the Tānūnaptra, the implication being that hostility to one from
outside is deemed as hostility to all. (AB). So, apart from internal
hostility, external hostility too is not tolerated.

10 One must be careful about any commitment he makes under the
Tānūnaptra because there will be commingling of one’s dearest bodies and
abodes with the similar assets of others. Once one commits himself to
the Tānūnaptra with another entity, he is bound to them because there is
no room for betrayal or going back under the Tānūnaptra. (ŚB)

Let us adopt a metaphor that will help us transmute the above ten points
into an insight for how we can understand the philosophical basis of why
the unity of Hindudharma makes sense and why, even if it is argued that
this unity stands to become more defined in the course of time and is
yet incomplete, this unity is not artificial but theologically
meaningful.

11 Let the different, organically developing primary religious systems
or sects or schools of a land be the Devas.

12 Let counter-religions, which primarily position themselves as
opponents of an organically developing religion and, that are threats to
more than one of the systems be the Asuras. The Devas reflect on the
need for unity only after the Asuras overpower them. Likewise, the
primary religious systems contemplate the case for unity only after
being routed by the counter-religions.

13 Let the rituals, liturgies, texts, pantheons, festivals, pilgrimage
sites, religious and endowments of the different systems be the contents
of the Devas’ common pool of assets, consisting of the Devas’ bodies and
abodes.

14 This shared “religious treasury” is deposited under a law that
enforces the binding commitment of the parties to one another, in the
same way the Devas’ common pool of assets is deposited with or witnessed
by a Deva, i.e. Varuṇa in the AB or Vāyu in the ŚB, who punishes
falsehood.

15 Among the various systems which have agreed to unite themselves to
one another under a binding covenant, there is a chief system, whose
pre-eminence and leadership are recognized across all members of the
covenant. The chief system’s representative capacity for all other
systems is also recognized. Let this chief system be the Deva whose
pre-eminence is universally accepted by all other Devas i.e. Indra in
the ŚB.

16 Each primary religious system that is a party to the covenant
undertakes to never harm another member of the covenant and also protect
one another in event of an external attack from the counter-religions.

17 The primary religious systems which are parties to the covenant are
currently grouped under these following overarching categories: the
Vaidika, the Āgamika, Laukika-Paurāṇika, Grāmya and Āṭavika (tribal)
religions.

Now, one must add a few nuances to this scenario, which are not
available in the Tānūnaptra narratives but nonetheless inspired from
them:

18 Just as Indra is chosen by the Devas but we know from the Veda that a
Deva may combine with others to form dvandvas, so is the case in the
Dharma that the leader system need not remain constant.

Example: The “pure” Vaidika system may have been the leader at some
point of time but has coalesced with the Paurāṇika and Āgamika systems
for several centuries now, to form a hybrid, that **may** be argued to
be the leader now.

19 Each of the current parties to the covenant of the Dharma may have
been the product of a similar covenant between a smaller group of
conflicting entities. These smaller-level covenants become subject to
the broader covenant but remain binding and enforceable.

Example: We have references from those like Kumārilabhaṭṭa,
Jayantabhaṭṭa and even within the Veda, which suggest that the
adherents of Vedaśākhā-s may have been hostile to one another. But at
some time, the overwhelming majority allowed their fervour for
individual Vedaśākhā-s to submit to and make way for the universal
supremacy of the Veda. This can be seen as a smaller-level covenant.
Once this is resolved and the Veda’s pre-eminence qua Veda is
established over the individual Vedaśākhā-s, the Veda’s covenant with
all other religious systems makes more sense.

20 Sub-systems and/or sects which are born as a result of the binding
covenant (i.e born from the “religious treasury”) are automatically
admitted into full membership under the covenant and will remain so
unless they consciously choose to betray the covenant.

Example: Various systems such as the Mādhva or Vīraśaiva, etc can be
said to be the results of complex syntheses of Vaidika, Āgamika and
Paurāṇika systems. They are born from the “Tānūnaptra” of the Dharma,
one can say. However, if a particular body declares itself as opposed to
all other systems (such as when a certain body of Liṅgāyata leaders
declared itself separate from Hindudharma and made disparaging
statements against other systems). However, one should note that the
actual Liṅgāyata laity on the ground may remain perfectly attached to
the Dharma as ever and their Hinduness cannot be negated by the acts of
a certain dissident body, which happens to be related to the laity).

21 As a final point, we must note that there can be multiple
“Tānūnaptra-s” being realized in different lands of Bhārata. Can all of
these Tānūnaptra-s stand in for a single covenant that is “Hindudharma”?

Example: For instance, there may be a shared understanding, beliefs and
practices between the Laukika-bhakti tradition and a tribal religion in
Utkala that amounts to a Tānūnaptra there. There may be a similar shared
understanding between the particular Āgamika tradition of a temple and a
Grāmya tradition surrounding a certain rural deity in Drāviḍadeśa. Can
these disparate understandings amount to a single “covenant”?

Our view is that, yes, it is possible though we will elaborate this in a
sequel. Tentatively, we suggest that it is a certain uniformity of view
across the Laukika and Āgamika traditions that allows them to embrace
tribal and village systems into a larger whole along with themselves. An
instance of such uniformity lies in the idea that Śiva, Viṣṇu and Devī
either manifest themselves as the deities of all peoples or these
deities somehow act as the conduits through which Śiva, Viṣṇu and Devī
make their power known.

The Tānūnaptra metaphor also provides sufficient defence against those
who complain that historical processes of assimilation and strategic
alliances are necessarily markers of the artificiality of the Hindu
identity. Why? Because just like the Devas repeatedly perform sacrifices
and may have to renew and update their own Tānūnaptra, our evolving
Dharma too is a series of Yajña-s or long Sattra-s, where different
pantheons, rituals and sacred spaces meld together, and which requires
us to perform the sacred rite of “Tānūnaptra” by committing ourselves to
the overarching Hindu identity. Thus, when we commit ourselves to the
“Hindu” identity, it is not a mere artificial, survival strategy. It is
divine. It is the earthly manifestation of the Tānūnaptra itself.

We end our essay here and will update it in due time.

