+++
title = "Guilds in Ancient India"
full_title = "Guilds in Ancient India A Study"
date = "2022-01-25"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2022/01/25/guilds-in-ancient-india-a-study/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2022/01/25/guilds-in-ancient-india-a-study/).

Guilds in Ancient India: A Study

In historical writings, any reference to ancient India usually leads to
discussion of subjects like religion and philosophy. Development of
statecraft has been the other favoured field of scholars. However,
economy of the time never seems to have captured public interest and
imagination in the same way as the other mentioned areas of study have
despite the fact that it has been discussed and researched upon by many
eminent historians. Trade, crafts and their organisation are very
crucial subjects in ancient Indian history as they undeniably were to
ancient Indians themselves. This article is an attempt in analysing this
aspect based on what various scholars have examined on the subject.

Table of Contents & Links

-   [Introduction](#Introduction)
-   [Early Mentions](#Early-Mentions)
-   [Mauryan Period](#Mauryan-Period)
-   [Post-Mauryan Period](#Post-Mauryan)
-   [Gupta Period](#Gupta-Period)
-   [Observations & Analysis](#Observations-Analysis)
-   [Conclusion](#Conclusion)
-   [References](#References)
-   [Bibliography](#Bibliography)

**Introduction**

Trade and crafts in ancient India saw significant development and
organisation into corporate bodies *i.e.* guilds and this forms the main
topic of this study. The functioning of these groups and co-operation of
its members is a fascinating subject that enlightens us with the
material aspects of ancient India and how it worked seamlessly with its
social aspect as well. These guilds though created for improving and
safeguarding the interests of traders and craftsmen played a much larger
role in the ancient Indian society. This article will explore the
activities of these guilds of ancient India covering a period till
approximately seventh century CE.

There were many kinds of corporate bodies for which we find mention in
ancient Indian literature. Guilds, whether of traders or artisans or
others were known in ancient India by various names. The words across
the ancient texts that had been used to signify various kinds of
co-operative bodies are śreṇi, kula, pūga, jāti, vrāta, saṁgha,
samudāya, samūha, pariśat, saṁbhūya sannuthāna, varga, sārth, naigama
and others.**¹**

**Early Mentions**

**§** **Vedic Sources**

We do find mention of the word śreṇi in Ṛig Veda in its earliest, most
basic meaning – a line or a series. It doesn’t seem to have any
particular relation with trade or crafts at this point in time. But, as
per some scholars, the earliest evidence for organisation of trade and
crafts in well defined bodies under a chief can be seen in Vedic texts
later than the Ṛig Veda and therefore it suggests the inception of the
system of guilds in the Vedic period itself (Patra,2008: 148). But
scholars like Majumdar contends that the evidence for this view is
insufficient, resting mostly on the use of the word śreṣṭhin and gaṇa in
the Vedic texts like Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, Kauṣītaki and Taittireya
Brāhmaṇa.**²** In this regard, he mentions the comment of Dr. Macdonell
that the word śreṣṭhin which generally denoted head of a guild may
already have formed that sense of the word in the Vedic literature.**³**
We however cannot say with any certainty that guilds did exist in the
Vedic times. Though, social and economic conditions required for the
inception of such groups might already have been sufficient in the Vedic
times and that culminated in the formation of guilds in the period
covered by the earliest smṛiti-s and Jātaka-s that specifically mention
their presence.

**§ Post-Vedic Sources**

The most frequently used word in ancient Indian literature and
inscriptions for these guilds was śreṇi which can be defined as a
corporation of people that belonged to the same or different castes but
followed the same trade or industry.**⁴** It thus corresponds to guilds
of the medieval Europe.**⁵** Pāṇini has used many of the terms,
mentioned above in the introduction of the article, particularly pūga,
gaṇa, saṁgha together (V. 2. 52) and pūga, vrāta, saṁgha separately as
well (V. 3. 112; v. 3. 113; V. 3. 114) (Mookerjee, 1919:32). Kāśikā
explains saṁgha to simply mean a larger assembly or corporation of which
pūga, vrāta etc are varieties. Mookerjee then suggests based on these
definitions that pūga, vrāta etc were special kind of saṁgha or
associations of men of various castes with no fixed occupation and
united in their pursuit of wealth and pleasure as their aim (Mookerjee,
1919:32). However, Mookerjee states that Pāṇini also uses the specific
term śreṇi (II. 1. 59) which Kayyata and Tattvabodhinī explain as –

ekena śilpena paṇyena vā ye jīvanti teṣāṃ samūḥ śreṇiḥ

*i.e.* an assembly of persons following a common craft or trading in a
common commodity (Mookerjee, 1919: 32-33).

It would be fair to divide guilds in ancient India broadly in two
categories –trade or merchant guilds and craft or professional guilds
(Patra,2008: 148). The conventional number of guilds right from the
period of the earliest Jātaka-s (Buddhist tales) has been eighteen,**⁶**
though it does seem from the scattered references in literary texts that
this number might actually have far exceeded this many a times.**⁷** “It
would appear that almost every important art or craft in a locality
formed a guild-organisation.”**⁸**From Jātaka-s it appears that these
organisations of craftsmen were headed by a Jeṭṭhaka or Pamukha
(Jyeṣṭhaka or Pramukha) who was like an alderman or a president.

Motichandra is of the opinion that in early ancient India, the
commencement of the concept of guilds was more due to the need of bigger
merchants to safeguard their interests and the smaller traders carried
on their work more or less on their own.**⁹** But, some scholars are of
the opinion that in the initial period, the artisans’ guilds saw more
concrete form of organisation than the merchant or traders’ guilds did.
On the authority of Fick, Majumdar states that there was a clear
distinction from the early Jātaka period (7th-6th century BCE) between
organisation of the merchant-trader class on one hand and the artisans
on the other.**¹⁰** The big hereditary families of the former for sure
organised themselves under a headman – the Jeṭṭhaka (alderman) but in
case of the latter, various factors like more pronounced heredity of
profession, the localisation of different branches of the industry and
also the institution of Jeṭṭhaka made the artisans far more organised at
this early stage (Majumdar, 1922: 21).

To support his view, Majumdar mentions the example of the artisans’
villages that seem to have acted as guilds in Jātaka-s whose number was
evidently quite large. For example, Mahāvaḍḍhakigāmo was a big village
of 1000 families of carpenters (or dealers in wood) and Kammāragāmo had
1000 families of smiths (Majumdar, 1922: 21). The guilds of master
craftsmen in gold and jewellery, in carpentary and in ivory carving are
known from the earliest times in India.**¹¹**

“We learn from Samudda-Vaṇija Jātaka that there stood near Benares a
great town of carpenters, containing a thousand families. But among
these thousand families there were two master workmen each at the head
of five hundred of them. On one occasion they left the town and settled
with their families in an island. The story shows the mobility of the
guilds which is testified to by inscriptions of a later period. It also
proves that there was sometimes more than one organisation of the same
class of craftsmen in the same locality. One might think that the double
organisation was due merely to the large number of craftsmen, but the
Jātaka stories preserve instances of a thousand men living under a
single organisation.”(Majumdar, 1922: 22)

According to Patra however, with time and increasing development in
trade in India, it wouldn’t be wrong to state that the merchant guilds
seem to have become more influential**¹²** and served in his terms, as a
catalyst in shaping the economic life of the country.**¹³**
Notwithstanding this debate over which kind of guilds were more
dominant, ever since their beginnings, the combined body of these guilds
whether of traders or artisans with their structure and functioning,
quickly became like oil to the gigantic machinery of the ancient Indian
economy and played a fundamental role in the society.

In the time of the earlier Jātaka-s these guilds were still of rather
temporary nature, with origin of certain kind of permanence in the form
of privileges like the hereditary rights and the appointment of the head
(Moti Chandra, 1977: 65) in the form of the office of Jeṭṭhaka, as
mentioned above. Majumdar also points out that the post of the Jeṭṭhaka
seems to have been hereditary. Jātaka-s also contains instances of not
infrequent fights among Jeṭṭhaka-s and how it might have become
necessary to have a tribunal to adjudicate these fights.**¹⁴** Important
to note is that, in one Jātaka tale, one officer called Bhaṇḍāgārika
(Treasurer or Superintendent of Stores) has been specifically mentioned
whose office carried with it judgeship of all the merchant guilds
(Majumdar, 1922: 23). Majumdar relates that in the story, no such office
had existed before but did always exist after this one had been
created.**¹⁵** He quotes Mrs. Rhys Davids to throw more light on the
creation of this office –

“The first appointment to a supreme headship over all the guilds doubled
with the office of the treasurer is narrated in connection with the
kingdom of Kasi at the court of Benares. Possibly the quarrels twice
alluded to as occurring between presidents (pamukh) of guilds at
Savatthi in Kosala may have also broken out in Benares and have led to
this appointment.” (Majumdar, 1922: 23).

Probably for the first time in the history of India, an important
development with regard to the structure of guilds was imparting of
authority to make their own laws and confirming this authority with
religious and legal sanction.**¹⁶** Gautama Dharmasūtra, forming one of
the earliest layer of smṛiti texts asks that the cultivators, traders,
herdsmen, money-lenders and artisans to lay down rules for their
respective classes (Majumdar, 1922: 24; Rao, 1950: 55), and advises the
king to give legal decision only after having learned the (state of)
affairs from those who (in each class) have authority (to speak).”**¹⁷**
The heads of the guilds from now on had the right and the authority to
represent their class in the royal courts (Majumdar, 1922: 24).

Cementing of these rights can be seen from the Buddhist evidence in
which guilds are vested with both executive and judicial authority and
their officers are even entitled to arbitrate between its members in the
court.**¹⁸** Noteworthy in this case is the Buddhist text Vinaya-piṭaka
which states that the sanction of the guild was necessary for the
ordination of wife of any of its members**¹⁹** and that guild was
entitled to arbitrate on certain occasions between its members and their
wives (Majumdar, 1922: 25). Another striking example from Vinaya-piṭaka
is when it states that a woman thief shouldn’t be ordained as a nun
without the sanction of the authorities concerned.**²⁰** A commentator
explains what is meant by the word ‘authorities’ here –

rājā nāma, yattha rājā anusāsati rājā apaloketabbo, seṇi nāma, yattha
seṇi anusāsati seṇi apaloketabbo

Where the King rules, his consent will have to be obtained where the
guild rules its consent will have to be obtained (Majumdar, 1922: 25).

We also have some names of the important chiefs called seṭṭhi (śreṣṭhin)
of the merchant guilds like the example of Anāthapiṇḍika, who was the
Mahāseṭṭhi, the president of a commercial federation, with numerous
Anuseṭṭhis under him.**²¹** The famous example of a guild and its
workings can be seen in the story of Pūrṇa, a merchant who later became
a famous disciple of Buddha and guild of merchants at Sopara
(Śūraparaka) the most famous sea port of the western coast of India in
the early Buddhist times and later periods (Moti Chandra, 1977: 141).The
importance of guilds not only in the economy but also owing to their
position in general in the society was such that guilds were even
included in royal processions as per the Jātaka-s.**²²** Such perks of
privilege continued and even increased with time, as mentioned
frequently in numerous sources which will be related shortly.

Some guilds have also been mentioned as having become strong and big
enough that they needed to maintain a body of armed force
(śreṇivala/śreṇibala) which also, according to ancient texts was one of
the classes of troops that the king called upon to serve under him when
necessary.**²³** The rules regarding the śreṇibala have been treated in
the masterpiece of Kauṭilya – Arthaśāstra and they will be dealt with in
a separate section shortly but interesting to note in this matter is the
mention of śreṇibala in the great epics of India, Rāmāyaṇa and
Mahābhārata. The former mentions them as ‘sayodhaśreṇi’ (Majumdar, 1922:
30) while the latter instructs the king to its use and regards it to be
of equal importance as the hired soldiers (bhṛitam).**²⁴**

**Mauryan Period**

Arthaśāstra uses words like śreṇi, kula, pūga, gaṇa, and saṁgha to
describe corporations or guilds (Rao, 1950: 52). In the text, Kauṭilya
particularly extols corporations along with family, deeds and character
of the Kings men (jāti, saṁgha, kula,karma, vṛttastavam) indicating that
guild like family and caste was by now considered as a primordial unit
of social organization.**²⁵** The steady development of such corporate
bodies like guilds had made them crucial to the economy and society both
but by the time of the great Mauryan Empire, their organisation reached
a great degree of sophistication as can be understood from Arthaśāstra,
which meticulously treats this subject and also specifies rules
regarding wages and work along with injunctions for a proper punishment
to those who flouted them (Moti Chandra, 1977: 85).

Though, śreṇi has been used in Arthaśāstra to mean corporations that
subsist on agriculture, trade and military service but it has also been
used in the same text to mean a corporation of artisans. In case of the
former, Kautilya refers to a class of Kṣatriya guilds which lived upon
both trade and war – Kāmboja-Surāshṭra-Kshatriya-śreṇyādayo
Vārtta-Śāstropajīvinaḥ.**²⁶** To Majumdar they seem to have been special
kinds of guilds and mostly found in Kāmboja and Surāshṭra
countries.**²⁷** But in the case of artisans and agricultural guilds,
the text makes clear provisions when they were made to situate in
specified quarters of the cities and distributed according to a definite
plan.**²⁸** For example – the text instructs that śreṇi of artisans
manufacturing various products like worsted thread, cotton thread,
bamboo mats, skins, armour, weapons and gloves shall have their
dwellings to the west of the town.**²⁹** It also provided protection to
the guilds as can be seen from the rule that – ” no company other than
the one of local birth (sajātādanyassaṅgha), and no guilds of any kind
other than local co-operative guilds (sāmutthāyikādanyassamayānubandha)
shall find entrance into the villages of the kingdom.”**³⁰** The text
also states rules for safeguarding of the consumer. The superintendent
of commerce, according to Arthaśāstra shall fix a profit of five per
cent over the fixed price of local commodities and ten percent on
foreign produce and the violation of this rule was to be punished with a
heavy fine (Rao, 1950: 61).

Arthaśāstra also made special concessions in case of law-suits between
trade guilds and accords special privileges to a merchant belonging to a
guild.**³¹** For Kauṭilya, the topic of the trouble caused by the guilds
or their leaders was important and he considered the problems created by
the leaders to be more serious for they, backed up by the support caused
oppression by injuring the life and property of others (Majumdar, 1922:
28). On the question of whether a wasteland should be colonized by an
unorganized population or the one consisting of corporate bodies like
the guilds, Kauṭilya favours the former as the latter would be more
susceptible to anger and other passions and intolerant of the
calamities.**³²**

As mentioned earlier in the article, armed forces of the major guilds –
the śreṇivala was an important factor for the state and in keeping with
its importance, in Arthaśāstra, Kautilya includes śreṇivala among the
various classes of troops which the king might possess. It was sometimes
quite sufficient both for defensive as well as for offensive purposes,
and when the enemy’s army consisted mostly of this class of soldiers,
the king also had to enlist them in his service (Majumdar, 1922: 28).
The pay of śreṇi mukhyas (chiefs of guilds) is set down as equal to that
of the chiefs of elephants, horses and chariots – important parts of an
ancient Indian army, and then the text remarks that the amount would
suffice for having a good following in their own communities.**³³**
Another cunning use of śreṇivala in the text is suggested when Kauṭilya
mentions that among the nefarious ways to keep a hostile party down, one
important one is when a śreṇivala is to be furnished with a piece of
land that is constantly under troubles from an enemy, evidently for
keeping them too busy to interfere in the affairs of state.**³⁴**
Majumdar tried to find the true explanation of the word śreṇivala in
‘Kṣatriya śreṇi’ of Kauṭilya. He defined it as a class of guilds that
followed some industrial art and also military profession at the same
time (Majumdar, 1922: 31). To him, the Mandasor Inscription provides its
confirmation and it will be discussed in detail shortly. Majumdar finds
śreṇivala and the role they played in ancient India quite similar to
those of Italian guilds of the Middle Ages.**³⁵**

Scholar Maity is of the opinion on the basis of an example from
Mṛichchakaṭika (a later Saṃskṛit drama by Śūdraka) that wage labourers
seem to have had no guild organisation (Maity, 1957: 151). But
Arthaśāstra does mention rules specifically regarding guild of labourers
or day workers**³⁶** and grants them special privileges like a grace of
seven nights over and above the period agreed upon for fulfilling their
engagement (Majumdar, 1922: 27). Arthaśāstra also specifically mentions
guilds of many kinds of workmen (saṅghabhṛtaḥ) employed by the companies
as Saletore calls them. The text also relates about those who carried on
co-operative work (saṁbhūsamutthāthāraḥ) who also employed these workmen
(Saletore, 1943: 321). Guilds of these workmen (saṁghabhṛitaḥ) were paid
by the employers for the work done but not for the work stipulated but
was not done, the guilds were also required to divide the wages either
equally or as agreed upon (Rao, 1950: 60). Once the worked had
commenced, leaving it in between on one’s own accord was to be
punished.**³⁷** It seems that the first mistakes were taken lightly as
Kauṭilya remarks that neglect in the work for the first time should be
shown mercy (abhayam) but continued neglect should be punished by
expulsion (pravāsanaṃ)**³⁸** and other major offences (mahāparādha ) by
death.

Special rules were also made regarding the guilds of artisans – they are
told to fulfill their engagements in due accordance with their agreement
as to time, place, and form of work. Delaying the completion of work and
flouting the agreed terms or even denying the existence of agreement
will result in forfeiture of ¼th of their wages and punishment of a fine
equal to twice the amount of their wages, except in troubles and
calamities. They are also told to make good whatever is thus lost or
damaged.

In the Mauryan period, trade was looked after by Director of the Trade
*i.e.* paṇyādhyakṣa and monopoly in trade of foreign goods was strictly
forbidden. Foreign traders could not be sued in the courts for their
debts, but interestingly, if they were members of the guild, then they
could be taken to the courts (Moti Chandra, 1977: 83-84).

The Mauryan period also saw a proper development of rules for money
lending. The dhāraṇika i.e. debtors and the dhanika i.e.
bankers/creditors had fixed rules of conduct.**³⁹** Elaborate
regulations were also made regarding the conditions under which
agreements of the merchants were considered valid. Ancient literature of
this time also had detailed rules to safeguard not only the interests of
the merchants but also the consumers (Moti Chandra, 1977: 85-86). But
these rules concerning individual merchants do not fall in purview of
this article as it only concerns itself with activities of merchants
under a corporate body like guild. Noteworthy is the fact that by the
Mauryan period, merchants also provided the facility of depositing sums
(upanidhi) and thus, acted as bankers to people. The interest on this
sum was equal to what was in any other ordinary business. However, it is
unsure whether at this point in history only individual prosperous
merchants provided this facility or guilds did it as well.

**Post-Mauryan Period**

**§ Buddhist Sources**

When we move forward from the heydays of the Mauryan empire, various
sources – both literary and otherwise give us details about the activity
of guilds. Buddhist text Mahāvastu, considered to have been composed
between the period of 2nd century BCE and 4th century CE gives us
information regarding the flourishing trade and its systemic
organisation in the period. It mentions lists of twenty-four guilds,
twenty two heads of guilds and as much as thirty professions.**⁴⁰**

“The Mahāvastu mentions the guilds of Kapilavastu. In the ordinary
guilds are mentioned the workers in wrought and unwrought gold, sellers
of wrappers (pravarika), the workers in chankshell (iankhika), ivory
carvers (dantakara), lapidaries (manikara), stone carvers (prastarika),
perfumers, weavers of silk and woollen clothes (koshavika), oil
pressers, sellers of dahi or curd (dadhyka), cake sellers (Moti Chandra,
1977: 149-50).”

Mahāvastu also mentions special kind of guilds called the śilpāyatana-s
that were important for trade and commerce of the country and goods
manufactured by them were not only meant for domestic market but were
also important for the exports. Their workshops comprised of many kinds
of artisans like the “ironsmiths, copper plate makers, bronze casters,
braziers, tin-makers, glass-makers and lathe workers. Garland-makers,
fillers of the cushion with cotton (purimakdra), potters, weavers of
wool, cane-workers, weavers on jacquards (devaiatantra), washermen,
dyers, needle- workers, cotton weavers, painters, makers of gold and
silver ornaments, farriers, washers, barbers, borers, stucco-makers,
chariot-makers, architects (sutradhara), well diggers, dealers in woods
and bamboos, sailors and gold washers were important as well (Moti
Chandra, 1977: 150).

Though from the lists of various kinds of guilds either in Mahāvastu
(mentioned above) for the earlier period or Jambū dvīpa prajñapti for
the Gupta period, it appears that the śreṇi or guild was mosty an
organisation of producers or professionals and not those of the traders
responsible for sale of those products manufactured.**⁴¹** Thus it
appears that the corporate organization was still more prominent among
the artisans or producers than the traders. Patra therefore comes to the
conclusion that śreṇi was only the organization of producers only
(Patra, 2008: 148), at least at this time period.

**§ Traders’ Organisation**

There is thus a debate regarding existence of guilds or any other
significant corporate organisation among the traders unlike in the case
of artisans and craftsmen. With whatever we have learnt by now, we are
in a position to form an opinion on it. Majumdar finds proof for the
presence of traders’ organization from quite early on. He prefers to
call them traders’ league.**⁴²** He states that many Jātaka stories
mention sea going merchants as a group. In particular, Valāhassa Jātaka
relates about five hundred merchants under a chief who chartered a
vessel for trading in Ceylon (Śri Laṅkā) (Majumdar, 1922: 80-81).
Similarly there are many such stories, one involving a group of
merchants and their journey on a ship and the treasure that was gained
in course of the voyage which then was equally distributed among
them.**⁴³** We also have examples from the Jātaka tales of traders
within India, from Benares or Śrāvasti going on a business together
under a chief (Jeṭṭhaka), sometimes to Ujjain, sometimes to other
destinations.**⁴⁴** The word seṭṭhi in Buddhist literature seems quite
certainly to mean a distinguished individual and a representative of the
communities of traders (Majumdar, 1922: 82). Not to forget the evidence
from Gautama Dharmasūtra which as mentioned above, specifically involved
traders among other groups who are asked to form rules for their
respective classes and advises the king to consult their representatives
before coming to any decision regarding their community (Majumdar, 1922:
83). Majumdar adds to his argument information from Guttila Jātaka that
refers to some traders of Benares travelled to Ujjain for trade. They
are told to have lodged in the same place and enjoyed themselves
together thus confirming that this was a concerted group action.**⁴⁵**
Even Kauṭilya mentions in his Arthaśāstra to traders who unite in
causing rise and fall in the value of articles and live by making
profits cent per cent (Majumdar, 1922: 85). Thus, the Jātaka stories
coupled with the evidence from Gautama Dharmasūtra and Arthaśāstra give
confirmation to existence, even flourishing corporations or guilds of
traders.**⁴⁶**

It is clear from the Sanskrit Buddhist literature of the period that the
importance of guilds in the economic aspect of the period had not only
continued from earlier times but even seems to have increased with their
increasingly developed and complex organisation, rules and regulations.
Importance was given to unanimous decisions i.e. validity of only those
rules and decisions that had been passed unanimously in these bodies,
evidently for safeguarding the interests of guild members and this
really is a crucial part in the structural development of guild
organisation. In the same breadth, another interesting fact that we
learn is that there seems to have been a rule at the time according to
which only the guild was authorised to purchase goods in bulk and no
individual member of the guild could do so (Moti Chandra, 1977: 148) but
again rules like this were binding only when they had been passed after
a unanimous vote (Moti Chandra, 1977: 149) and when the decisions of the
guild were challenged by other members but the guild was unable to clear
the disputes within the organisation, then the case was taken to the
king, the supreme and final arbiter. Guilds had great influence over the
king, with the most prosperous guild chiefs being the chief banker of
the king also acted as the adviser of the king, who helped him
financially in the time of the need.**⁴⁷**

**§ Early Dharmaśāstra-s**

Guilds continued to remain fundamental to the Indian economy and their
importance suring that time is clearly visible when we see that they are
dealt with extensively by the Indian legal texts of the time like the
smṛiti-s of the period the early Dharmaśāstra-s like that of Manu,
Yājñavalkya and Viṣṇu and this information is supplemented ably by the
mention of their important role and functioning from the epigraphy of
the period.

Manusmṛiti continues to define śreṇi as an association of traders and
artisans, money-lenders and men proficient in the four sciences of
learning (Rao, 1950: 54). It is significant to note that right from the
time of early smṛiti-s like the Gautama Dharmasūtra to the later work
like Manusmṛiti, the traders have been included along with the artisans
and other producers as being organised into corporate bodies of guilds.
Manu also not only accepts the rights of these guilds to make their own
rules and regulations but also provided them with authority, another
point of continuation from the past. Thus, Śreṇi-dharma i.e. usages of
the guilds are told as having the force of law.**⁴⁸** It further states
that “If a man belonging to a corporation inhabiting a village or a
district (grāmadeśa-saṁgha) after swearing to an agreement, breaks it
through avarice, (the king) shall banish him from his realm.”

The text also has special sections of laws titled samvitvyatikrama –
violation of compacts, samayayānapākrama – non-performance of agreements
that are related to various groups, which include śreṇi, pūga and
naigama.**⁴⁹** While from this text, the meaning of śreṇi is a well
known but pūga is a bit difficult to define. In the post-Vedic period,
the early mention of pūga in Buddhist text like Vinaya piṭaka was in the
sense of corporation of a town or a village (Majumdar, 1922: 139) but
Kātyāyana defines pūga as a group of merchants. Naigama on the other
hand is explained as a group of various inhabitants of the same town
which is really insufficient as an explanation but Amarakośa sheds some
more light on the term where it is applied particularly to a
merchant.**⁵⁰**

Yājñavalkya and Viṣṇu smṛiti-s also contain such injunctions regarding
guilds. The former states that if a man steals the property of a guild
or any other corporation, or breaks any agreement with it, he shall be
banished from the realm and all his property, confiscated.**⁵¹**
Yājñavalkya also states that the duties arising from the rules and
regulations of the corporation (sāmayika), provided they were not
inconsistent with the injunctions of the sacred texts, as well as the
regulations laid down by the king, must be observed with care.**⁵²**

**§ Early Inscriptions**

As we reach the Kuṣāṇa period, epigraphic evidence starts to emerge that
gives information regarding guilds in ancient India. Many Kuṣāṇa
inscriptions refer to trade guilds and perhaps unsurprisingly, according
to scholar Saletore, majority of them appear to be the corporations of
craftsmen. He mentions the Sōnāri Stūpa I rail inscription that relates
about gift of a man named Dhamaguta (Dharma Gupta?) who was a
Navakarmika, an architect.**⁵³** Another type of architects mentioned in
Kuṣāṇa inscriptions is Vihārakāravhayiṇa (Vihārakārapakiṇa), who were
responsible for the repairs of the monasteries.**⁵⁴** There are also
inscriptions that mention guilds of the lohakākāra, possibly relating to
either smiths or according to Saletore, the term might even include
artisans of other metals as well (Saletore, 1943: 322). Goldsmiths
(Hiraṇyakāra) have also been mentioned in these inscriptions. As
mentioned before in the article, Jātaka-s also provides confirmation
about such corporate bodies.

While there is no doubt that guilds of various kinds and professions
existed in the Kuṣāṇa times, it is very difficult to find out about
their administration from these inscriptions. What is noteworthy is that
even at his earlier period, one significant function of some of these
guilds was depositing the sums of some public benefactors for specified
works of common welfare (Saletore, 1943: 323). An interesting evidence,
probably the first of its kind which Saletore points out is an
inscription from Mathurā in which a foreigner named Kanasarukmāṇa has
been mentioned as depositing 500 purāṇas as a permanent endowment
(akṣyanivī) with Sabittakara and Rāka corporations with the condition
that every month (māsānumāsaṃ), the interest accruing from this amount
was to be utilised for feeding one hundred Brāhmaṇa-s in a Puṇyaśālā and
for provisions for indigent at the doors of this house of charity.**⁵⁵**
From this time, guilds become an important centre for such endowments
and we find them frequently even in the Sātavāhana inscriptions
(Saletore, 1943: 323).

Other examples of inscription from this period include the Nāsik
inscription of Uṣavadāta, son-in-law of Śaka satrap Nahāpāna, dated
around 119-124 CE.**⁵⁶** It is a crucial piece of information that
furnishes important details about various activities of the guild of
weavers. According to it, the king permanently deposited 3000
kārṣāpaṇa-s at varying interest with two major guilds of weavers at
Nāsik (Morwanchikar, 1980: 916). To one, he gave 2000 at the rate of 1%
per month and to the other he gave 1000 at ¾ % per month. Maity states
that this shows that the rate of interest varied between 12 to 9 % per
annum.**⁵⁷** The interest from these deposits was to be used for
distribution among the bhikṣu-s to cover for their expenses of clothes
etc during their stay in the monsoon (Morwanchikar, 1980: 916). This
inscription also informs us about an important step of the process
related to the the assembly of the guilds i.e. naigama sabhā. The
inscription mentions that this donation was proclaimed in the naigama
sabhā which acted as the sanctioning authority.**⁵⁸**

We also have example of a 3^(rd) century CE Nāsik inscription in the
period of Ābhīra king, Rājā Māṭharīputra Īśvarasena, son of Ābhīra
Śivadatta in his ninth regnal year. The inscription mentions endowments
with many guilds like that of the potters (kularika), oil millers
(tilapisaka) etc for philanthropic purposes. (Morwanchikar, 1980: 916).
It states about two investments – one of 1000 kārśāpaṇa-s and another of
500 kārśāpaṇa-s in trade guilds at Govardhana i.e. old Nāsik. These sums
were endowed for providing medicines for the sick among the monks of the
monastery at Nāsik hills**⁵⁹** and benefactress was a lay devotee named
Viṣṇudattā, Śakānī, mother of Gaṇapaka Viśvavarman and daughter of Śaka
Agnivarman.

It would be wrong to contend that the practice of depositing these
permanent endowments with the guilds started only first or second
century CE on the basis of these inscriptions. The guilds must have
formed a high reputation for their honest operations in the society if
the royalty was using their services for philanthropy. And such
reputation forms over a long period of time which also suggests that the
guilds might have been accepting deposits for quite some period of time.

These inscriptions are mostly from western parts of India and from the
same part of the country, we come across some other kinds of
organisations and some interesting terminology than the usual śreṇi.
This organisation was called Sanigha (most likely derived from Saṃgha)
which was a somewhat bigger guild of the persons following same
profession but belonging to various castes and also regions
(Morwanchikar, 1980: 915). Another interesting terminology from western
India is the use of the word Bhojika for the chief executive of the
guilds other than adhyakṣa, mukhya or the usual śreṣṭhin (Morwanchikar,
1980: 915).

**Gupta Period**

**§ Later Dharmaśāstra-s and Other Literary Sources**

The Gupta period saw the most special attention being given to
specifying laws for guilds and defining their activities with great
details. The later Dharmaśāstra-s of Nārada and Bṛihaspati treat guilds
and their organisation in such comprehensive way that it signifies the
level of maturity these corporate bodies reached in the Gupta period
specifically.**⁶⁰** No doubt the earlier texts whether the Arthaśāstra
or the smṛiti-s of Gautama, Manu, Yājñavalkya related various laws on
the subject but these later smṛiti-s analyse the matter in depth,
probably signifying the exceptional growth of the economy in the Gupta
period. On this, scholar Maity opines –

“For the first time in the Gupta period the law-books lay down detailed
rules on the functioning of guilds and partnerships in business. This
indicates a considerable growth in the activities of such bodies, which
came more and more to the attention of the jurists. We may thus assume
that the Gupta age was marked by increased trade, as compared with the
period between the Mauryas and the Guptas, when earlier Smṛitis, such as
Manu, Gautama, Yājñavalkya and others were written.” (Maity, 1957: 164)

But this needs to be stressed that this was not a new phenomenon.
Though, Nāradasmṛiti and Bṛihaspatismṛiti was compiled during the Gupta
period and gives details regarding the rules and regulations of the
myriad of trade practices of that period but as per scholar Motichandra,
there is a strong possibility that these rules were also current in the
early centuries of the Common Era.**⁶¹** So these later texts should be
seen in continuation from the developments of the earlier periods.

Jambūdvīpa prajñapti dated to the Gupta period gives the name of the
eighteen traditional guilds – potter, silk weaver (paṭṭailla),
gold-smith, cooks (sūvakāra), singer (gandhabba), barber (kāsavaga),
garland maker, vegetable grower (kāchhī), betel leaf seller, cobbler,
oil presser (jantapīlaga), sellers of napkins (gañchhī), calico printers
(chhimpa), brazier, tailor (sīvaga), cowherds, hunter (bhilla) and
fisherman.**⁶²** The traditional number of the guilds in the ancient
texts has usually been told to be eighteen but we wouldn’t be wrong to
presume that the actual number might have exceeded it by much. Dramas
like Raghuvaṃśa and Mudrārākṣasa mention guilds of architects and guild
of jewelers respectively. Mudrārākṣasa even has the jewelers’ guild
president Chandanadāsa playing an interesting role in the story. The
pilots and sailors had their own guilds (Moti Chandra, 1977: 144) and
texts inform us about the vigorous knowledge and training that a head of
the guild of pilots went through. One of the names of the position of
chief of the sailors’ guild was niyāmakajeṭṭha.**⁶³** At other places,
the sailors’ guild has been called nāvikatantra.**⁶⁴** Interestingly,
Bṛihaspati mentions even the guilds of painters, dancers, religious
orders, dyers and even robbers! (Rao, 1950: 55)

It seems that the membership of the guilds was also governed by some
regulations and qualifications (Patra, 2008: 147). The first step in a
newly established guild was the monetary deposit which was backed by a
written documentation and then the amount was also guaranteed, thus
providing it with validity.**⁶⁵** The guild was bound by a constitution
which had its laws written in it and it was an accepted agreement of the
members of the guild. The rules had to be followed by all of its members
and consciously failing to do so was to be punished by confiscation of
the property and banishment from the town.**⁶⁶** There also were
provisions for punitive measures against those flouted the rules of the
guilds. A member who fell out with his corporation or neglected his work
was fined six niṣka or four suvarṇa (Maity, 1957: 60). The guilds
operated on the principles of safeguarding their business. Bṛihaspati
states that danger to one was to be regarded as danger to all and should
be repelled by collective efforts (Maity, 1957: 155).

Guild presidents still had pre-eminent position in its heirarchy.
According to texts, only those who were honest, acquainted with the
Vedas (Saletore, 1943: 326) and their duty, able, self-controlled,
sprung from good families and skilled in every business, should be
appointed as heads of an association. But hostile, dissolute, bashful,
indolent, timid, avaricious, or very young person must not be chosen for
these affairs.**⁶⁷** It is interesting to see the list of requirements
of virtues in the chief of a public body, a definition that must have
included guilds, though these expectations rather define an ideal.
Notwithstanding whether these virtues were actually found or not but the
position was considered important enough by our ancient jurists that it
required such ideal persons on the heads of public bodies. On special
occasions, the preeminent guild presidents like the chief banker amongst
other important personalities are even told to have accompanied the king
(Moti Chandra, 1977: 172).

As for the internal laws of guilds, Nārada smṛiti defines the aggregate
of the rules settled by the corporations by the word ‘samaya’**⁶⁸** and
these smṛiti-s of the period confirm that duty towards the guild was now
on considered equally important as that towards the state (Majumdar,
1922: 41-42). Nārada specifically states that the King should maintain
the usages of the guilds and other corporations. Whatever be their laws,
their duties, the rules regarding their attendance and the particular
mode of livelihood prescribed for them, that the King should approve
of.**⁶⁹**

In Bṛihatsaṃhitā, Varāhamihira has written about the general prosperity
of guilds and the guild presidents.**⁷⁰** The source of the finance of
the guilds has been mentioned by Bṛihaspati as – gift from the king,
profits earned on public works, earnings from the fines imposed on those
who violated the guilds laws and profits earned through the banking
functions of the guilds (Maity, 1957: 159-160).

There is no doubt that by the Gupta period, śreṣṭhin – the guild
president had become a very important position and the contemporary
inscriptions like the Pahārpur Copper Plate of 478-9 CE confirm the
same.**⁷¹** From other inscriptions, which we will discuss shortly in
detail, we even come across the names of such eminent presidents of the
guilds like Jīvanta and Matṛidāsa (Maity, 1957: 160). The guild
presidents were clearly prestigious personalities of the society in
ancient India with important roles. It also appears that the position of
the guild president might have been hereditary. In Bṛihad Kathā
Śloka-Saṁgraha, there is a story of a merchant named Sānudāsa, who was
the son of a merchant of Champā. He was appointed as the head of the
merchant guild (śreṣṭhipada) after the death of his father (Moti
Chandra, 1977: 134). But, in a new development, the president/chief of
the guild was now to be assisted by two, three or five executive
officers (kārya chiṅtakāḥ)**⁷²** and from texts like Yājñavalkya smṛiti
and other Dharmaśāstra-s, it seems that the actual powers had by now
come upon these executive officers (kārya chiṅtakāḥ).**⁷³** These
officers could not be autocrats for their ultimate responsibility to the
law and custom was assured by the instrumentality of the assembly
(Majumdar, 1922: 40). Mitramiśra is quite explicit on this point. He
says that the removal of the executive officers was the proper function
of the assembly (samūha), and that the king would step in to punish
these men only when the assembly found itself unable to do so.**⁷⁴**

We also find information regarding the workings of the guild assembly –

“There was a house of assembly where the members of the guild assembled
to transact public business from time to time. According to Nārada,
regular rules were laid down for the attendance of members, and the king
had to approve of them, whatever they might be. It appears from
Mitramiśra’s comment on the passage, that the sound of a drum or other
instruments was a signal for the attendance of members in the guild hall
for the transaction of the affairs of the community.” (Majumdar, 1922:
55)

A democratic system seems to have been followed in the assembly where
regular speeches were made (Majumdar, 1922: 55). Majumdar mentions that
Chaṇdeśvara in his Vivādaratnākara quotes a passage from Kātyāyana which
means that the executive officer who injures another for having said
reasonable things, interrupts a speaker (lit. gives no opportunity to
the speaker to continue), or speaks something improper, is to be
punished with ‘pūrvasāhasadaṇḍa’.**⁷⁵**

Nārada and Bṛihaspati also mention about conventions or compacts called
samvitpatra made by these groups. These conventions of the guilds were
to be strictly enforced by the King barring the situation if these were
averse to the King’s interests or disapproved by the people or were
harmful to the public good.**⁷⁶** These compacts were called
stithipatra-s by Kātyāyana who defined them as deeds of convention for
preserving their usages intact.**⁷⁷**

There was also an interesting practice according to which all guilds
could not have their business done in one market only and businessmen
engaged in different professions were asked to live in different
quarters of the city and that they could not stay in one quarter.
Motichandra suggests the possibility that perhaps the members of the
guilds were not required to pay the market tax. The tax was either
deposited with the king in the palace or handed over to revenue officers
appointed for that purpose. Interestingly but unsurprisingly, in the
eyes of law, foreign merchants were not entitled to those rights which
indigenous merchants claimed (Moti Chandra, 1977: 173).

It also becomes clear from these smṛiti-s that while the sanctity and
the validity of the guild in treating its members was duly accepted by
the state, the laws of the state also safeguarded guild members from any
injustice as they could appeal to the king against it. If it was founded
by the king that their judgment was not in conformity with the guild
laws and usage then he could annul the decision of the guilds (Maity,
1957: 161). The King also intervened when there was a dispute between
the guild president and his associates.**⁷⁸** It was an accepted
provision that one could quit the membership of the guild on his own
accord (Majumdar, 1922: 58).

The texts also informs about many rules regarding the actions that can
be taken in case of the defiance by guilds against the state. According
to Bṛihaspati – “A traders guild whose members conspired to cheat the
King of the share due to him from the trade profits, shall be compelled
to pay eight times as much and shall be punished if they take to
flight.”**⁷⁹** In Nārada Smṛiti, we are told with reference to guilds
and other associations, that confederacy in secret, resort to arms
without due causes and mutual attacks, will not be tolerated by the king
(Majumdar, 1922: 30). It could be a hint towards the use of śreṇivala by
guilds and other associations against the king but it is unsure.

It is noteworthy that by the Gupta period, these guilds were duly
accepted by the state as a body with authority of judicial
administration over the general population. Bṛihaspati states that
relatives, guilds, assemblies (of co-habitants), and other persons duly
authorised by the king, should decide lawsuits among men. Though, these
powers were limited and Bṛihaspati makes a clear exception concerning
violent crimes (sāhasa)**⁸⁰** –

“When a cause has not been (duly) investigated by (meetings of) kindred,
it should be decided after due deliberation by guilds; when it has not
been (duly) examined by guilds, it should be decided by assemblies (of
co- habitants); and when it has not been (sufficiently) made out by such
assemblies, (it should be tried) by appointed (judges).” (Majumdar,
1922: 63)

**§ Later Inscriptions**

**Mandasor Inscription of Silk-Weavers –** Now as we move towards
archaeological evidence for activities of ancient Indian guilds in Gupta
period, one of the main sources is an inscription, mentioned before in
this article called the Mandasor Inscription of the reign of Kumāragupta
I. This inscription is an extremely crucial one for it furnishes with
details about multiple aspects of functioning of a guild.

This Mandasor Inscription (not to be confused with the other Mandasor
Inscription of Yaśodharman) is particularly famous for its mention of
silk weavers from Lāṭa (present day southern Gujarāta) and their guild
whose members were very proud of their organisation.**⁸¹** The guild is
told to have originally belonged to the Lāṭa viśaya near the Narmadā
region, but then the guild migrated en masse inland in the country to
Daśapura or the Mandasor region of Western Mālwā and its members took to
other professions. Some decades after the migration, they also caused a
temple of Sun to be built in Mandasor in 436 CE.

In his fascinating opinion connecting this migration to world events of
the time, Maity has mentioned that the reason for their migration might
have been the failure of the profitable silk trade with the West due to
difficulties of the Roman Empire which faced attacks from the Visigoths
in early 5^(th) century CE.**⁸²** The trade was disrupted as a result
and this reflected in the tottering fortunes of the silk-weavers in the
western coast of ancient India. The guild migrated and its members then
took to various others professions, as mentioned in the inscription.
Maity suggests that the weavers might have found it difficult to convey
their products to the sea for export and local demand might have been
insufficient to keep all of them employed and therefore, they might have
decided to undertake other professions.

Though, according to Maity, it speaks to the general prosperity of India
of the time that the weavers, despite leaving their ancestral profession
became prosperous in their new professions as well.**⁸³** The
inscription also informs us that these guild members who despite
undertaking different professions, still considered themselves as
members of their earlier guild. The guild was very much prosperous,
strong and prestigious enough to undertake the building of a temple of
Sun and then its subsequent repair in 473-474 CE (Maity, 1957: 113). The
general prosperity is again confirmed as the inscription mentions that
it had stores of wealth acquired by the exercise of their craft
(Saletore, 1943: 347). And when such was the affluence of a successful
guild, then it is hardly surprising that these were important for the
state as a source of taxes and the state thus duly demanded its share
from these guilds.

Another intriguing point is suggested by Majumdar with regard to this
particular inscription. As per him, it confirms the existence of
Kṣatriya śreṇi-s mentioned in Arthaśāstra at a later time.**⁸⁴** As
mentioned earlier in the article, Kṣatriya śreṇi-s according to Majumdar
was a class of guilds that followed some industrial art and also
military profession at the same time (Majumdar, 1922: 31). And the
Mandasor inscription states that as many of its members took to other
professions, some of them took to arms and these Majumdar continues,
martial spirits valorous in battle “even to-day…effect by force the
destruction of their enemies.”**⁸⁵** Majumdar finds it curious that this
silk-weavers’ guild originally belonged to the Lāṭa province on the
border of the Surāshṭra country, which, according to Kauṭilya, abounded
in these Kṣatriya guilds. He finds the later example of this kind of
Kṣatrīya śreṇi in the Veḷaikkāra of the southern India in the early
medieval period (Majumdar, 1922: 31).

An important point that emerges from inscriptions such as the Mandasor
Inscription is that these corporate or guild inscriptions were
undertaken by guilds themselves when necessary as this inscription uses
the expression “by the command of the guild,” and this refers to the
authority of this corporation of getting this inscription composed with
a praśasti (lit. praise, meaning eulogy) as we are told that this
inscription carefully composed by Vatsabhaṭṭi.**⁸⁶** What was the
importance of such authority will be discussed later in the post.

Along with such humongous task of getting a temple built and repaired,
we also have examples of gifts or donations by these guilds. There is an
inscription from Junnar that records a meritorious gift of a cave and a
cistern by the śreṇi of dhāmnika (guild of corn dealers) (Morwanchikar,
1980: 917). Another is an inscription from Junnar again which records
the investment of income of two fields with the guild at Koṇāchika for
planting Karanja trees and banyan trees (Majumdar, 1922: 36).**⁸⁷** The
‘Koṇāchika’ inscription is interesting as usually the guilds are named
after their profession but in this case, it is named after a place,
suggesting that either there was only one guild at this village, thus it
didn’t require any specific mention or that the whole village formed one
guild (Majumdar, 1922: 38). But Morwanchikar thinks that Koṇāchika was
actually the name of the captain and not a place.**⁸⁸** Nonetheless, it
is interesting that the usual method of naming guilds after a profession
has not been followed. Another one records investment of money with the
guild of bamboo-workers and the guild of braziers (Majumdar, 1922: 36).

**Indore Copper Plate Inscription –***** ***Another significant
inscription of the Gupta period related to our topic is the Indore
Copper Plate Inscription of Skandagupta. The inscription is a fine
example that the practice of permanent endowments for religious and
beneficial purposes with the guilds**⁸⁹** was still continued. It
mentions guild of oil sellers (Moti Chandra, 1977: 173) and informs
about a permanent endowment made by a Brāhmaṇ named Devaviṣṇu from
Indrapura (Indore) with an oil-men’s guild of the same place to
perpetually maintain a lamp in the temple of the Sun god. The head of
this guild was named Jīvanta (Maity, 1957 116). According to some
scholars, this money was then further invested by the guild either in
its own business or lent to others. Whatever was the case but in return
they paid interest that daily provided two palas of oil for the
lamp.**⁹⁰**

**Others – **The reputation and prestige of these guilds was such that
even emperors like Chandragupta II (c. 408 CE) and Kumāragupta I (c. 418
CE), as we learn from the inscriptions called the Gadhwā stone
inscriptions of both these emperors, deposited money with guilds to
maintain almshouses (sattrā) out of its interests (Maity, 1957: 159). In
one of them, Chandragupta II states how he endowed a guild “headed by
Mātṛdāsa…for the purpose of increasing the religious merit…fashioned…the
Brāḥmaṇas of the community of a perpetual almshouse…by ten dināra-s
(Saletore, 1943: 368).” Similar is the inscription for an endowment by
Kumāragupta I where he is stated to have donated two gifts of ten
dināra-s and another one of twelve dināra-s. There is another Sāñchi
stone inscription of the reign of Skandagupta dated 450-51 CE, where one
Upāsikā Harisvāmini makes the permanent endowment of twelve dināra-s for
philanthropic purposes.**⁹¹** These deposits or religious endowments
were done with proper documentation of the agreements with clear
statements of the conditions under which the agreements were made.**⁹²**
We also have examples where the great merchant guilds evidently
undertook industrial enterprises in the country. For example the great
masonry work of Lake Sudarśana mentioned in the Jūnāgadh Rock
Inscription of Skandagupta, 456-57 CE (Saletore, 1943: 366).

**§ Clay Seals**

We also have evidence about the working of these guilds through some
clay seals discovered from the Gupta sites like Basarh (ancient Vaiśālī)
and Bhita (near Prayāgarāja). In these seals, the legends and the names
are often joined along with those of private individuals**⁹³** and
probably are examples of the conventions or compacts made by the local
guilds with private individual or individual members, i.e. the
samvitpatra or stithipatra of the late smṛiti-s.**⁹⁴** Evidently, the
contracts made by these guilds were registered by affixing seals.
Saletore mentions survival of one such seal where the great corporation
of bankers seems to have made such an agreement with a Kumārāmātya
(Saletore, 1943: 332). The usual legends mentioned in the seals from the
former site are the following –

Śreṣṭhi-Sārthavāha-kulika-nigama

Śreṣṭhi-Kulika-nigama

Śreṣṭhi-nigama

Kulika-nigama

Prathama-kulika

While meaning of some of the words is clear, others are disputed.
Individually, here Śreṣṭhi is considered to mean bankers, Sārthavāha –
traders or merchants, kulika – artisans but various interpretations are
provided for nigama or in some cases, nigamā. Majumdar believes nigam to
simply be taken in its basic form to mean a city**⁹⁵** and therefore,
the legends above would refer to cities administered by Śreṣṭhin, Kulika
and Sārthavāha, jointly or severally (Majumdar, 1922: 43). As per him,
the clay seals thus belonged to guilds which were powerful enough to be
recognised as the ruling authority in a city.**⁹⁶**

According to other definition, naigama was a guild of traders belonging
to various towns.**⁹⁷** As per, Bṛihadkalpasūtrabhāṣya, the nigama
(undoubtedly the sarrāfā of the medieval period) were of two kinds, one
that only carried out the business of banking and the other that also
carried on other business transactions (Moti Chandra, 1977: 172). As per
other interpretations, nigama only means to refer to a corporation and
the legend means a corporation of bankers, traders and merchants**⁹⁸**
or a corporation of bankers as the legend Śreṣṭhi-nigama or
Śreṣṭhi-nigamasya suggests. Banking certainly was an important aspect of
ancient India and particularly of the region of Magadha. Saletore quotes
D. B. Spooner on this banking aspect of many a seals from Basarh
(Vaiśālī) –

> “Banking was evidently as prominent in Vaiśālī as we should have
> expected it to be, judging from the notice in Manu to the effect that
> the people in Magadha were bards and traders.”
>
> – Saletore, 1943: 367.

Bloch was of the view that these legends put together suggested
existence of “something like a modern chamber of commerce,” view that
was supported by scholars like Mookerjee and Saletore but Maity
disagrees and considers this analogy to be far-fetched and unsuitable to
ancient Indian situation (Maity, 1957: 157). The place of their
discovery according to Maity might have been the record department of
the local government or office of some corporate organization as many
seals have been found with the name of the king like Chandragupta and
many seals name state officials along with guilds, merchants, artisans
etc (Maity, 1957: 157). However, there is no doubt that these seals were
used for business transactions.

**§ Role in the Administration**

Records from the Gupta Empire show that some of the guild leaders of
merchants and artisans played significant role in the general
administration of the country as well.**⁹⁹** A record from the time of
Kumāragupta I and Buddhagupta relates about one Vetravarmana, the
governor of Koṭivarṣa viṣaya who ruled with the help of an advisory
board or a unicipal board that consisted of Nagara Śreṣṭhin – the guild
president; Sārthavāha – the chief caravan leader/the chief merchant;
pratham kulika – the chief artisan and jyeṣṭha kāyastha – the chief
scribe.**¹⁰⁰** Thus, Saletore aptly explains the importance that the
chiefs of these guilds of respective professions had in the general
administration –

“This statement reveals how the captains of industry in those days were
virtually the rulers of the locality, for they formed a majority in the
Advisory Board and their word must have carried considerable weight.
These representatives were also assisted by the Pustapālas or the
Record-Keepers who were conversant with the previous grants, which had
to be verified before a plot of land could be sold (Saletore, 1943:
290).”

The term nagaraśreṣṭhi recorded in Gupta inscriptions (Maity, 1957: 156)
is interpreted by some scholars as the guild president, as mentioned
above. But Maity considers it to mean president of the merchant guild
who also acted as a representative of the guild in the administration of
the town.**¹⁰¹** This interpretation thus considers sārthavāha as only
the chief caravan leader.

This role of the heads of guild in matters related to administration is
also supplemented by an example from the famous drama Mṛcchakaṭika where
in a scene, a court is in session and the judges were accompanied by
guild warden (Śreṣṭhin), a clerk (Kāyastha) and others (Saletore, 1943:
270). The court according to Saletore was called the adhikaraṇa – a
court or an office where land transactions were decided and possibly the
judicial matters might have also been discussed.**¹⁰²** However, the
opinion on the role of guilds in the general administration of a region
is disputed. Some scholars think that Gupta period records like the
Dāmodarpur Copper plates (433 CE and 438 CE) in reign of Emperor
Kumāragupta I rather suggest that the role of guild chiefs was more in
the administration of justice rather than the general administration
(Majumdar, 1922: 64-65). The passage in Majumdar’s opinion contains
reference to courts presided over by the chiefs of different
corporations of merchants and artisans.**¹⁰³**

**Observations** **& Analysis**

Based on what we have learnt, we are thus, in a position to make some
observations on the functioning and importance of guilds. They have been
called by a scholar as the primary groups, fundamental in forming the
social nature and ideals of the individual caste (Rao, 1950: 51). The
extensive existence of the guilds in the ancient Indian society goes far
to illustrate how far the spirit of co-operation was organised into a
proper body for streamlining the trade practices and safeguarding the
traders and artisans interests.

Scholars have opined that the economic activity of the guilds,
particularly during the Gupta period closely resembles to that of the
later ones in medieval Europe.**¹⁰⁴** The guilds not only secured their
interests from the internal and external dangers but also created an apt
environment for individual craftsmen to develop his skill (Maity, 1957:
155). The economic life of the period found its best expression through
the organization of the guilds.**¹⁰⁵** Their importance was accepted by
the political writers of the time who are unanimous in stating that the
king had to respect the customs and the laws of the castes, districts,
guilds and families (Rao, 1950: 55). Guilds and caste seems to have
complemented each other in ancient India. According to Maity, ancient
Indian society and its stratification into numerous castes not only
helped to generate but also maintain an attitude of co-operative
organization in industry and trade. As per him, the hereditary nature of
the trades and occupations helped a great deal in the formation of
guilds and corporations.**¹⁰⁶**

**§ Guilds & the State**

However, the extent of freedom provided to the guilds in our texts to
make their own laws, rules and regulations etc has led some scholars to
suggest that Hindu society was “essentially pluralistic.” But, Rao
points out in his paper that nowhere in Arthaśāstra does Kauṭilya imply
that groups and associations should be independent or co-ordinate with
the state.**¹⁰⁷** Rao continues – 

“to the associations the state was not a mere policeman but a doctor and
as social reformer, playing the role of conscience and providence,
toughing the rectitude of each man’s life, the truth of his dealing with
his own conscience, the whole substance of character and conduct,
righteousness both of act and of mental habit. The groups never
distrusted nor regretted state interference and never attempted to
delimit the sphere of the state; on the other hand, the groups desired
that the authority of the State should be exercised over the whole of
the social and economic life of the community (Rao, 1950: 56-57)”

The state vis-à-vis associations like guilds did not only have
protective duties but also what are called promotive duties.**¹⁰⁸** Even
though guilds and other associations had the authority to make their own
laws, they still had to be in tandem with those of the state. The
guilds had to conform to the rules and regulations of the sovereign
devised to keep the integrity of the state (Rao, 1950: 60).

**§ Prestige **& **Perks**

The prestige of these bodies was such that one of the great epics of
India – Mahābhārata also gives information regarding the importance of
guilds. The importance of śreṇivala in Mahābhārata has already been
mentioned previously . It is fascinating to learn that in the epic, even
Duryodhana after being defeated by the Gandharva-s refuses to go back to
the capital as he felt humiliated and did not want to face the heads of
the guilds amongst others.**¹⁰⁹** The text describes the guilds as a
principal source of royal power and inciting them for treason is
considered in it as part of legitimate strategy against an enemy kingdom
(Majumdar, 1922: 42). Adhering to the duties of the guilds to which a
person belongs is considered very crucial. It states that nothing could
redeem the sins of forsaking the duties of the guilds.**¹¹⁰**

Guilds even had rights to have their own banners and flags bearing
emblems and implements of their profession (Patra, 2008: 149). Majumdar
has mentioned a crucial detail vis-à-vis guilds and their rights in
Harivaṁśa –

“An interesting reference to guilds is also contained in a passage in
Harivaṁśa which describes the fatal wrestling match between Krishna and
the followers of Kaṁsa. The arena which was built for accommodating
visitors contained pavilions for the different guilds, and we are told
that these pavilions, vast as mountains, were decorated with banners
bearing upon them the implements and the emblems of the several
crafts.”**¹¹¹**

Along with banners and emblems, we have learnt from many inscriptions,
some of which have been mentioned above that guilds had the authority of
having their own elaborate praśasti-s. Now coming to the point of what
does this authority of getting their praśasti-s composed meant? Actually
it signified their respectful position in public and helped in
increasing their social acceptability and political prominence.**¹¹²**
The fact that some guilds donated gifts and even lands for donation
clearly means that they also had corporate property i.e. property
collectively owned by the guild members**¹¹³** which according to their
standing, they used for philanthropy. However, it wouldn’t be wrong to
assume that the main goal of these organisations was precisely to
protect their own interests (Patra, 2008: 147). They also were much
organised for none but a fully organised body could thus shift from
place to place and yet retain its unity and public confidence**¹¹⁴** as
we have learnt from the example of Mandasor Inscription of silk weavers.

**§ Contribution**

The sheer number of the kinds of trade, industry and crafts in ancient
India was such that they needed such corporate bodies in order to
efficiently function and prosper. According to Patra, easy marketing of
some products would not have been possible without efficient
organisation that these guilds provided as it gave security from
robbery, wild animals, absence of proper means of communication and
natural hazards.**¹¹⁵** He continues that in ancient times, the
individual even if owning large sums, still depended on guilds for
investments as guilds supplied financial and legal assistance to the
merchants (Patra, 2008: 151) and also provided a certain sense of
security. The role of merchant guilds was also crucial in the sale and
the distribution of the surplus products of the village and the
cities.**¹¹⁶**

We have learnt that these guilds were also used extensively by the
public for permanent endowments in order to do their parts in charity
and guilds thus acted as trustees of public money. On what made guilds
such an attraction for such deposits, Maity gives following explanation
–

“..these guilds must have possessed a coherent organisation and long
standing reputation sufficient to induce the public to trust large sums
of money to them. Their business transactions must have been
characterised by honesty and fair dealing, otherwise men would scarcely
have made perpetual endowments with them. The efficiency of their
organisation is further witnessed from their longevity, expressed in the
terms of their contract: and even the death or the change of members did
not hamper their regular transactions of business and credit. What is
still more surprising and significant, the guilds were apparently
allowed perfect freedom of immigration as dictated by economic
necessities. But change of place did not affect in the least their
internal cohesion, their credit or their liabilities to the depositors.”
(Maity, 1957: 159)

**§ The Question of Banking**

However, there is a difference in opinion amongst scholars when it comes
to the role of guilds as banking institutions in ancient India.
According to one stream of thought, the evidence is inconclusive to
prove that guilds in any way engaged in money lending. The Arthaśāstra
evidence only suggests depositing of sums and not of money lending
(Dutt, 1991: 198). But to understand the situation further, we will have
to go back in time for clarity regarding the concept of money lending in
ancient India.

**Approach Towards Money Lending –** According to Dixit, approach in the
Ṛig Veda towards aspirations of wealth is very positive**¹¹⁷** and as
per her, the activities of borrowing, lending and repaying the debt were
even at such a early period, a very common phenomenon and default in
repayment of the debt was considered a criminal act “bordering on a
grave sin.” However, it is not sure whether at this time the practice of
charging interest was also followed or not (Dixit, 2012: 96). But from
the evidence of Baudhāyana, we learn that in the later Vedic times,
money lending was recognized as a regular profession**¹¹⁸** and was by
this time associated with the vaiśya-s (Dixit, 2012: 96). Though the
term ṛiṇa has always been used to generally mean debt but another word
kusīda was used to denote material debts distinct from the spiritual
ones (Dixit, 2012: 96) and thus the act of lending money but on an
appropriate interest was given legal and religious sanction (Dixit,
2012: 96). Dixit on the authority of Apte mentions that the practice of
money lending continued in what she calls the Upaniśadic age at an
annual rate of fifteen per cent.**¹¹⁹** The ancient Indian law givers
therefore, maintained a balance between dharmyavṛddhi and adharmyavṛddhi
i.e. between normal rate of interest and what was considered exorbitant
and hence, wrong (Dixit, 2012: 97). At this point, it is noteworthy that
two different terms were used to denote this difference – the term
kusīda was meant for legally and religiously sanctioned rate of interest
and vārdhuṣa for lending on an oppressive rate of interest. That’s why,
the latter was condemned. Therefore, in ancient India, money lending was
considered an honest business.**¹²⁰** It then means that money lending
on decent rates of interests was not unwelcomed. That’s why many
merchants and particularly the prosperous ones engaged in business of
money lending. However, it is interesting that the term vārdhuṣa later
by the Gupta times came to generally denote usury or specifically
interest on grain and does not seem to have negative connotations. But
that does not mean that exorbitant rates were not condemned for they
definitely were.

**Against Guilds as Banks –** The money lenders were called kusīdin and
vārdhūśika and according to Dutt, they have nowhere been mentioned as
the members of any guilds.**¹²¹** She continues that as guilds had
reputation of integrity and honesty, they avoided money lending (Dutt,
1991: 198). Guilds, in her opinion accepted public deposits and acted as
trustees of the sums but there was no regular payment of interest to the
depositors (Dutt: 1991: 198) and these were usually endowments for
religious or philanthropic purposes.**¹²²** However, many scholars
disagree with this view.

**For Guilds as Banks** – According to Dixit, guilds were an integral
part of the credit structure along with individual money lenders, the
village assemblies, the temples and even the state.**¹²³** Patra on the
authority of Gupta details that as guilds acted as trustees for
endowments, it seems possible that the money obtained was then invested
in loans to traders, thus fulfilling their function as banks of the
ancient India.**¹²⁴** He continues that if the permanent endowments were
made, it is safe to assume that short time savings with interest
earnings were very likely as well (Patra, 2008: 151). In such
investments the terms (samaya) were agree upon and the parties were
abided by it. The rate of interest on loan granted by guilds was higher
in case of unsecured loan like maritime trade loans because the risk
involved in the sea trade was immense**¹²⁵** as there was less chance of
recovery of these loans due to the inherent uncertainties of the
maritime trade (Patra, 2008: 150), particularly in the ancient times.

Maity also favours the view that these guilds used to function as banks
as well. They received deposits and paid interest on them which
according to him shows that they also lent money to others and thus made
profit in these transactions. His reasoning behind such conclusions is
that if they didn’t made profit or more investment out of these deposits
then it was quiet impossible for them to pay regular interest to the
depositors.**¹²⁶** Our texts anyway did not condemn usury in itself,
only its exorbitant rates. Thus, guilds would not have found much
difficulty in operating honest money lending along with their other
functions.

**§ Social Participation**

An important aspect of the guilds was their role in the society other
than the work of a trading corporation. The guilds of the time also used
to provide sums for many actions of social utility and for the general
use of the public like the facilities for the travelers in form of rest
houses, pools, gardens, drinking water for them. The construction and
maintenance of the temples was another important role that the guilds
frequently contributed to. The Mandasor inscription of the guild of silk
weavers mentioned earlier, specifically states how the guild undertook
the construction of Sun Temple in 437-8 CE, and then also repaired the
temple in 473-4 CE.**¹²⁷** There is even record of guilds undertaking
the construction of assembly houses. These various examples go on to
further solidify the engaging and crucial philanthropic role that guilds
played in the society and the mention of such actions of guilds by
smṛiti writers proves that it was a recognized aspect of these
corporations in which all the members were bound to contribute and was
not an example of one-off instance of charity.

“They also extended their helping hand to poor people who could not
afford to perform Saṃskāras which generally imply the religious
observances after the death of relatives, the birth of a child, the
sacred-thread ceremony, the marriage ceremony etc.”

– Maity, 1957: 158

**Conclusion**

We thus learn from the views expressed by various scholars on the
subject that trade and crafts, their production and distribution in
ancient Indian society were heavily organized under the system of
guilds. They were an important intermediate body between the state and
the individual and hence, were crucial to the ancient Indian society.
While it is certainly true that their motive was to safeguard the
interests of their profession but their activities were in tandem with
the other aspects of society as well, be it political or cultural and
the system worked in co-ordination with the state enriching the life of
ancient Indians.

**References**

-   **¹**Patra,2008.*Merchants, Guilds and Trade in Ancient India.*p.
    148
-   **²**Majumdar, 1922. *Corporate Life in Ancient India*. p. 15
-   **³***ibid*.
-   **⁴***History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II. p. 601
-   **⁵***ibid*.
-   **⁶***ibid*.
-   ^(**7**)*****ibid*.
-   **⁸***ibid*.
-   **⁹** Moti Chandra, 1977. *Trade and Trade Routes in Ancient
    India*. p. 65
-   **¹⁰**Majumdar, 1922. p . 20
-   **¹¹***History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II. p. 2.
-   **¹²**Patra,2008. p. 148
-   **¹³***ibid*.
-   **¹⁴**Majumdar, 1922. p . 23
-   **¹⁵***ibid*.
-   **¹⁶***ibid*. p. 24
-   **¹⁷***ibid*.
-   **¹⁸***History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II. p. 601
-   **¹⁹***ibid.*
-   **²⁰**Majumdar, 1922. p . 25
-   **²¹****History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II.* pp. 601-602
-   **²²**Majumdar, 1922. pp. 23-24
-   **²³****History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II.* p. 601
-   **²⁴**Majumdar, 1922. p . 30
-   **²⁵**Rao, 1950. *Guild and State in Kautilya’s Arthashastra.* p.
    53
-   **²⁶**Majumdar, 1922. p . 29
-   **²⁷***ibid.*
-   **²⁸**Rao, 1950. p. 60
-   **²⁹***ibid.*p. 54
-   **³⁰***ibid.*p. 55
-   **³¹**Majumdar, 1922. p . 26
-   **³²***ibid.* p. 28
-   **³³***ibid.* p. 29
-   **³⁴***ibid.*
-   **³⁵***ibid.* p. 31
-   **³⁶***ibid.* p. 27
-   **³⁷**Rao, 1950. p. 60
-   **³⁸***ibid.*
-   **³⁹**Moti Chandra, 1977. p. 85
-   **⁴⁰***ibid.* p. xiv
-   `41`Patra,2008. p. 148
-   **⁴²**Majumdar, 1922. p . 80
-   **⁴³***ibid.* p. 81
-   **⁴⁴***ibid.*
-   **⁴⁵***ibid.*
-   **⁴⁶***ibid.* pp. 84-85
-   **⁴⁷**Moti Chandra, 1977. p. 149
-   **⁴⁸**Majumdar, 1922. p . 33
-   **⁴⁹***History and Culture of Indian People* Vol III. p. 604
-   **⁵⁰***ibid.*
-   **⁵¹**Majumdar, 1922. p . 33
-   **⁵²***ibid.*pp. 41-42
-   **⁵³**Saletore, 1943. *Life in Gupta Age.* p. 321
-   **⁵⁴***ibid.*p. 322
-   **⁵⁵***ibid.*p. 323
-   **⁵⁶**Maity, 1957. *Economic Life of Northern India.* p . 158
-   **⁵⁷***ibid.*
-   **⁵⁸**Morwanchikar, 1980. *Early Traders and Trade Guilds of
    Western India.* p. 916.
-   **⁵⁹****History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II.* p. 222
-   **⁶⁰**Maity, 1957. p. 157
-   **⁶¹**Moti Chandra, 1977. p. 150
-   **⁶²***ibid.*p. 174
-   **⁶³***ibid.*p. 62
-   **⁶⁴***ibid.*p. 218
-   **⁶⁵**Maity, 1957. p. 157
-   **⁶⁶***ibid.*
-   **⁶⁷***ibid.*p. 160
-   **⁶⁸**Majumdar, 1922. p. 41
-   **⁶⁹**Maity, 1957. p. 161
-   **⁷⁰***ibid.*p. 156
-   **⁷¹***ibid.*p. 48
-   **⁷²***ibid.*p. 160
-   **⁷³**Majumdar, 1922. pp. 40-41
-   **⁷⁴***ibid.*p. 59
-   **⁷⁵***ibid.*pp. 55-56
-   **⁷⁶****History and Culture of Indian People** Vol III.  p. 604
-   **⁷⁷***ibid.*
-   **⁷⁸**Maity, 1957. p. 161
-   **⁷⁹***ibid.*
-   **⁸⁰**Majumdar, 1922. p. 41
-   **⁸¹**Moti Chandra, 1977. p. 173
-   **⁸²**Maity, 1957. p. 138
-   **⁸³***ibid.*
-   **⁸⁴**Majumdar, 1922. p. 31
-   **⁸⁵***ibid.*
-   **⁸⁶**Saletore, 1943. p. 343
-   **⁸⁷**Morwanchikar, 1980. p. 917
-   **⁸⁸***ibid.*
-   **⁸⁹**Maity, 1957. p. 156
-   **⁹⁰***ibid.* p. 158
-   **⁹¹**Saletore, 1943. p. 368
-   **⁹²**Maity, 1957. p. 159
-   **⁹³***History and Culture of Indian People* Vol III. p. 605
-   **⁹⁴***ibid.*
-   **⁹⁵**Majumdar, 1922. p. 44
-   **⁹⁶***ibid.* p. 45
-   **⁹⁷***History and Culture of Indian People* Vol II. p. 313
-   **⁹⁸**Saletore, 1943. p. 367
-   **⁹⁹***ibid*. p. 366
-   **¹⁰⁰***ibid*. p. 290
-   **¹⁰¹**Maity, 1957. p. 156
-   **¹⁰²**Saletore, 1943. p. 270
-   **¹⁰³**Majumdar, 1922. pp. 64-65
-   **¹⁰⁴**Maity, 1957. p. 155
-   ^(**105**) *ibid*. p. 161
-   ^(**106**) *ibid*. p. 155
-   ^(**107**) Rao, 1950. p. 56
-   ^(**108**) *ibid*. p. 57
-   ^(**109**) Majumdar, 1922. p. 42
-   ^(**110**) *ibid*.
-   ^(**111**) *ibid*. p. 43
-   ^(**112**) Patra,2008. p. 149
-   ^(**113**) *ibid*.
-   ^(**114**) Majumdar, 1922. p. 66
-   ^(**115**) Patra,2008. p. 150
-   ^(**116**) *ibid*. p. 147
-   ^(**117**) Dixit, 2012. *Ancient Indian Attitude Towards Money
    Lending…* pp. 95-96
-   ^(**118**) *ibid*. p. 96
-   ^(**119**) *ibid*. p. 97
-   ^(**120**) Patra,2008. p. 151
-   ^(**121**) Dutt, 1991. *Contribution of Guilds Towards the Growth of
    Banking…* p. 198
-   ^(**122**) *ibid*.
-   ^(**123**) Dixit, 2012. p. 97
-   ^(**124**) Patra,2008. p. 151
-   ^(**125**) *ibid*. p. 149
-   ^(**126**) Maity, 1957. p. 158
-   ^(**127**) *ibid*.

**Bibliography**

-   Chandra, Moti. [*Trade and Trade Routes in Ancient
    India*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.532337/page/n3/mode/2up).
    Abhinava Publications, Delhi. (1977).
-   Dixit, Shailini. [“ANCIENT INDIAN ATTITUDE TOWARDS MONEY LENDING IN
    BRAHMANICAL LITERATURE.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/44156194)
    *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress* 73 (2012): 95–103.
-   Dutt, Geeta. [“CONTRIBUTION OF GUILDS TOWARDS THE GROWTH OF BANKING
    IN ANCIENT INDIA: SUMMARY.”](https://www.jstor.org/stable/44142597)
    *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress* 52 (1991): 197–98.
-   Maity, Sachindra K., [*Economic Life of Northern India – In the
    Gupta Period (A.D.
    300-550)*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.135324)*.*
    The World Press Pvt. Ltd. (1957).
-   Majumdar, Pusalker, [*The History and Culture of Indian People – The
    Classical
    Age.*](https://archive.org/details/classicalage03bhar/page/n9/mode/2up)
    Volume III. Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, Bombay. (1954/Third Edition –
    1970).
-   Majumdar, Ramesh C., [*Corporate Life in Ancient
    India*](https://archive.org/details/corporatelifeina00majurich/page/n11/mode/2up).
    Calcutta University Press. Calcutta. (1922).
-   Mookerjee, Radhakumud, *[Local Government in Ancient
    India.](https://archive.org/details/dli.csl.5212/page/n1/mode/2up)*
    Oxford University Press, London. (1919).
-   Morwanchikar, R.S. [“EARLY TRADERS AND TRADE GUILDS OF WESTERN INDIA
    (AS GLEANED IN INSCRIPTIONS OF WESTERN INDIAN CAVE
    TEMPLES).”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/44141920) *Proceedings of
    the Indian History Congress* 41 (1980): 912–22.
-   Patra, Benudhar. [“Merchants, Guilds and Trade in Ancient India: An
    Orissan Perspective.”](https://www.jstor.org/stable/41692117)
    *Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute* 89 (2008):
    133–68.
-   Ramakrishnan, Majumdar, Pusalker, [*The History and Culture of
    Indian People – The Age of Imperial
    Unity*](https://archive.org/details/ageofimperialuni07bhar/page/n7/mode/2up%20Hemachandra%20Raychaudhuri,%20Political%20History%20of%20Ancient%20Indi),
    Volume II. Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, Bombay. (1951/Seventh Edition –
    2001).
-   Rao, M. V. Krishna. “[GUILD AND STATE IN KAUTILYA’S
    ARTHASASTRA](https://www.jstor.org/stable/42743274).” The Indian
    Journal of Political Science 11, no. 1 (1950): 51–65.
-   Saletore, Rajaram N., [*Life in the Gupta
    Age*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.13655). The
    Popular Book Depot, Bombay. (1943).

