+++
title = "Samskrit Education at a"
full_title = "Samskrit Education at a Crossroads"
date = "2020-07-19"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VG1wamVFOUVhM2RQVkUxM1RYcEpQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VG1wamVFOUVhM2RQVkUxM1RYcEpQUT09).

Samskrit Education at a Crossroads 



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1595168164cross-roads-samskrit.jpg)

There is a new found interest in Samskrit all over the world, in India
in particular. People are thronging to learn Samskrit. But at the same
time we see a sharp decline in number of Samskrit students in colleges
and universities, decline in sanctioned teaching posts and a steep fall
in scholarship amongst the Samskrit teachers in general. Samskrit
Education is at a crossroads.  
  
There is no point in blaming the Governments and their policies when we
the Samskrit fraternity ourselves have abandoned Samskrit as a language.
How do you expect the politicians to make Samskrit a compulsory language
when we ourselves have not made Samskrit the compulsory language of
Samskrit professors and teachers at least, leave apart the language of
Samskrit classes, Samskrit departments, Samskrit Universities, Samskrit
Vidyalayas or Mahavidyalayas? Do we really love Samskrit or do we simply
adore and extol it?  
  
A mighty question is what our priorities are as far as the Samskrit
Education is concerned. Mightier question is how to educate people,
policy makers and thought leaders in particular, regarding the need and
indispensability of Samskrit. The mightiest question is how to make our
own Samskrit professors and teachers understand the present realities
and become change agents.  
  
The objective of Samskrit Education is certainly to understand the past,
to appreciate the literature, to access the knowledge hidden in the
Shastras and to enrich, enlighten and empower our lives through
Samskrit. But it alone will not do much good for Samskrit. Only that
subject of study will be more relevant and sought after which provides
solutions to present problems of mankind, which caters to future needs
of the nation, which fulfills the societal aspirations, which leads to
new inventions and innovations, which promises to usher in a new era,
which throws light on undiscovered paths and that which welcomes and
accepts changes. Are we, Samskrit scholars, prepared to take up these
challenges?  
  
This is the time to debate on the immediate steps and long term action
plan to be taken for the restructuring of Samskrit Education. Did anyone
make any study on whether establishing Samskrit universities did really
make any difference? Is any scientific survey made of the reasons for
the decline in Samskrit students’ number? Is there any authentic
collection of data regarding the status of Samskrit studies? Is any
proper study made regarding the utility and shelf value of the PhD
theses produced by Samskrit Departments? Is there a single significant
experimental project in Samskrit pedagogy anywhere that made some impact
in Samskrit teaching? There could be a few hundred such questions which
might get “nay” as an answer. We have to go a long, long way. But, alas,
we haven’t even yet started the journey.  
  
Are Samskrit scholars not obsessed with ‘what to teach’? Is ‘how to
teach’ not equally important if not more important? Was a seminar or
workshop ever held on how to teach Samskrit at school level, college
level and university level? Is the demand that Samskrit should be made
compulsory and it should be taught from first standard itself, i.e. the
question ‘from which standard to which standard’ is more important or
the question ‘whether you teach THE Samskrit or you teach ABOUT
Samskrit’ is more important?  
  
Our immediate attention is needed on 1)How to teach Samskrit at various
levels and through various methods and approaches to language teaching
in order to make Samskrit learning more attractive and effective. 2)
Stupendous task of training teachers 3) Strategic transformation of
Samskrit education/institutions 4) Popularizing “Simple Standard
Samskrit” for the purposes of communication, medium of instruction,
administration etc. 5) Preparing Samskrit students for the fast
approaching Digital India and beyond.  
  
External search for internal problems may not yield results. Accusing
others will not bring change within. Hence it is time for us to throw
out our inaction and to spend our time, money and energy to transform
Samskrit education. Let us reprioritize and have a grand strategic
action plan for Samskrit. Let us give a new impetus to Samskrit
Education. Let us infuse hope and aspirations amongst Samskrit students.
Let us instill confidence amongst Samskrit teachers. Let service and
sacrifice characterize us, the Samskrit professors and teachers!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 3159 \| 19-07-2020 07:46
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

