+++
title = "Epistemology and"
full_title = "Epistemology and Comparative Philosophy in Confluence and the APA Blog"
date = "2016-06-22"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/22/epistemology-and-comparative-philosophy-in-confluence-and-the-apa-blog/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/22/epistemology-and-comparative-philosophy-in-confluence-and-the-apa-blog/).

Epistemology and Comparative Philosophy in Confluence and the APA Blog

At the beginning of the month, there was an interdisciplinary conference
in Kanazawa, Japan–the[International Conference on Ethno-Epistemology –
Culture, Language, and
Methodology](http://philevents.org/event/show/17921). Jonardon Ganeri
gave a keynote presentation, “Pluralism about Epistemic Cultures” and
Anand Vaidya, along with Purushottama Billimoria, gave a paper,
“Colonialism and the Impossibility of Empirical Ethno-Epistemology.” I
mention their talks first, although there were other people (including
myself) giving papers on Indian philosophy, because of two online
conversations I want to highlight.

First, the new online journal*Confluence*has published its [fourth
issue](http://www.verlag-alber.de/e-journals/confluence/#issue4), which
includes a symposium centered on Ganeri’s paper, “A Manifesto for
Re:emergent Philosophy.” This paper ([abstract
here](http://www.verlag-alber.de/e-journals/confluence/abstract_html?aid=60)),
looks like it echoes his presentation at the conference, in which he
also argued that “Only an epistemic culture, which is open to a
plurality of epistemic stances, he contends, can propel polycentric
modes of knowledge production” (from the abstract). Second, Vaidya has
[begun a series of three blog
posts](http://blog.apaonline.org/2016/06/21/the-inclusion-problem-in-epistemology-the-case-of-the-gettier-cases-1-of-3/)
at the Blog of the APA on Gettier problems and the “inclusion problem”
in Western philosophy. In them, he is going to present views derived
from Nyāya philosophy and Mohist philosophy that “\[show\] how
non-Western traditions may have responded to the Gettier examples, by
extrapolating from the textual evidence a general epistemic theory that
can be applied to handle the Gettier cases.”

Returning the conference in Kanazawa–this was a conference which brought
together philosophers working on what’s known as “[X-phi](http://xphi)”
or “Experimental Philosophy” with linguists (primarily those working on
the [Natural Semantic Metalanguage
approach](https://www.griffith.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/419064/Goddard_2010_OUP_Handbook_Ch18.pdf),
NSM) and philosophers doing Chinese and Indian philosophy. On the side
of Indian philosophy Eberhard Guhe (Fudan University) gave a talk on
“The Indian Blue-Pot-Paradox in Navya-Nyaya and the Chinese
White-Horse-Paradox”, I gave a talk on “Is Ellipsis Completion
Knowledge?” While neither of our presentations engaged with experimental
philosophy directly, these presentations, and our presence, along with
the others from diverse disciplinary backgrounds, means that
analytically-trained philosophers thinking about theories of
epistemology are becoming more aware of the philosophical resources
outside of the West. We’ve discussed
this[elsewhere](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/08/philosophy-meets-cultural-diversity/)
[on the
blog](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/03/08/philosophy-meets-cultural-diversity/),
whereAnand Vaidya has argued that, if one is going to engage in
experimental philosophy, one shouldn’t only be testing Gettier cases on
everyday speakers of Bengali, but drawing on *theoretical*expertise
from Indian, Chinese, and other philosophical traditions–and then
testing on everyday speakers of English. While Indian philosophy as a
broader fieldmay not wish to hitch its wagon to theX-Phi or NSM
movement,I think collaborative participation in these kinds of
conferences is important.

Thoughts?
