+++
title = "The West within the rest"
full_title = "The West within the rest"
date = "2016-06-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/05/the-west-within-the-rest/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/05/the-west-within-the-rest/).

The West within the rest

Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.

In the [previous
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/why-philosophy-departments-have-focused-on-the-west)
I discussed why academic philosophers have usually focused on the West,
and pointed out reasons why some amount of Western focus remains
valuable. Above all, I noted: “we are always already formed by some sort
of philosophical tradition, whether we like it or not and whether we
know it or not. And a great deal of what forms us is Western.” So
exploring Western philosophy is important to understand our own thought
better, where we are coming from.

There are at least two important objections to be made to that claim as
I have phrased it. First, one might well ask, could this Western
background not be an argument to study non-Western traditions *more*, in
order to enrich ourselves with different perspectives we *don’t* already
share? Well, yes, to a point. Part of philosophical reflection *is*
breaking down our established certainties. But this only goes so far.
The further a given philosophy is from our existing given starting
point, the more likely we are to view it as a bizarre curiosity –
something that might be of exotic interest in the way that animals in a
zoo are of exotic interest, but not a live option, not something that
can inform or make sense of our lives. To study the politics of the
Indian Mīmāṃsā school often tends to feel this way: their assertions
that human beings should follow the traditional ritual order of the
Vedas seems wacky at best, oppressive at worst. A political philosophy
course that taught Mīmāṃsā but *not* utilitarianism or Marxism would no
longer be *doing philosophy*; it would be [ethics studies and not
ethics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/ethics-vs-ethics-studies/).
To make non-Western traditions live options, there should be Western
philosophy in the mix. (This was a key reason that my [dissertation on
Śāntideva](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/05/lele-dissertation.pdf)
paid so much attention to his contrast with Martha Nussbaum.)

In a different vein, one might object to the “we” I have been throwing
around here. Sure, perhaps, “we” Canadians and Americans and Italians
have our ideas primarily formed by Western tradition. But that does a
disservice to the Indians and Koreans and Malagasy formed in a very
different context – many of whom, in this age of global migration, are
now enrolled in American universities. Surely a focus on Kant and Plato
will be as alienating to them as a focus on Mīmāṃsā would be to a
Frenchwoman?

Here is where I say: not so fast. Like it or not, the Western tradition
*has* shaped pretty much the whole contemporary world, certainly the
world of anyone able to get on a plane to the United States or study in
a modern university. True, this dominance of Western ideas comes out of
unfair and harmful colonial relations of military conquest, relations
that are still with us and that we may well want to fight against. But
that very project of fighting for subordinate groups against a dominant
order is itself one with a specific Western history, one going back
especially to Karl Marx, but before him to Jesus of Nazareth and earlier
Jewish prophets. Nowadays, critics of Western domination in philosophy
and other cultural spheres are often especially informed by [Edward
Said’s *Orientalism*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orientalism_(book)).
This book not only explicitly takes its subject to be the West and
representations within the West, bracketing out the question of what
“the Orient” was *actually* like, it also (just as explicitly) derives
its method from the very Western thinker Michel Foucault. The attempt to
find justice for the oppressed East takes us right back, intellectually,
to the West.

By contrast, as I’ve argued a number of times, this project of
liberating oppressed groups would have been [quite alien to Indian
Buddhists](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/)
like Śāntideva, let alone to the Mīmāṃsakas with their views of a right
and proper social hierarchy. That doesn’t mean it’s bad – far from it!
But a key part of the point of studying philosophy is to know where the
ideas we already think with come from – so that we know how they have
already been argued for and argued against. So we could say that a
Western focus is important even when we emphasize social justice – but
we might do even better to say a Western focus is *especially* important
when we emphasize social justice.

Much of the Western tradition is now deeply implicated in the way the
non-Western world thinks and even acts. Consider the case of [Jawaharlal
Nehru](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jawaharlal_Nehru), revered across
modern India as the country’s founding father. Nehru and his colleagues
were faced with the task of building a new constitution from the ground
up. This is the sort of task that demands reflection on political
philosophy: if one is building a state that will shape the lives of
billions of people, one should be thinking about what exactly a good
state is. In this process, Nehru paid little attention to indigenous
models; he derived his ideas from Western thinkers like [Harold
Laski](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_Laski), his teacher at the
London School of Economics. Nehru studied in the UK but was Indian born
and bred; he was not unfamiliar with the traditions developed in his
subcontinent. But *he* thought Western models were worth following. His
predecessor [Rammohun Roy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ram_Mohan_Roy),
despite being an *advocate* for Indian philosophy and “religion” in
general, similarly built his political thought entirely out of Western
materials.

Roy’s and Nehru’s choices matter. These men had access to local
traditions and to Western traditions, and they chose the latter. We
don’t have much respect for the ideas of *these* Asians if we dismiss
their carefully considered ideas (on the grounds of Western-derived
conceptions of social justice and diversity!) by saying that they
*should have* been learning from “their own” tradition instead. That is
not only an Indian phenomenon, of course: Mao Zedong may have urged
“socialism with Chinese characteristics”, but it was still
self-consciously socialism, shaped more by Marx than by Confucius – and
this in a country that did *not* have India’s experience of an education
system forcibly reshaped by the British. For these Asians, Western
philosophy was central to the philosophy that made sense *to them*.
Bentham and Laski and Marx were as much “theirs” as anything from
Confucius or the Upaniṣads.

So too, nowadays, a student born and raised in India or China who comes
to North America for university will have imbibed local political
debates which will have been fought on Nehru’s and Mao’s terms, as much
as American debates are fought on Thomas Jefferson’s. And one cannot
understand these Nehruist and Maoist ideas without understanding the
ideas of the Western Enlightenment that shaped them almost as much as it
shaped Jefferson.

The history of the West is *in* Asia now, not to mention the rest of the
world. (European thought is as important to Latin America as it is to
North America!) We can’t wish that history away. Our very reasons for
wishing it were not there are themselves informed by it. Is that a bad
thing? Maybe, but so is death – and Plato and the Buddha would agree
that death is something the lover of wisdom must learn to deal with, and
at some level accept. A Westernized world has made us who we are, and
that fact is not a thing that can change. By all means let us now
rediscover the oft-forgotten non-Western ideas that would enrich modern
thought within the West and outside it. But to do this truthfully and
productively, we – we around the world – do need to acknowledge our
Western background.
