+++
title = "Interview with Mark"
full_title = "Interview with Mark Siderits, a guest post by Debajyoti Gangopadhyay* (part 2)"
date = "2016-06-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/10/interview-with-mark-siderits-a-guest-post-by-debajyoti-gangopadhyay-part-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/06/10/interview-with-mark-siderits-a-guest-post-by-debajyoti-gangopadhyay-part-2/).

Interview with Mark Siderits, a guest post by Debajyoti Gangopadhyay* (part 2)

**Debajyoti Gangopadhyay: Let us now turn towards the concept of
*śūnyatā* in Buddhist Philosophy. *Śūnya* had been famously advocated by
Nāgārjuna as going even beyond the *catuṣkoṭi* —the four possible state
of affairs advocated by the Buddha, so that given any question, the
Buddha used to advocate four possible answers, namely Yes, No, Both, and
Neither, as in the Greek Tetralemma. The Buddha doesn’t seem to have
endorsed explicitly any possibility, but trace of his departure from
common sense ontology can often be traced in his advocacy of the ‘Both’
option. Yet, Nāgārjuna advocated to go even beyond the framework of four
possibilities!  
Accepting Nāgārjuna’s standpoint, what about the possibility to
understand *śunya* in terms of any so-called logical characterization?
Or is *śūnyatā* forever beyond any kind of epistemic qualification, is
it a Reality beyond any possible categorization?**

Mark Siderits: My own reading of the uses of the *catuṣkoṭi* in the
Indian Buddhist tradition is rather different.

The Buddha himself seems to have used the device in order to show that
with respect to some question all four possibilities involve a false
presupposition, thus rendering any of the four possible answers
meaningless and so neither true nor false. The rejection of each
involves use of a commitmentless form of negation that does not entail
affirmation of any alternative. In effect it functions like ‘Do not say
…’ (Note that when p has a false presupposition, no contradiction
results from asserting both ‘Do not say that p’ and ‘Do not say that
not-p’.) As for the apparent violation of non-contradiction and excluded
middle in the third and fourth *koṭi*s, these are avoided by
parametrization. As for instance the third claim the Buddha rejects,
‘The enlightened person both exists after death and does not exist after
death’, is to be understood as ‘exists in one sense’ and ‘does not exist
in another sense’.  
Nāgārjuna’s use of the *catuṣkoṭi* follows the same pattern. The one key
difference is that whereas in early Buddhism and in the Abhidharma
schools it is applied only to things like persons and chariots that are
deemed to not be ultimately real, in Madhyamaka the same logic is
applied to everything that is thought to be ultimately real. So if the
arguments in support of this use are sound, the upshot is that there is
nothing that is ultimately real. The only things that can be said to be
real are things that other Buddhists consider merely conventionally
real. Nāgārjuna is not affirming an inexpressible ultimate reality. He
is instead trying to get us to stop supposing there could be any such
thing as how the world is anyway. Nāgārjuna is not a Hegelian-style
absolute idealist. He is a global anti-realist.  
If this interpretation is correct, then any attempt to turn physicalism
into a form of ‘serious ontology’ will be incompatible with Madhyamaka,
and Madhyamaka arguments can be deployed against any table-pounding
variety of physicalism. In philosophy of science this would amount to
something like a global operationalism. What it would most definitely
not do is align Madhyamaka with anything like Ladyman’s structural
realism, let alone with anything calling for wholesale adoption of a
deviant logic. Of course a Mādhyamika might concede that our best
theories about such things as quantum mechanics might turn out to
require using something other than classical logic. But they would add
that this is not to be taken as showing that ‘reality is ultimately
non-classical’.

**DG: The crux of the present day debate (championed notably by Graham
Priest and a few others) about whether Buddhism implied contradiction
(paraconsistency in modern term) as an essential part of understanding
Reality or not evolves around this point – his implicit advocacy for the
‘Both’ option. Do you feel sympathetic to Priest and the others who are
trying to figure out paraconsistency in Buddhism as well as in Jain
Logic in this way?**

MS: I’m not competent to judge the case of the Jainas (though scholars I
trust assure me that they reject paraconsistency). But as will be clear
from what I’ve already said, I reject Priest’s interpretation of
Buddhist uses of the catuṣkoṭi. Indeed I’ve often pointed out to Graham
passages where Buddhist philosophers explicitly affirm
non-contradiction, excluded middle and the like; even a passage where
the Mādhyamika Candrakīrti calls anyone who utters a contradiction
‘crazy’ (*unmatta*).

**DG: Above considerations lead us once again to one of the most
important aspects of metalogical issues, namely the way Indian
mathematics and astronomy were affected by the dependence of logic on
metaphysics. Of course this issue is important in context of the Growth
of Knowledge in the Indian Philosophical context as a whole. So far
Buddhist teachings are concerned, certainly the Buddha had an implicit
agenda against Metaphysics. We need not get here into the social
perspective of this agenda in Mithila where Buddhism and Jainism
developed, or other contemporary doctrinal traces of this agenda in
Yājñavalkya’s teachings or in Sāṅkhya, but this agenda (against
metaphysics) was surely an assignment to defend for Nāgārjuna as well as
for the later Buddhist Logicians. How would you like to relate today in
modern logical terms the Buddhist defenses of their kṣaṇavāda
metaphysics or no-metaphysics/ontology) with the *catuṣkoṭi*?**

MS: If by ‘metaphysics’ you simply mean using philosophical methods to
try to determine facts about the ultimate nature of reality, then I am
not sure the Buddha is against all metaphysics. He certainly opposes all
‘speculative’ metaphysics: all attempts to use reason alone to prove the
existence of things that are by nature imperceptible. But his anātmavāda
as well as his rejection of the existence of an Īśvara and his apparent
acceptance of mereological nihilism look to me like metaphysics.
Nāgārjuna could be called anti-metaphysical insofar as his global
anti-realism might best be understood as leading to a kind of
quietism.  
Kṣaṇavāda was not taught by the Buddha, who merely claimed that
everything relevant to the continued existence of persons is
impermanent. *Kṣaṇavāda* was, however, accepted by all the philosophical
schools that later developed from his teachings, with the probable
exception of Madhyamaka. And this doctrine certainly looks like a case
of a metaphysical theory that is in principle not empirically
verifiable. Now the standard argument for *kṣaṇavāda* does not use the
*catuṣkoṭi*, it only examines two options: the possibility that anything
subject to destruction does so due to extrinsic causes, and the
possibility that destruction is intrinsic to anything subject to
destruction. And the argument seeks to prove the latter is true by
showing the former is false. So even if the catuṣkoṭi did involve the
use of deviant logic, their defense of kṣaṇavāda does not. So this would
not count as a case of adopting a logic based on its utility for
establishing a certain metaphysical theory that supports one’s doctrinal
commitments. In fact I’m not sure any Buddhist ever ‘adopts’ a logic;
since they all seem committed to classical logic, they would be better
described as simply using the logic they take to be commonly accepted.  
The one possible exception here might be Madhyamaka. Although they never
say anything like this, I suspect that if they were presented with a
convincing case for adopting an alternative logic in order to account
for the phenomena we observe at the quantum level, they might agree that
logical deviancy is acceptable in this specific area; that is, they
might accept the utility of ‘quantum logic’ or some such. But they would
hasten to add that this can tell us nothing about ‘the logical structure
of ultimate reality’. There being no such thing as the ultimate nature
of reality, the question of its logical structure simply does not
arise.  
**  
DG: In fact, metaphysics had been tried to be exorcised, from time to
time, from Logic or even from Science as a whole. We are aware of the
famous Viennese attempt against Metaphysics led by Carnap and his
colleagues; but none of these attempts has been successful ultimately.
Compared to the Buddhist agenda against Metaphysics, what message do you
suggest to read out of all these failures as well as the recalcitrant
Metaphysics at the same time?**

MS: If metaphysics is just bookkeeping for physics, then there should
not be any incompatibility between naturalism and the practice of
metaphysics. Doing metaphysics typically requires the assumption that
there is such a thing as how the world is anyway, but then since the
proponents of naturalizing usually share this assumption, there is no
source of conflict there. What the Vienna Circle seems to have been
objecting to is Hegelian-style speculative metaphysics. The sort of
metaphysics one finds in contemporary analytic metaphysics as well as in
much of the Buddhist and Nyāya material is more like ‘bookkeeping for
physics’: using philosophical tools to lay out the ontological
commitments of our best theories.  
Metaphysicians run into opposition when their practices lead to results
that outrun empirical verifiability. The trouble is, it is not at all
easy to say exactly why doing such a thing should be a problem. Vienna
Circle anti-metaphysicians tried to do this using assumptions derived
from the doctrines of epistemological internalism, semantic internalism
and internalism about mental content. But externalists question all
those assumptions so those arguments are not decisive. This difficulty
of saying why verification-transcendence is a problem may be why periods
of anti-metaphysics are followed by the resurgence of metaphysics:
Kant’s strictures are followed by Hegel, the logical empiricist
orthodoxy is followed by the rise of analytic metaphysics, Madhyamaka
quietism is followed by the return of Abhidharma-style metaphysics with
Diṅnāga and Dharmakīrti, etc. There is evidence both that bookkeepers
can have important things to say about how the firm should be run, and
that when a bookkeeper is put in charge the firm suffers.

(the first part of this interview can be read
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/30/interview-with-mark-siderits-a-guest-post-by-debajyoti-gangopadhyay-part-1/)).

\*Edited for the IPhB by Matthew Dasti and Elisa Freschi
