+++
title = "Deafness"
full_title = "Deafness"
date = "2013-03-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/03/26/deafness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/03/26/deafness/).

Deafness

In the days of old, deafness was arguably a fate worse than death, since
it left you unable to produce or understand speech. It also must have
reduced fitness to near zero, for those who care about such things.

Today, with deaf education and sign language, it’s a lot better. But
it’s still not good.

Deaf adults have poor reading levels (\~4th grade, on average), are far
less likely to graduate from high school and college, and have a tough
time making a living. Their unemployment rate is at least 40%, and seems
to be getting worse with time. There used to be some blue-collar jobs
that they fit pretty well, but those have become scarcer.

Severe congenital deafness hits about 1 in 1000 children. Some cases are
caused by various environmental insults, but most are genetic. One
particular mutation (GJB2 35delG) accounts for a fair fraction of
genetic deafness (and almost certainly confers some kind of heterozygote
advantage), but mutations in many different genes account for the
majority of cases. Prenatal rubella used to cause a lot of cases, but
that ended when there was an effective vaccination campaign back in the
1970s.

Because of the diverse mutational spectrum, \> 90% of the children of
deaf couples can hear. Many deaf people wish that their children were
deaf like them, but they’re wrong, of course.

I was wondering about the language skills of those hearing children with
deaf parents. It seems as if it might well be a disadvantage, but then
kids are flexible and robust. We know that typical between-family
variation doesn’t have much effect on adult IQ: but on the other hand,
parents who can’t talk are pretty far from typical. I dug around, looked
at a number of studies, but I’m not sure what the real story is. A lot
of them were small-N, statistically useless – someone wrote about three
kids. Sheesh. I got the strong impression that some of the articles were
*motivated*: they didn’t want to give the impression that having deaf
parents was bad for a kid, even if it were true. Still, that doesn’t
mean that they’re necessarily wrong.

Then the light dawned. Or, more accurately, the sun set. If the hearing
kids of deaf parents don’t suffer a disadvantage in language
development, it’s hard to see how the currently fashionable idea that
lower verbal skills in black kids are caused by parents who don’t talk
or read to them enough can be true. Yet it must be. And if they *are*
disadvantaged, then that disses deaf parents – and that can’t be right.
Does not Compute!

This happens a lot.

