+++
title = "Amish Paradise"
full_title = "Amish Paradise"
date = "2011-10-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/10/04/amish-paradise/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/10/04/amish-paradise/).

Amish Paradise

French Canadian researchers have shown that natural selection has
noticeably sped up reproduction among the inhabitants of Île aux
Coudres, an island in the St. Lawrence River – in less than 150 years.
Between 1799 and 1940, the age at which women had their first child
dropped from 26 to 22, and analysis shows this is due to genetic change.

This has to be the case for French Canada generally. There were about
5,000 permanent settlers, including 1600 women: they account for about
90% of the ancestry of the 7 million Francophones in Quebec (along with
a substantial number in New England). During that rapid expansion, genes
that favored fast reproduction surely increased in frequency. Today the
French of Quebec must differ significantly (in those genes that
influence this trait) from people in France, which has had relatively
slow population growth. Slower reproduction must be favored – lead to
greater fitness – in a more Malthusian society. Obviously the
opportunity for large family size are rare in such resource-limited
situations, and costs incurred as a consequence of a high-fertility
phenotype detract from fitness.

The same must be the case for old American types whose ancestors –
Puritans, for example – arrived early and went through a number of
high-fertility generations in colonial days. It’s likely the case for
the Mormons, who are largely descended from New Englanders. I’ve heard
of odd allele frequencies in CEU (involving FSH) that may relate to
this.

Something similar must be true of the Boers as well.

I would guess that a similar process operated among the first
Amerindians that managed to get past the ice in North America. America
south of the glaciers would have been a piece of cake for anyone tough
enough to make a living as a hunter in Beringia – lush beyond belief,
animals with no experience of humans. Truly, the Happy Hunting Ground.
Selection would have favored high reproduction rates. That process
would have reversed when the population saturated. Of course that
probably followed a real crash, when they wiped out the megafauna. You
might see signs of that old high-reproduction phase in ancient DNA.

The Amish must have experienced simultaneous selection for high
reproductive rate and an unusual personality type – individuals that
prefer the Amish way of life to that of outsiders.

Amish in Lancaster County, Ashkenazi Jews as a merchant/scribe caste,
Tibetans & altitude, pastoralists and lactase tolerance,
hunter-gatherers -> peasants : every significant, lasting ecological
change creates an altered human population, different in both body and
mind.





















