+++
title = "Hindu Ethics"
full_title = "Hindu Ethics"
date = "2017-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/19/hindu-ethics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/19/hindu-ethics/).

Hindu Ethics

Hi all

A seemingly innocent question about Hindu Ethics was raised elsewhere.
[Ram](http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/ppr/undergraduate/religious-studies/meet-our-tutors/professor-chakravarthi-ram-prasad/)
kindly referenced the
[Handbook](https://books.google.ca/books?id=SMshDQAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false)
that I edited. I wanted to respond the original context, but as I
started writing it grew and I thought it would be more fitting to post
here.

One of the outcomes of this project, I think, is that it shows not only
that ethics or moral philosophy is one of the most basic differentia of
Indian philosophy but that “Hindu ethics” is better treated as a mass
term, than as a kind term. So there is no single Hindu ethics, but
virtually all options of moral theory are also Hindu options. I also
think the volume sheds light on the role of literature such as the epics
in Hindu ethics that makes the question of whether it was taken
seriously as history or myth a false dichotomy. Rather such literature
was presented and taken seriously as an exploration of truths of moral
theory. But, before we get there, I want to say something general about
Indian ethics.

*Dharma Theory*

What made this collection possible for me was that I started thinking
about the topic of ethics philosophically, and not as a matter of
comparison with the Western tradition. Ethics concerns the right
procedure or good outcome and theories of ethics attempt to explain this
basic concept (*the* *Right or the Good*) from some vantage. A theory of
ethics will explain a perspectives employment of moral terms (terms such
as “ethical” or “moral”) as *entailments* of the moral theory. The
common concept of ethics (*the Right or the Good*) is what such theories
converge on while they disagree. I think this is how philosophers
approach moral philosophy and I think that if we study Indian thought
this way, we see that “dharma” is a term that is best explained by a
perspective’s theory of dharma (the theory *entails* the perspective’s
employment of the term) and the common concept is what such theories
disagree on: *the* *Right or the Good*.

There are at least four basic theoretical possibilities. The first to
prioritize the good in moral explanation and hence are *teleological.*
The second two prioritize the right in moral theory and are hence
procedural.

Virtue Ethics: The good (character) leads to or produces the right
(procedure)

Consequentialism: The good (outcome) justifies the right (procedure)

Deontology: The right (procedure) justifies the good (actions).

Bhakti: The right (the approximation of a procedural ideal, i.e., the
Lord) produces the good (outcome) when perfected.

With respect to Indian philosophy I think putting the matter this way
shows that some major lines are moral philosophical. The volume shows
for instance that Jainism is a paradigm version of Virtue Ethics (See
Jayandra Soni’s paper on the issue for this). Consequentialism is
thought to be exemplified by Buddhism (cf., Goodman, *Consequences of
Compassion*). But Kisor Chakrabarti’s article on Nyāya shows that it too
is a version of Consequentialism. Francis Clooney’s paper shows that the
Mīmāṃsā tradition is not only Deontological but Particularist. If you
are interested in the *Dharmaśāstra-*s and Manu, file that in here. My
papers on Yoga and Vedānta show that they emphasize Bhakti, but also a
general proceduralism that attempts to persuade us to abandon
teleological reasoning (Virtue Ethics and Consequentialism) in favour of
procedural ethical theories, such as Deontology and Bhakti.

Already it is quite difficult to talk about Hindu ethics: which version?
Add to this Neo Hindu options (for those interested, please see Ashwani
Peetush’s scholarly paper on the topic) and it’s quite clear that the
options within the Hindu tradition are practically continuous with the
options of moral theory. (Virtue ethics seems to be relatively
understated in the Hindu tradition, but I suspect that this impression
will seem implausible when you start delving more deeply in the Nyāya
and Vaiśeṣika traditions, and also when one considers the role that
Virtue Theory plays in Madhva’s Vedānta—something I talk about in my
paper on Vedānta).

*Literature (the Hindu Epics)*

What impressed me as I was thinking about a submission on the *Rāmāyaṇa*
(it was never published) and the early draft of Edeltraud Harzer’s paper
on the narrative ethics of the *Mahābhārata*, is that what these texts
have in common is that the main characters exemplify moral theories
either in what they explicitly profess or in terms of how they ruminate
on practical matters. The plot then is an exploration of the dialectic
of moral theories, cast as characters. I provide an account of how this
plays out in the *Rāmāyaṇa* (p.119-120), and Harzer’s paper does a
wonderful, scholarly job of zooming in on this dialectic in exemplary
portions of the *Mahābhārata*.

Is this history, or myth? In so far as it is about moral theory, I think
it is neither.

One further observation I might add is that history will be very
important for teleological moralists in the way that it would not be for
bhaktas for the following reasons. If you are a Virtue Ethicist, you
think that moral guidance and knowledge follows from the goodness of
paradigm moral agents, so if these paradigm moral agents don’t exist
historically you will not be able to account for moral knowledge. I
think this is why the historical reality of the Pathfinders for Jains is
important: it explains how their teachings came to be. I think this is
also why in Nyāya tradition so much effort is poured into proving God’s
existence: for theists, who are virtue ethicists (God, on their account,
is the paradigm good agent) the historical reality of God is important
otherwise they would be at a loss to explain their teachings.

But for bhaktas, whose Lord is a procedural ideal, there’s no such
pressure. Rather on the bhakta’s account, one has to engage in a
relational approximation of a regulative ideal to bring about a good
outcome (the merging with or instantiation of this ideal) and this does
not presume pre-existing teachings. Rather, it’s a kind of generative
act that involves the devotee engaging in an intense meditation on the
regulative ideal of practice: the Lord. The literature of this tradition
is a supplement to this practice. And moreover the Lord as a regulative
ideal is displayed in vividness in this literature, and hence the
literature serves to facilitate this direct vision of the procedural
ideal.
