+++
title = "Farewell to “Yavanayāna”"
full_title = "Farewell to “Yavanayāna”"
date = "2017-01-22"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/22/farewell-to-yavanayana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/22/farewell-to-yavanayana/).

Farewell to “Yavanayāna”

\[[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/01/farewell-to-yavanayana/).\]

Late last year I was delighted to see [a post from Richard
Payne](https://rkpayne.wordpress.com/2016/11/22/chagrined-retraction-of-a-naive-blogger/)
retracting his earlier post on “White Buddhism”, motivated at least in
part by [my
critique](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/of-white-buddhism/).
It is all too rare to see a human being change his or her mind,
especially on politically charged issues where passions run high and it
is all too easy to develop attachment to views. I commend and thank
Payne for his thoughtful retraction. On my end, he has provoked me to
make a retraction of my own.

Payne rightly recognizes that his former term “White Buddhism” does not
do justice to people like myself and [Chade-Meng
Tan](http://religiondispatches.org/rich-people-need-inner-peace-too-an-interview-with-googles-jolly-good-fellow-chade-meng-tan/)
who practise this form of Buddhism and are not white. He adds that “The
ideology remains and anxiously awaits a better name.”

For many years on Love of All Wisdom, I have used the term
“[Yavanayāna](http://loveofallwisdom.com/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-what-it-is/)”
to describe this new Buddhism. I now see that this term will no longer
do. What I continue to find helpful about the term is the use of the
[*yāna* terminology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yana_(Buddhism)) to
indicate that what we are seeing is a new form of Buddhism that is still
recognizably Buddhist – a major cultural transformation of the Buddhisms
that came before it, to be sure, but still of a kind much like previous
cultural transformations, no less legitimate than
[Vajrayāna](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vajrayana) or Chinese
Mahāyāna.

[Jim Wilton has
critiqued](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/of-white-buddhism/comment-page-1/#comment-39960)
my use of *yāna* (“vehicle”) in this regard, and he is not the only one.
He notes that in Tibet there is a concept of nine different *yāna*s that
describe progress on the path. But as [I argued in
response](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/of-white-buddhism/comment-page-1/#comment-39962),
that understanding of *yāna* is contested; the Tibetans have no monopoly
on the term (and indeed, it appears that some Tibetans do not understand
the term in that way). The idea of *yāna* was employed by early
Mahāyānists to suggest that theirs was a different path from what most
people practised; so it was by early Vajrayānists. And I think that the
new Buddhisms of the past two centuries make for a similar sea-change, a
path that introduces a similar degree of differences.

I continue, then, to think it is appropriate to use the *yāna*
terminology to refer to a certain set of forms of Buddhism emerging
since the late 19th century. What I can no longer accept is the *yavana*
part. The Sanskrit term *yavana* comes from “Ionian”, referring
traditionally to Greeks, and is a common Sanskrit word to refer to
Europeans. I used that term playfully to acknowledge the roots of the
new modifications to Buddhism –
[naturalized](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/),
textually based, focused on meditation, often politically engaged – in
Western philosophy. But by naming the new Buddhisms as Western, the term
performs some of the same denigration and deligitmation as “White
Buddhism” – more implicitly, but it is still there.

Thinkers today are very sensitive to the implications of race and
colonial power, which casts a suspicion on anything labelled Western.
When new Buddhisms are cast as Western, they come to look not only less
authentic (link to explorations of that?) but exploitative or even
“imperialist”, the tools of the British or French colonizers of the
Buddhist world. But to say this is to do an enormous injustice to
Anagarika Dharmapala, Walpola Rahula, Sulak Sivaraksa, Buddhadasa
Bhikkhu, S.N. Goenka, D.T. Suzuki, Thich Nhat Hanh, B.R. Ambedkar, to
say nothing of their followers. These men were not white, they were not
Western. They were not colonizers; many of them were colonized. And yet
*they* not only saw the value of the newly emerging Buddhism, they were
among its *creators*. “Yavanayāna” Buddhism may have its roots in
Western thought, but a very significant part of it *itself* is Asian.

One could of course accuse the Asian new Buddhists of false
consciousness, of being so brainwashed by their imperial oppressors that
they could not see their own culture. To which one can and should
respond: yeah, great way to be respectful of marginalized colonized
people *there!* Somehow *you* know what a true Asian consciousness is
and all these born-and-raised Asians don’t. That’s *so* much better than
all those white people who’ve disrespected Asia in the past.

That objection, then, does not stand. One could, if one wished, still
identify the word of the historical Buddha as truer than later
permutations in China or Tibet or elsewhere, as [Asians have
historically also
done](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/authenticity-then-and-now/)
in Tibet and elsewhere, and say that one’s own scholarly historical
research gives better access to that word than does the accumulated
Asian tradition. But that is on grounds of respect for buddhavacana and
the figure of the Buddha, not of resistance to colonialism or
imperialism. Can there be anything more ironic than non-colonized
subjects – which is the vast majority of us today – dismissing the
legitimate and thoughtful work of colonized subjects like Dharmapala on
the grounds that *their* work is somehow a form of “cultural
imperialism”?

So the problem with a term like “Yavanayāna”, I see now, is that it
lends far too much credence to such unfortunate dismissals – it leads us
to see Dharmapala and Sulak and Goenka and Suzuki as somehow “not really
Asian”, and in that way inauthentic, “imperialist”, or both. The
hybridity of the new Buddhism matters. It *is* Asian, just as it is
Western.

And so I have come to rule out “Yavanayāna” along with “White Buddhism”
as a term for the new Buddhism. I have also [ruled out “Protestant
Buddhism”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/).
But what then should we call it? Payne closes his post by saying “The
ideology remains and anxiously awaits a better name”, but does not
attempt to provide one. I will try my hand at doing so here.

Christopher Queen has [identified Engaged Buddhism as a fourth
yāna](https://www.amazon.com/Engaged-Buddhism-West-Christopher-Queen/dp/0861711599),
but the new forms at issue here are absolutely not limited to the
left-wing political engagement that that term names. At a minimum they
include a [naturalizing of the
supernatural](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/)
and a focus on meditation; typically they also emphasize scriptural
texts (leading to the “Protestant” label); David McMahan makes a strong
case that they also include the [embrace of interdependence and of
everyday
life](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-story-of-buddhisms-descent/).
Goenka and Tan are not politically engaged but they *are* part of this
new yāna. We could then simply *call* it “Navayāna”, “new yāna”, as
[B.R. Ambedkar explicitly
did](https://web.archive.org/web/20110208224554/http://www.navayan.com/navayan.php?about-navayan).
The problem with that term is that Ambedkar used it specifically for his
Indian Dalit Buddhist movement, and it has come to be associated with
them. Where Yavanayāna makes the new Buddhism sound too Western,
Navayāna makes it sound not Western enough.

What does that leave? “Enlightenment Buddhism” is not a bad term, as a
slightly punning title that points back to a) the weaving of the thought
of the European Enlightenment into Buddhist tradition, as all of these
new traditions do in some regard, and b) the common tendency for
Buddhists of this persuasion to translate *bodhi* (awakening) or
*nirvāṇa* as “enlightenment” even though there is no metaphor of light
or illumination associated with the indigenous Asian terms. It is not
yet widely used, though.

[David
McMahan’s](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-story-of-buddhisms-descent/)
“Buddhist modernism” is one alternative, pointing similarly to the way
in which these traditions adopt modern elements. My objection to it is
that many of the new Buddhisms situate themselves *against* much that is
modern. A key example is [Sulak
Sivaraksa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sulak_Sivaraksa), the Thai
Buddhist activist: his Buddhism is politically engaged, in a way that is
more characteristic of modern than of premodern Buddhisms, yet
throughout his work one finds a condemnation of the modern capitalist
world and a preference for a simple premodern life. He is [modern yet
anti-modern](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/03/modernity-and-modernism/),
so “modernist” is not a good term for him.

“Modern Buddhism” would be another alternative, but it seems too vague:
it could describe nearly *any* Buddhism today by virtue of the fact that
it exists in the 21st century and has access to technology, even if the
Buddhism has more to do with amulets and spirits than mindfulness
meditation. Instead, how about *modernized* Buddhism? That term is
inclusive of someone like Sulak who has adapted the tradition to be
something very different from its older forms, but nevertheless prefers
a less modern society – an [innovation through
conservatism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/05/on-innovation-through-conservatism/)
of sorts. I haven’t thought with that idea for long; perhaps there are
big problems with “modernized Buddhism” as well. But it’s the best term
I can think of so far.
