+++
title = "Some thoughts on the"
full_title = "Some thoughts on the terms śabda and “testimony”"
date = "2017-01-11"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/11/some-thoughts-on-the-terms-sabda-and-testimony/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/11/some-thoughts-on-the-terms-sabda-and-testimony/).

Some thoughts on the terms śabda and “testimony”

In the context of epistemology and *pramāṇa* theory, we often translate
*śabda* as “testimony.” It is reasonable to do so, since using “word” in
sentences like “Word is a genuine source of knowledge” is unpleasant to
the ear and confusing to modern readers. That said, it strikes me that
the Indian thinkers use of *śabda* makes good sense. Primarily, this is
because “testimony” seems to imply situations where one person is
self-consciously teaching another person; yet these are really a subset
of the more general way that we gain cognition from the denotative power
of language. Much of our day is spent in conversation where we give and
take knowledge, typically unselfconsciously, and largely without either
side approaching the situation in the way we would approach being taught
by an expert. When we do learn from experts, this is just a special case
of learning from language. I’d opine that this is why some medieval
Sanskrit teaching texts discuss philosophy of language as nested within
discussion of *śabda* as a *pramāṇa,* something that may strike modern
thinkers as mixing together two separate domains of philosophical
inquiry.What is central is the denotative power of language and how it
can generate true cognition. It is what underwrites all instances of
learning “from testimony.”

Secondly we can learn from words without them being an expression of
another’s true beliefs in the way that “testimony” seems to presuppose.
Admittedly this point is argued and debated both classically and in
modern philosophy; but to use an example I find compelling: I can look
up the distance between two places in Google maps, and for the sake of
argument let’s say no one has ever asked or thought about the exact
distance between the two places before. The program then algorithmically
generates words from which I learn something true; words which in no way
express a belief that was previously held by anyone. Here, I learn from
words, but not exactly from an assertion or from testimony unless we
want to significantly adjust what we mean by the latter two terms. The
reason I learn from Google maps in this case is because the words that
are being generated do in fact denote certain places and accurately
express the distance between them. That’s it.
