+++
title = "Bhoja’s comments on"
full_title = "Bhoja’s comments on Adhyeyam–a Guest Post by Satyanarayana Hegde"
date = "2017-01-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/06/bhojas-comments-on-adhyeya-a-guest-post-by-satyanarayana-hedge/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/01/06/bhojas-comments-on-adhyeya-a-guest-post-by-satyanarayana-hedge/).

Bhoja’s comments on Adhyeyam–a Guest Post by Satyanarayana Hegde

In the second pariccheda of Sarasvatīkaṇṭhābharaṇālaṅkāra (1025 CE)
titled śabdālaṅkāravivecanam, Bhoja defines at 2.138 the śabdālaṅkāra
Adhyeyam (Śarmā and Paṇśīkar 1934:304):

yadvidhau ca niṣedhe ca vyutpattereva kāraṇam  
tadadhyeyam vidustena lokayātrā pravartate

Bhoja at Sarasvatīkaṇṭhābharaṇālaṅkāra 2.139 divides Adhyeyam into six
subtypes-kāvya, śāstra, itihāsa, kāvyaśāstra, kavyetihāsa and
śāstretihāsa. He adduces the following exemplum for the kāvya subtype
(ibid.):

teṣu kāvyam yathā-  
yadi smarāmi tām tanvīm jīvitāśā kuto mama  
atha vismṛtya jīvāmi jīvitavyasanena kim  
tadidamuktiprādhānyāt kāvyamityucyate

No other poetician or rhetorician mentions a śabdālaṅkāra called
Adhyeyam. There’s no autocommentary on this section. The third
pariccheda of the Sarasvatīkaṇṭhābharaṇālaṅkāra is commented on by a
traditional commentator Rāmsinha and the fourth by Jagaddhara, but the
second pariccheda has no commentator. In the tenth pariccheda of the
Śṛṅgāraprakāśa (1050 CE), Bhoja repeats Adhyeyam as one of the
twenty-four śabdālaṅkāras, defines it as
vidhiniṣedhavyutpattiheturadhyeyam (Saini 2001:388) and enumerates the
same six sub-types as in the Sarasvatīkaṇṭhābharaṇālaṅkāra. Here too, he
adduces the same exemplum (ibid.:389) with the gloss teṣūktipradhānam
kāvyam yathā (ibid.:388). This section too lacks autocommentary as well
as commentary. There’s thus no premodern commentary on the śabdālaṅkāra
Adhyeyam.

Raghavan (1963:369) states (in a tone of exasperation!) that Adhyeya
“inaugurates a series of strange Śabdālaṁkāras” and opines that “The
idea is not clear, and further his classification and illustration
conveys a different idea altogether” (my emphasis). He ends by
mentioning (ibid.) “How Bhoja calls this Adhyeya or how these alone are
intended for Vyutpatti is not known.” Pollock (2003:49-50) invokes this
section and offers some observations on this exemplum while discussing
the genre-functions of śāstra, itihāsa and kāvya:

At the same time, the Veda does have meaning, which lies primarily in
its commandments of moral action (dharmavidhi). This is in fact its
primary signification, one that must not be interpreted away by recourse
to secondary language functions associated with kāvya, such as
implication. While kāvya, too, can have real-world entailments—from
reading Vālmīki’s Rāmāyaṇa one learns to act like the hero Rama, and not
like the villain Rāvaṇa—kāvya does not, like the Veda, prompt, let alone
command, us to do anything.

Let us see how this textual typology works in critical practice. All
kinds of texts—science, narratives of things as they were, and, as just
noted, kāvya itself—have the capacity to teach us something by
prescribing or prohibiting action, something Bhoja calls the educative
function. But they execute this function in very different ways, as the
following examples show (note that their formal organization is entirely
irrelevant to the discussion; all illustrations are verse). The
educative in kāvya is shown in the following verse:

If I call to mind that beautiful girl, what hope have I to stay alive?  
If I forget her and live, what point would there be in living?

This is kāvya, we are told, because “the expression itself (ukti) has
primacy.” However we might want to characterize the “educative” aspect
of the text (perhaps it shows how neither prescription nor prohibition
applies to the dilemma of unfulfilled love), it does not expressly
enjoin or define appropriate action, nor adduce an actual account of
such action from the past as authority. Its specificity resides
precisely in the self-sufficiency of the utterance itself. In śāstra, by
contrast, where prescriptive, injunctive, and related forms of discourse
are found, the particular wording or terminology has primacy….. (50)

This verse is ascribed to one Dīpaka in Vallabhadeva’s Subhāṣitāvali
(1500 CE?) and is listed at no. 1251 (Peterson and Durgāprasāda
1886:208) under the rubric virahiṇām pralāpāḥ. The lectio of the first
half of the first hemistich is given as yadi smarāmi tanvaṅgīm. This
verse may thus be classified under Pūrvānurāga Vipralambhaśṛṅgāra.
Bhoja’s stated aim in defining Adhyeyam as “that which brings about
knowledge of prescription and proscription” and which functions as a
“guide in life’s journey” seems prima facie completely inapplicable to
the kāvya exemplum adduced. The problematic is that there’s nothing in
this verse either grammatically or semantically to substantiate or
justify it being cited as an exemplum of vidhiniṣedhavyutpattihetuḥ,
summed up in Pollock’s opinion that “it does not expressly enjoin or
define appropriate action, nor adduce an actual account of such action
from the past as authority.” Pollock’s comment about this verse that
“perhaps it shows how neither prescription nor prohibition applies to
the dilemma of unfulfilled love” is however unclear to me. In what
manner would it be philologically justified to state that Bhoja
seemingly adduces an exemplum that contradicts the very concept that he
seeks to elucidate and illustrate? Also, Raghavan’s observation that
“How Bhoja calls this Adhyeya or how these alone are intended for
Vyutpatti is not known” raises another problematic issue-are all verses
expressive of Pūrvānurāga Vipralambhaśṛṅgāra to be postulated as
possessing an educative function of bringing about “knowledge of
prescription and proscription” that will “guide” the addressee through
“life’s journey”?

References:

Peterson, P. and Pt. Durgāprasāda, edd. The Subhāṣitāvali of
Vallabhadeva. Bpmbay:BSS, 1886.

Pollock, Sheldon. “Sanskrit Literary Culture from the Inside Out.” In
Literary Cultures in History: Reconstructions from South Asia, edited by
Sheldon Pollock. University of California Press, 2003:39-130.

Raghavan, V. Bhoja’s Śṛṅgāra Prakāśa. Madras: Punarvasu, 1963.

Saini, R.S., ed., intro. Śṛṅgāraprakāśa. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 2001.

Śarmā, K. and Paṇśīkar, W.L., ed. The Saraswatī Kaṇṭhābharaṇa by
Dhāreshvara Bhojadeva. Edited by Panḍit Kedarnath Śarmā and Wāsudev
Laxmaṇ Śāstrī Paṇśīkar. Bombay: Nirṇay Sāgar Press, 1934.
