+++
title = "saMskAras and paurohitya"
full_title = "saMskAras and paurohitya as a reminder to reinstate sadAchAra"
date = "2018-11-21"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/11/21/samskara-s-and-paurohitya-as-a-reminder-to-reinstate-sadachara/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/11/21/samskara-s-and-paurohitya-as-a-reminder-to-reinstate-sadachara/).

saMskAra-s and paurohitya as a reminder to reinstate sadAchAra

The following is an actual anonymized conversation, which may inspire
the use of saMskAra-s/ paurohitya as a reminder to reinstate sadAchAra.
Those that have given up their AchAra may retain some instinct to get
back to it – and such cases should be supported to the extant possible.

(Postscript to the below is that the ceremony did indeed go well
(despite KV making a couple of minor errors, and having to eat “ApaNIyam
annam” therein), and the Husband so far seems to be keeping up
sandhyAvandana and related exploration.)



Forwarded Conversation  
Subject: nAmakaraNa explanation and options.  
————————  


From: KV

To: Husband  
namaskaras Husband and Wife,

Firstly congrats! XYZ told me about your enquiry about whether I can
facilitate your son Child’s nAmakaraNa ceremony on \*\*\* at 11AM as per
the Apastamba sUtra. The brief answer is that I will quite
enthusiastically assist you with an elaborate ritual if you are serious
about the saMskAra aspect (as the sages intended), but will direct you
towards a good shortcut which you can yourself apply otherwise. For
clarity, it is necessary to clarify a few things:

– The Apastamba sUtra does not prescribe some elaborate naming ritual.
It is pretty short and simple – दशम्यामुत्थितायां स्नातायां पुत्रस्य नाम
दधाति पिता मातेति ॥ is the actual sutra. Haradatta the commentator
explains that this basically involves the parents feeding worthy
brAhmaNa-s a good sAttvika meal, declaring the name and finally having
the brAhmaNa-s bless the child with mantra-s. In later practice folks
included puNyAhavAchana, a gaNapati or vishvaksena pUjA in the
beginning, and further there are non-vedic rituals people apply –
getting the maama to write the name in rice etc… Nothing else. This is
to be done on the 10th day after birth. The name you give on this
occasion is often not the one used outside ritual, and has to follow
certain rules (so Child won’t do).

What you see beyond this is actually the elaborate (but beautiful)
jAtakarma ritual, which cannot be performed right after birth due to
modern life and the associated pathologization of birth.

Now,

case 1 (the slightly elaborate ritual case): if you want to belatedly do
nAmakaraNa as prescribed for brAhmaNa-s along with jAtakarma – that’s
quite delightful to see you yearning to tread the path of the sages the
best you can – and I will help you the best I can. If Husband (mildly
sleep deprived as he might be :-D ) starts doing sandhyAvandana twice a
day till atleast the appointed day – that will be enough to convince me
that we’re all serious about it. Alternatively, there are of course
local paNDita-s who routinely do all this for money without caring too
much about intention, clarity or seriousness on the part of the parents.

case 2 (the simple case): If all you want to do is nAmakaraNa without
jAtakarma – you don’t need my help except perhaps as one of the blessing
brAhmaNa-s. This is more suitable if all you want is to just have a
social gathering with some mild ritual paraphranelia.

Appendix, in case you’re curious why some folks may want case 1:  
It is common for humans across societies to have rituals and rites of
passage. But, saMskAra-s of the gRhya-sUtra-s are special classes of
rituals, addressing the particular needs of the Arya-s (= dvija-s =
brAhmaNa-s, kShatriya-s or vaishya-s), as they pertain to their
varNAshrama-dharma. So, it is quite possible for a shUdra to have a
naming ceremony, but that ceremony will be different from a “gRhya
saMskAra” (though possibly loosely based on it). This difference stems
from the fact that the sages intended for certain classes of people to
inculcate a certain higher culture and social role (brAhmaNa-s being the
conservative ritualist class, kShatriya-s being the dhArmika warrior
elites, vaishya-s being the dhArmika entrepreneurs). The sages thought
that these saMskAra-s and other observances empower an individual to
take up this great role as part of a multi-generational project and
attain heights of fulfilment.

Congratulations again on Child’s birth!

—  
—  
KV

———-  
From: Husband

To: KV

KV Thank you for your honesty and also your kind offer. I am super
excited to hear this and yes, I am in complete agreement with what you
said. It would indeed be superficial to perform a ritual ceremony
without seriousness and indeed one should introspect carefully why we
want to do this in the first place. While I had stopped performing
sandhyAvandana, I’d like to resume it for my son who will make his own
decision as he grows up. I intend to do at least 2 of 3 sandhyAvandana
going forward.

I understand that \*\*\* is not the 11th day and it is delayed and also
that we will need to think of a different name for the purposes of the
ceremony. I will think about the name.  
Husband

———-  
From: KV

To: Husband

Great! You’ll find good videos and procedures for sandhyAvandanam
online, in case you need them. The most important part of
sandhyAvandanam is arghya-pradAnam – gAyatrI japa, the prokShaNa-s etc..
are secondary. It need not be elaborate – a quick but unfailing vandanda
at the appropriate time is far superior to detailed occasional
performance. I myself remember restarting sandhyAvandana with Achanama,
2 proxaNa-s, arghya and short japa before eventually adding other
elements.

The particular rules that need to be followed (according to Apastamba)
when picking a name are: द्व्यक्षरं चतुरक्षरं वा नामपूर्वमाख्यातोत्तरं
दीर्घाभिनिष्ठानान्तं (=दीर्घात्परोऽभिनिष्ठानो विसर्जनीयोऽन्ते यस्य तत्)
घोषवदाद्यन्तरन्तस्थम् (यरलवा अन्तस्थाः।) ९ अपि वा
यस्मिन्स्वित्युपसर्गस्स्यात् तद्धि प्रतिष्ठितमिति हि ब्राह्मणम् १० . So,
the name should be 2 or 4 letters long, compliant with sanskrit grammar,
should be composed of a noun-part followed by a verb part, with a long
vowel and visarga in the end; or it should be contain the prefix “su”.
This will be Child’s ritual name (with the suffix शर्मन्) for most of
the rest of his life. You don’t have to think up something fresh –
xyzप्रीः will do.

If as I understand you’ve chosen “case 1” let me know – I will send you
a set of mantra-s to say aloud daily (you’ll be made to say it on the
nAmakaraNa/ jAtakarma day). You’ll also need to figure out his naxatra
based on his exact time of birth (a formulaic naxatra-name, used later
in rare rituals, will need to be used).  
———-  
From: Husband

To: KV

Great, thanks. Yes, do send the mantra-s, with meaning if possible.

His Nakshatra according to online calculators is Pushya

Regards,  
Husband  
———-  
From: KV

To: Husband

Child’s naxatra name is tiShya (the Sha is a retroflex which should be
pronounced by rolling your tongue as when saying ण). This should be kept
secret, like the ritual name – when ever you utter it, utter it with a
low voice.

Keeping in mind your current comfort level, sending you just the most
appropriate bits; please print it out and read it aloud atleast once a
day (stressing with an elevated pitch any vowel which follows an
underline or preceeds an overline, such as मि and ह in अ॒स्मिन्न॒हꣳ ) –

उपस्थ आधानम् (with this you place the infant on your lap)- अ॒स्मिन्न॒हꣳ
स॒हस्रं॑ पुष्या॒म्येध॑मान॒स् स्वे वशे॑ । (In him shall I find a thousand
fruits as he grows under my oversight.)

अभिमन्त्रणम् (thus you address him) – अङ्गा॑दङ्गा॒त्संभ॑वसि॒ हृद॑या॒दधि॑
जायसे । आ॒त्मा वै पुत्र॒नामा॑ऽसि॒ स जी॑व श॒रद॑श्श॒तम् । (from limb and
limb you arise, you’re born from my heart. I am born as you, son! May
you live a thousand autumns.)

मूर्धन्यवघ्राणम् (with this you smell his forehead) – अश्मा॑ भव
पर॒शुर्भ॑व॒ हिर॑ण्य॒मस्तृ॑तं भव । प॒शू॒नान्त्वा॑ हिङ्का॒रेणा॒भि
जि॑घ्रामि तिष्य। (Be a stone, be an axe, be uncovered gold. Of the
animals, I smell you with the hiim sound, O tiShya!)

दक्षिणकर्णे-जपः (this you whisper in his right ear) – मे॒धान्ते॑ दे॒वस्
स॑वि॒ता मे॒धान्दे॒वी सर॑स्वती । मे॒धान्ते॑ अ॒श्विनौ॑ दे॒वावाध॑त्तां॒
पुष्क॑रस्रजा । (your intellect may savitR (bear), your intellect may
sarasvatI (bear), your intellect may the two divine lotus wreathed
ashvins with bear )

मधु-घृत-प्राशनम् (with this you feed him honey mixed with ghee) – त्वयि॑
मे॒धां त्वयि॑ प्र॒जां त्वय्य॒ग्निस्तेजो॑ दधातु । त्वयि॑ मे॒धां त्वयि॑
प्र॒जां त्वयीन्द्र॑ इन्द्रि॒यं द॑धातु । त्वयि॑ मे॒धां त्वयि॑ प्र॒जां
त्वयि॒ सूर्यो॒ भ्राजो॑ दधातु । (in you intellect, in you progeny, in you
splendour may agni bear. in you intellect, in you progeny, in you the
senses may Indra bear. )

पृथिव्या अभिमर्शः (with this you stroke the earth on which he will lie)
– यद्भूमे॒र्हृद॑यन्दि॒वि च॒न्द्रम॑सि श्रि॒तम् । तदु॑र्विपश्यं॒ माऽहं
पौत्र॒मघꣳ॑ रुदम् । (Hey earth! So that I may see your heart (as the
shadow) situated in the moon for long, may I not cry at my son’s
distress.)  
यत्ते॑ सुसी॒मे हृद॑यं॒ वेदा॒हं तत् प्र॒जाप॑तौ । वेदा॑म॒ तस्य॑ ते व॒यं
माऽहं पौत्र॒मघꣳ॑ रुदम् । (Hey well bound (earth)! So that I may for long
know your heart (as the shadow) situated in the lord of progeny ( moon),
may I not cry at my son’s distress.)

The full set of mantras that will be used:

##‌ अभिमर्शनम्  
दि॒वस् परि॑ प्रथ॒मं ज॑ज्ञे अ॒ग्निर॒स्मद् द्वि॒तीय॒म् परि॑ जा॒तवे॑दाः ।
तृ॒तीय॑म॒प्सु नृ॒मणा॒ अज॑स्र॒मिन्धा॑न एनं जरते स्वा॒धीः ।  
वि॒द्मा ते॑ अग्ने त्रे॒धा त्र॒याणि॑ वि॒द्मा ते॒ सद्म॒ विभृ॑तम् पुरु॒त्रा
। वि॒द्मा ते॒ नाम॑ पर॒मं गुहा॒ यद्वि॒द्मा तमुत्सं॒ यत॑ आज॒गन्थ॑ ।  
स॒मु॒द्रे त्वा॑ नृ॒मणा॑ अ॒प्स्व॑न्तर् नृ॒चक्षा॑ (=नृद्रष्टा) ईधे
(=दीपयते) दि॒वो अ॑ग्न॒ ऊधन्न्॑ (=उधस्स्थानीये मेघे) । तृ॒तीये॑ त्वा
रज॑सि (=लोके) तस्थि॒वाꣳस॑मृ॒तस्य॒ योनौ॑ महि॒षा अ॑हिन्वन्न् (=बुद्धवन्तः)
।  
अक्र॑न्दद॒ग्निः स्त॒नय॑न्निव॒ द्यौः क्षामा॒ (=पृथिवीं) रेरि॑हद्
(=आस्वादयन्) वी॒रुधः॑ (=गुल्मान्) सम॒ञ्जन्न् । स॒द्यो ज॑ज्ञा॒नो
{दावानलः} वि हीम् इ॒द्धो अख्य॒दा रोद॑सी भा॒नुना॑ भात्य॒न्तः । उ॒शिक्
पा॑व॒को अ॑र॒तिः (=गन्ता) सु॑मे॒धा मर्ते॑ष्व॒ग्निर॒मृतो॒ निधा॑यि ।
इय॑र्ति (=गमयति) धू॒मम॑रु॒षम् (=महत्) भरि॑भ्र॒दुच्छु॒क्रेण॑ शो॒चिषा॒
द्यामिन॑क्षत् (=दीपयत्)। विश्व॑स्य के॒तुर् भुव॑नस्य॒ गर्भ॒ आ रोद॑सी
अपृणा॒ज् जाय॑मानः ।  
वी॒डुं चि॒दद्रि॑मभिनत् परा॒यञ् जना॒ यद॒ग्निमय॑जन्त॒ पञ्च॑ ।
श्री॒णामु॑दा॒रो ध॒रुणो॑ रयी॒णाम् म॑नी॒षाणा॒म्प्रार्प॑णः॒ सोम॑गोपाः ।
वसोः॑ सू॒नुः सह॑सो अ॒प्सु राजा॒ वि भा॒त्यग्र॑ उ॒षसा॑मिधा॒नः ।  
यस्ते॑ अ॒द्य कृ॒णव॑द् भद्रशोचे ऽपू॒पं दे॑व घृ॒तव॑न्तमग्ने । प्र तं न॑य
प्रत॒रां वस्यो॒ अच्छा॒भि द्यु॒म्नं दे॒वभ॑क्तं यविष्ठ ।  
आ तम् भ॑ज सौश्रव॒सेष्व॑ग्न उ॒क्थउ॑क्थ॒ आ भ॑ज श॒स्यमा॑ने । प्रि॒यः
सूर्ये॑ प्रि॒यो अ॒ग्ना भ॑वा॒त्युज्जा॒तेन॑ भि॒नद॒दुज्जनि॑त्वैः ।
त्वाम॑ग्ने॒ यज॑माना॒ अनु॒ द्यून् विश्वा॒ वसू॑नि दधिरे॒ वार्या॑णि ।  
त्वया॑ स॒ह द्रवि॑णमि॒च्छमा॑ना व्र॒जं गोम॑न्तमु॒शिजो॒ वि व॑व्रुः ।
दृ॒शा॒नो रु॒क्म उ॒र्व्या व्य॑द्यौद्दु॒र्मर््ष॒मायुः॑ श्रि॒ये रु॑चा॒नः ।
अ॒ग्निर॒मृतो॑ अभव॒द्वयो॑भि॒र्यदे॑नं॒ द्यौरज॑नयत्सु॒रेताः॑ ।।

उपस्थ आधानम्- अ॒स्मिन्न॒हꣳ स॒हस्रं॑ पुष्या॒म्येध॑मान॒स् स्वे वशे॑ ।

अभिमन्त्रणम् – अङ्गा॑दङ्गा॒त्संभ॑वसि॒ हृद॑या॒दधि॑ जायसे । आ॒त्मा वै
पुत्र॒नामा॑ऽसि॒ स जी॑व श॒रद॑श्श॒तम् ।

मूर्धन्यवघ्राणम् – अश्मा॑ भव पर॒शुर्भ॑व॒ हिर॑ण्य॒मस्तृ॑तं भव ।
प॒शू॒नान्त्वा॑ हिङ्का॒रेणा॒भि जि॑घ्राम्यसौ ।

दक्षिणकर्णे-जपः – मे॒धान्ते॑ दे॒वस्स॑वि॒ता मे॒धान्दे॒वी सर॑स्वती ।
मे॒धान्ते॑ अ॒श्विनौ॑ दे॒वावाध॑त्तां॒ पुष्क॑रस्रजा ।

मधु-घृत-प्राशनम् – त्वयि॑ मे॒धां त्वयि॑ प्र॒जां त्वय्य॒ग्निस्तेजो॑ दधातु
। त्वयि॑ मे॒धां त्वयि॑ प्र॒जां त्वयीन्द्र॑ इन्द्रि॒यं द॑धातु । त्वयि॑
मे॒धां त्वयि॑ प्र॒जां त्वयि॒ सूर्यो॒ भ्राजो॑ दधातु ।

स्नापनम् – क्षे॒त्रि॒यै त्वा॒ निर्ऋ॑त्यै त्वा द्रु॒हो मु॑ञ्चामि॒
वरु॑णस्य॒ पाशा॑त् । अ॒ना॒गसं॒ ब्रह्म॑णे त्वा करोमि शि॒वे ते॒
द्यावा॑पृथि॒वी उ॒भे इ॒मे । शन्ते॑ अ॒ग्निस्स॒हाद्भिर॑स्तु॒ शं
द्यावा॑पृथि॒वी स॒हौष॑धीभिः । शम॒न्तरि॑क्षꣳ स॒ह वाते॑न ते॒ शन्ते॒ चत॑स्रः
प्र॒दिशो॑ भवन्तु । या दैवी॒श्चत॑स्रः प्र॒दिशो॒ वात॑पत्नीर॒भि सूर्यो॑
विच॒ष्टे । तासा॑न्त्वा ज॒रस॒ आ द॑धामि॒ प्र यक्ष्म॑ एतु॒ निर्ऋ॑तिं
परा॒चैः । अमो॑चि॒ यक्ष्मा॑द्दुरि॒तादव॑र्त्यै द्रु॒हः पाशा॒न्निर्ऋ॑त्यै॒
चोद॑मोचि । अहा॒ अव॑र्ति॒मवि॑दथ्स्यो॒नमप्य॑भूद्भ॒द्रे सु॑कृ॒तस्य॑ लो॒के ।
सूर्य॑मृ॒तन्तम॑सो॒ ग्राह्या॒ यद्दे॒वा अमु॑ञ्च॒न्नसृ॑ज॒न्व्ये॑नसः ।
ए॒वम॒हमि॒मं क्षे॑त्रि॒याज्जा॑मिश॒ꣳ॒साद्द्रु॒हो मु॑ञ्चामि॒ वरु॑णस्य॒
पाशा॑त् ।

दधि-घृत-प्राशनम् – भूस्स्वाहा॒ भुव॒स्स्वाहा॒ सुव॒स्स्वाहोꣳ स्वाहा॑ ।।

मातुर् उपस्थ आधानम् – मा ते॑ कुमा॒रꣳ रक्षो॑वधी॒न्मा धे॒नुर॑त्यासा॒रिणी॑
। प्रि॒या धन॑स्य भूया॒ एध॑माना॒ स्वे गृ॒हे ।  
दक्षिणे स्तने प्रतिधाप्य – अ॒यं कु॑मा॒रो ज॒रां ध॑यतु दी॒र्घमायुः॑ ।
यस्मै॒ त्व२ꣳ स्तन॒प्रप्या॒यायु॒र्वर्चो॒ यशो॒ बल॑म् ।

पृथिव्या अभिमर्शः – यद्भूमे॒र्हृद॑यन्दि॒वि च॒न्द्रम॑सि श्रि॒तम् ।
तदु॑र्विपश्यं॒ माऽहं पौत्र॒मघꣳ॑ रुदम् । यत्ते॑ सुसी॒मे हृद॑यं॒ वेदा॒हं
तत् प्र॒जाप॑तौ । वेदा॑म॒ तस्य॑ ते व॒यं माऽहं पौत्र॒मघꣳ॑ रुदम् ।

संविष्टस्याभिमर्शनम् – नाम॑यति॒ न रु॑दति॒ यत्र॑ व॒यं व॑दामसि॒ यत्र॑
चा॒भिमृ॑शामसि ।

उदकुम्भनिधानम् – आप॑स्सु॒प्तेषु॑ जाग्रत॒ रक्षाꣳ॑सि॒ निरि॒तो नु॑दद्ध्वम्
।  
———-  
From: Husband

To: KV

Thank you KV! This is terrific.

Husband  
———-  
From: Husband

To: KV

KV,

If it is not much of a hassle, may I request that you send me a recorded
piece of the mantra that I can repeat after, if you can?

I tried reading Vedic accent and I am not sure that I can get the
udatta-anudatta etc and may be even some of the pronunciations right.

Thanks,  
Husband  
———-  
From: KV

To: Husband

Sent a couple of audios on whatsapp with slightly exaggerated natural
conversational accent. Please practice aloud only when in a state of
ritual purity (ie having done an Achamana, and being in a pleasant state
of mind).

How’s your sandhyAvandana practice going? Also, please send me your
abhivAdana on whatsapp since it is a common place for mistakes despite
being in many cases the only tenuous link one has to the awareness of
belonging to the bloodline of our ancestors the sages.

———-  
From: KV

To: Husband

PS: Try to identify and arrange for at least 3 \*practising\* brAhmaNa-s
– the more mantra power they have the better – who will bless your child
and the occasion.  
(As Apastamba says: शुचीन्मन्त्रवतः सर्वकृत्येषु भोजयेत् ११)  
———-  
From: Husband

To: KV

Thank you KV.

I sent my Abhivādana on WhatsApp.

Yes I am meditating on mostly two of the Sandhyas and occasionally one
depending on my sleep cycle. I only seem to remember the essentials from
the past – aachamanam, pranayamam, sankalpam, arghyam and Gayatri
mantram.

I will ask around which of my relatives are practicing Brahmins. Can it
include a host (my father-in-law)?

Husband

