+++
title = "The Apūrva in Prābhākara"
full_title = "The Apūrva in Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā"
date = "2021-03-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/25/the-apurva-in-prabhakara-mima%e1%b9%83sa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/25/the-apurva-in-prabhakara-mima%e1%b9%83sa/).

The Apūrva in Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā

Dear readers,  
  
For my final blog post as guest host for March 2021, I’ll begin by
putting the concept of the *apūrva* on the table, and then I’ll shift
into my interpretation of Śālikanātha’s new model of the archetypal
Vedic command. I should note that not everyone in the field agrees with
my new interpretation of what *apūrva* means in Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā; that
is cool, I’m happy to debate further.  
  
First, to the concept of the *apūrva.* Mīmāṃsā begins with an
investigation into the authority of the Veda via The Chapter on Reason,
and only subsequently investigates the meaning of the Veda through
hermeneutic principles. This means that with the Veda’s authority first
established, our investigation into what the Veda tells us about
extra-worldly matters must take everything the Veda communicates as
truths that cannot subsequently be cancelled (but the onus is on us as
interpreters to figure out exactly *what* the Veda communicates). For
Śabara and Kumārila, the archetypal Vedic injunction: *svargakāmo
yajeta* communicates sacrifice as the means to heaven, as for them this
sentence has the semantic structure: *yāgena svargam bhāvayet* (‘one
should bring heaven into being via sacrifice’). That is, with the Veda’s
authority already established via The Chapter on Reason, this
cause-n-effect relationship must be true. However, Śabara and Kumārila
need a solution to the latency problem, i.e., to the issue that
sacrifice and heaven defies our normative expectations of cause-n-effect
relationships as immediate. To explain: if I shoot one billiard ball
into another, they don’t stay connected motionless for several seconds
and *then* the second billiard ball moves, rather the second billiard
ball begins to move instantly upon contact with the first ball. However,
heaven is not experienced instantly upon the performance of sacrifice:
how can what the Veda tells us, that sacrifice produces heaven, be true?
Their answer to this latency problem is the *apūrva*, literally: ‘the
un-precedented (*a-pūrva*).’ The sacrifice produces an *apūrva*, a
trans-temporally stable potency, which in turn produces heaven at a much
later time. Thus, for Śabara and Kumārila the *apūrva* is necessarily
postulated based on what the Veda tells us about sacrifice as the means
to heaven, even though the language of the Veda is not explicit on the
*apūrva*.

With the concept of the *apūrva* tabled, let us now turn to my
interpretation of Śālikanātha’s new theory (i.e., unattested in
Prabhākara’s *Bṛhatī*). In the *Vākyārthamātṛā II*, Śālikanātha presents
his view on the *apūrva* as a direct engagement with Kumārila (in
Subrahmanya Sastri’s 1961 edition, this is pp. 439-40). How can I be
certain Śālikanātha is engaging Kumārila specifically? Let me explain:  
  
Kumārila’s view is on a continuum with Śabara’s in that Kumārila accepts
the *apūrva* as the solution to the latency problem. However, Kumārila
faces a real post-Śabara Mīmāṃsā-internal interlocutor who denies the
*apūrva*’s existence on the grounds that there is no epistemological
instrument to cognize it (see Cummins 2021, pp. 314-5 and notes 114-6).
Kumārila’s answer to his real interlocutor on the epistemological
instrument behind how we understand the *apūrva* is necessary linguistic
presumption (*śrutārthāpatti*): we postulate a term in the text which is
not actually there to communicate this term-referent (i.e., the
*apūrva*), based on the otherwise impossibility of sacrifice as a means
to heaven (which we, as Mīmāṃsakas, accept as a truth based on the
Veda’s infallible authority). Thus, *yāgena svargam bhāvayet* ≈ *yāgena
**apūrveṇa** svargam bhāvayet*. Kumārila ad MS 2.1.5 is where we first
find necessary linguistic presumption (*śrutārthāpatti*) as the
epistemological instrument behind the *apūrva*.

In the *Vākyārthamātṛkā II* (Subrahmanya Sastri’s 1961 edition, pp.
439-40), Śālikanātha says: ‘*no, the* apūrva *is not understood through
necessary presumption (*arthāpatti*), it is understood through the
language itself’* as per the Prābhākara theory of linguistic
signification that terms directly signify their referents as
co-construed (*anvitābhidhāna*). In Cummins 2021 pp. 315-6, I provide a
translation and discussion of the relevant passage where Śālikanātha’s
prima facie interlocutor says the *apūrva* is understood through
necessary presumption (*arthāpatti*). Thus, it is beyond doubt here that
Śālikanātha’s prima facie interlocutor is a version of Kumārila when the
concept of the *apūrva* rears its head here in Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā, since
Kumārila is the *only* person to hold this specific position that
necessary postulation (*arthāpatti*) is the epistemological instrument
by which we understand the *apūrva*. Moreover, Śālikanātha must have a
shared understanding with Kumārila over what the object of debate is. To
say: ‘*it* is not understood through *arthāpatti*, *it* is understood
through *anvitābhidhāna*’ requires a shared understanding of what *it*
is (even if specifics of its nature are under debate). Otherwise, their
conversation would cease to be coherent. And no one would disagree that
for Kumārila the *apūrva* is the sacrifice’s trans-temporal potency to
produce its result.

Śālikanātha’s position against Kumārila that the *apūrva* is directly
signified by language (i.e., by an actual morpheme in *svargakāmo
yajeta*) allows Śālikanātha to maintain the further position that the
specific verbal suffix *-eta* directly signifies the *apūrva* (whereas
on Kumārila’s position of ‘necessary linguistic presumption’, we
postulate an *extra* term not there in the text to communicate the
*apūrva* –> explained above: *yāgena **apūrveṇa** svargam bhāvayet*). In
turn, saying the *apūrva* is directly signified by the verbal suffix
–*eta* allows Śālikanātha to subordinately incorporate Kumārila and
Maṇḍana’s theory of *bhāvanā* (the ‘bringing into being,’ best
understood as intentional action to produce an outcome). Here is how:  
  
All Mīmāṃsakas agree that in *yajeta* the verbal suffix –*eta* is the
predominant element in relation to the verbal root *yaj-*, and Śabara,
Kumārila and Maṇḍana all hold that the suffix –*eta* directly signifies
the (in their view, predominant) *bhāvanā*. Śālikanātha accepts that the
verbal suffix –*eta* signifies the ‘bringing into being’ (*bhāvanā*),
but by advancing the position that the verbal suffix –*eta* also
directly signifies the *apūrva*, opens the door for the *bhāvanā* to be
positioned as the subordinate linguistic element on the basis of its
ontological subordination (if both referents are communicated by the
same suffix, we must look to the ontological structure to determine
their relative hierarchy). Thus, when both the *apūrva* (the immediate
effect of the *bhāvanā*) and the *bhāvanā* (the immediate cause of the
*apūrva*) are established as directly signified by the verbal suffix
–*eta*, this opens the door for the *bhāvanā* to be positioned as
*linguistically* subordinate to the *apūrva* on the grounds of its
ontological subordination in the causal chain of events.  
  
The payout of this is a new model for Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā whereupon the
bringing into being (*bhāvanā*) is subordinately incorporated to the
*apūrva –* a model entirely unattested in Prabhākara’s own treatise(s).
I will defer the interested reader to my recent article in JHS (esp.
Cummins 2021 pp. 318-322), but put succinctly, the way this new model
works is:  
  
On Prabhākara’s theory of the command (*niyoga*), the commandee feels an
obligation to the action expressed by the verbal root (e.g., *yaj-*
‘sacrifice’), and then Śabara’s injunctive theory kicks in at moment two
the computational process. However, Prabhākara doesn’t really have a
solution for where Śabara’s concept of bringing into being (*bhāvanā*)
fits into the command’s computational process, he largely side-steps the
issue.  
  
In contrast, Śālikanātha has a solution to this very problem via the
*apūrva*. On Śālikanātha’s new model, the commandee feels an obligation
towards the *apūrva*, not the action (e.g., sacrifice). The payout is
the exclusion of the bringing into being (*bhāvanā*) from being the item
towards which one feels an obligation towards at moment one of the
command’s computational process. Then, at moment two of the
computational process – when *bhāvanā* theory explicitly kicks in
(remember that for Śālikanātha, the *bhāvanā* is still directly
signified by the verbal suffix –*eta*) – the *bhāvanā* is incorporated
as subordinate in the language hierarchy to the *apūrva*. In short, this
allows Śālikanātha to account for the *bhāvanā* and also systematically
incorporate Kumārila’s new philosophical resources in a Prābhākara model
(for an explanation of this in detail with citations, please see my
article in JHS pp. 318-322).
