+++
title = "Prābhākāra Mīmāṃsā and"
full_title = "Prābhākāra Mīmāṃsā and the Rise of Nyāya’s Philosophy of Language"
date = "2021-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/01/prabhakara-mima%e1%b9%83sa-and-the-rise-of-nyayas-philosophy-of-language/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/01/prabhakara-mima%e1%b9%83sa-and-the-rise-of-nyayas-philosophy-of-language/).

Prābhākāra Mīmāṃsā and the Rise of Nyāya’s Philosophy of Language

Dear fellow readers,

Hi. My name is Patrick, and I’m a Doctoral Candidate at Cornell
University. For the month of March 2021, I’ll be taking the lead in this
blog series for graduate students to discuss their research. In this
first blog post, I’ll speak briefly about my dissertation project:

My research interests primarily orbit around philosophy of language in
premodern South Asia, and my dissertation project seeks to tell an
intellectual history of Gaṅgeśa’s philosophy of language in the
*Tattvacintāmaṇi* (c. 1320 CE).

My intellectual-historical narrative is tied together by the theme of
appropriating resources and positions from Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā: Prābhākara
Mīmāṃsā emerged with Śālikanātha (c. 900 CE?) as on the cutting edge of
the field of philosophy of language through his antithetical engagement
with Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā to coopt their philosophical resources within a
Prābhākara model, and then Naiyāyikas in turn developed their own
philosophy of language antithetical to the then-dominant textual
tradition of Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā, primarily by rehabilitating and
refining positions from Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā, and especially from Maṇḍanamiśra
(active late 600s/early 700s?).

On the content/philosophical side of the project, one of my core theses
is that the competing systems on philosophy of language were primarily
concerned with the topic of human motivational behaviour. For the
Naiyāyikas, humans are rational agents and are motivated by a
calculation of self-interest, whereas for the Prābhākaras, humans’
initial impulse to act is disinterested from the result and stems from a
sense of duty or obligation. The framework in which this debate occurred
was a perception model of language (i.e., how the language-listener
computes meaning), and specifically commands. One of my goals is to show
how other topics within their systems harmonize with their positions on
this core topic.

I have published some preliminary writing which will feed into the first
section of my dissertation as an article in the *Journal of Hindu
Studies* titled: ‘Commands and the Doctrine of the *Apūrva* in
Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā’ (hereafter, Cummins 2021). In the article I argue
that Śālikanātha developed a new model of the archetypal Vedic command
*svargakāmo yajeta* (‘the man desiring heaven must sacrifice’) for
Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā whereupon the *apūrva* is directly signified by the
command suffix –*eta*. I attempt to show that this reconfiguration
allows Śālikanātha to subordinate Kumārila and Maṇḍana’s theories of
*bhāvanā* (‘bringing into being’) while coopting their philosophical
resources. The first section of my dissertation will expand upon the
article, covering other topics in Śālikanātha’s treatises where this
theme is replicated.

While Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā rose to a position of dominance in the wake of
Śālikanātha, this is only now gaining some recognition in the field:
much of the post-Śālikanātha corpus is lost and the extant pieces remain
deeply understudied (see Cummins 2021 pp. 4-5, 36-7). And on the
flip-side, scholastic attention given to Nyāya in the past century has
primarily focused on their theories of perception and inference, not
their philosophy of language, even though philosophy of language was an
equal concern for the Naiyāyikas themselves (e.g., the *Śabdakhaṇḍa*
constitutes 1/3^(rd) of the whole *Tattvacintāmaṇi*). Given all this, it
is unsurprising that our field hasn’t realized that Gaṅgeśa was the
final voice in several centuries of responses to Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā.
Gaṅgeśa was, as his son Vardhamāna called him, a master of Mīmāṃsā (lit:
a seer of the far shore of Mīmāṃsā \[*mīmāṃsāpāradṛśvane*\], vs. 3 of
the *Prakāśa* on the *Nyāyakusumāñjali*). The very language we typically
think of as synonymous with later Nyāya – *avacchedaka*s and whatnot –
is all but absent in Gaṅgeśa’s *Śabdakhaṇḍa*. Instead, the language that
permeates the *Śabdakhaṇḍa* is the language of Mīmāṃsā.

The biggest challenge in this project is one of reconstruction. Gaṅgeśa
engages Prābhākara interlocutors’ whose treatises are no longer extant,
and Gaṅgeśa does not name names. To compound the problem, Gaṅgeśa’s
commentators in the following centuries appear to not have direct access
to Gaṅgeśa’s source materials nor is their commentarial modality
historicist. This leaves me in the situation of trying to figure out if
a Prābhākara interlocutor’s position on a given topic in the
*Śabdakhaṇḍa* tracks with any Prābhākara interlocutors’ positions on
other topics (and conclusions from this methodology can only go so far).
Similarly, on the Nyāya side of things the treatises of two important
Naiyāyikas are also lost: Trilocana (pre-Vācaspati) and Soṇḍāda
(post-Śaśadhara but pre-Gaṅgeśa). Thus, although much *can* be said with
certainty, there will nevertheless be gaps and hypotheses which can only
be resolved via the emergence of new materials.  
  
One of my working hypotheses is that this conversation between
Prābhākaras and Naiyāyikas primarily happened in the Mithilā to Bengal
region. While it’s not at all a controversial claim on the Naiyāyika
side of things that Vācaspati, Udayana and Gaṅgeśa were all from the
Mithilā region, it is perhaps more controversial on the Prābhākara side
(as Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā was well-studied in the South too, as confirmed
by inscriptional evidence and engagement by Vedāntins). However, I’ve
found evidence that points to Śālikanātha as from Bengal (see Cummins
2021 n. 109). Likewise, no other Sanskrit intellectual seems to have
direct access to Gaṅgeśa’s immediate Prābhākara interlocutors’ materials
–> this makes it so I can’t but seriously consider the possibility that
these Prābhākaras were from his immediate locale. I need to scour the
inscriptional evidence from the greater Mithilā and Bengal region for
references to Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā (it’s high on my to-do list!), but I
would be love to hear if anyone has further thoughts on this issue.
