+++
title = "The reasons for"
full_title = "The reasons for nondualism"
date = "2021-03-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/21/the-reasons-for-nondualism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/21/the-reasons-for-nondualism/).

The reasons for nondualism

I [said previously of
nondualism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/perennial-nondualism/),
“I’m not sure I can think of any other major philosophical idea that
flowered so much in so many different places, more or less
independently. I think that gives us *prima facie* reason to think the
nondualists were on to something important.” Nathan reasonably [took me
to task for this
claim](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/perennial-nondualism/#comment-41109)
in a comment: “Amod seems to overlook that ideas can be successful
without being true.”

I don’t think it’s fair to say I *overlooked* that point: I said the
pervasiveness gave us reason *prima facie* – at first glance – to say
think the nondualists were on to something. That doesn’t mean nondualism
is true, and I didn’t say that it was. Second glances might reveal
something different. And where I think Nathan is right is in asking us
to *take* those second glances. Is nondualism widespread for a reason
*other* than its being true?

I think the question is particularly important because the rationale
given for nondualism does often come down to mystical experience of some
sort. Sufis like ibn ‘Arabi, as I understand them, believe that
practices like *dhikr* chanting give one an experience of the [unity of
being](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/06/wilbers-atmanism-vs-the-saints-encounter/)
(*wahdat al-wujūd*). More recently the exciting [work of Roland
Griffiths](https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/press_releases/2006/griffithspsilocybin.pdf)
and other psychologists has used psilocybin to experimentally induce
mystical experiences; the subjects of these experiences report a strong
sense of the unity of all things, into which they merge.

The latter point is particularly inviting to a skeptic. If drugs can
induce an experience of unity, doesn’t that indicate that that
experience is a *hallucination*, comparable to a fever dream – a
perceptual *error* with nothing to do with reality?

To that I say: not so fast. It *could* be that the psilocybin makes
people see something that isn’t real. But it could *also* be that it
makes them see something that *is* real! Those who *have* the experience
do typically report a high level of confidence that what they saw was
real, and that matters. But the skeptics are right that the experience
itself – and for that matter the confidence – is not sufficient to
indicate the reality of what was perceived in it.

What *is* sufficient? To answer *that* question we need to turn back to
good old-fashioned epistemology: our other tools for [telling true from
false](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/07/how-may-we-tell-true-from-false/).
What do we count as a
[pramāṇa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/10/sabda-and-the-sciences/),
a valid means of knowledge? Anyone who asks that question nearly always
admits that *perception* is indeed a means of knowledge: it can lead us
to error, yes, but it *also* often leads us to truth. That snake we see
could be a rope – but it could also actually *be* a snake. When
psilocybin or *dhikr* lead us to perceive the unity of all things, is
that perception correct?

Typically when we want to ask whether is a perception is correct, we
verify it with another perception. Is that a rope or a snake? Look at it
more closely (being careful not to get bitten if it *is* a snake). Did I
smell gas in the kitchen? Check the burners to see if they’re on. But
that does not seem an appropriate means of verification in this case.
Even if one can seek different means to mystical experience –it is
*possible*, after all, to take psilocybin *and* practice *dhikr* – if
one of those turned out to be a mere error induced by a change in brain
chemistry, there’s a good chance the other one was too.

So what then *is* a good way to verify whether the world actually is
nondual? Here, I think, it matters a great deal that, as I noted in the
[earlier
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/perennial-nondualism/),
most nondual philosophers actually *don’t* cite mystical experience as
the main justification for nondualism; indeed, as in Śaṅkara’s case,
they often don’t cite mystical experience as a justification for
nondualism at all. Many of Śaṅkara’s own justifications are scriptural,
but that won’t persuade anyone who does not share his faith in the
Upaniṣads. Yet Śaṅkara is in debate with Buddhists who do not share that
faith, and so he must also make *logical* arguments why everything must
be one. He is far from alone in that. And I think it is the logical case
for and against nondualism that can give us the most reliable guide to
whether nondualism really *is* the most accurate way to talk about
ultimate reality.

One way logical inquiry explores the possible truth of nondualism is in
the very old quest for a [first
explanation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/the-four-explanations-and-the-first-explanation/),
a quest that goes back at least to the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (circa 700
BCE, according to Patrick Olivelle). Centuries before
[Thales](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thales_of_Miletus) would look for
an originating principle of all things and discern that it must be
water, Gārgī Vācaknavī (one of the few major female characters in early
philosophical literature) also observed that “this world is woven back
and forth on water”. But Gārgī made this observation only to ask the
*next* question: “on what, then, is water woven back and forth?” The
sage Yajñāvalkya replied it was woven on air – to which of course Gārgī
asked what the *air* is woven on. The sequence of recursive questions
(“and what is *that* woven on?”) continues for a while, until Gārgī asks
what the worlds of Prajāpati the creator are woven on, and Yajñāvalka
names *braḥman*, that supreme principle that later Vedāntic tradition
would identify as the ultimate. Gārgī asks one more time what *braḥman*
is woven on, and Yajñāvalkya tells her “Don’t ask too many questions,
Gārgī, or your head will shatter apart!”

That, of course, is a completely unsatisfying answer. But Gārgī’s
questioning shows us how, in India and in Greece, inquiry into the
nature of things winds up being a search for a first principle. Where
will that search end up, if *not* with a huffy dismissal that the
questioner is asking too many questions? It *could* end up in an
infinite regress ([turtles all the way
down](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turtles_all_the_way_down)), but when
one is asking for ultimate explanations such a regress poses its own
problems: [as MacIntyre
argues](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/the-four-explanations-and-the-first-explanation/),
the infinite regress must then *itself* be explained. For MacIntyre, the
series of questions “can terminate only with a being, not itself a
member of the series, which makes it the case that this particular
series exists.” This gets us to some sort of ultimate as a first
principle and first explanation. It does not necessarily get us to
nondualism *per se* – it could be [Sirhindī’s “all is *from*
him”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/06/wilbers-atmanism-vs-the-saints-encounter/)
– but it gets us somewhere close.

Coming from a different angle, the key test that logic most often
applies is *coherence*. How well does a given idea fit with the other
ideas we already take to be true? As always, [contradictions are
bad](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/why-worry-about-contradictions/)
([even for
Mādhyamikas](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/does-santideva-think-bodhisattvas-are-happy/)).
But short of actual contradictions there are also what Aristotle would
call puzzles (*aporiai*): places where we perceive *apparent*
contradictions that might not actually be such on a closer look. Getting
to truth involves resolving these puzzles, though there are typically so
many that we can’t get at all of them.

In my case, one of the driving puzzles is that I have found myself
endorsing a position of two truths, in a manner that brings together
[Wilfrid Sellars and classical
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/06/a-sellarsian-solution-for-the-self/).
But such a position immediately raises the question: what is the
relationship between the two? Hegel would have argued that, if we are
seeking a most fundamental explanation, then it is that relationship
itself that must constitute that explanation. (And so Hegel himself ends
up in a certain kind of nondualism, with Spirit as the ultimate.) In
China the Tiantai thinker Zhiyi posited a “middle truth” to relate
conventional and ultimate, *without* making the ultimate more
fundamental as Hegel does – but it seems to me that this just makes the
problem knottier, for now we have to address the relationship between
*three* truths and not only two. There are at least some puzzles that
get resolved if one posits a single ultimate and provides reasons why
explanation should terminate with that ultimate. Additional puzzles then
arise: what is the relationship between that ultimate *itself* and that
which it explains? (I think such a problem may underlie both Plato’s
so-called [Third Man
Argument](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_man_argument) and
[Rāmānuja’s critique of
Śaṅkara](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/advaita-theodicy-and-the-goodness-of-existence/).)
I do not by any means think that I have reached a satisfactory
resolution to these questions. Yet the logical arguments pointing to an
ultimate do give me some reason to think that when the mystics feel
certain they have encountered an ultimate reality, we have some reason
to believe them. And that the worldwide pervasiveness of nondualism is
not just a pervasive error.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/03/the-reasons-for-nondualism)
