+++
title = "Prabhākara’s Subversion"
full_title = "Prabhākara’s Subversion of Śabara’s Theory of Human Motivational Behaviour"
date = "2021-03-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/07/prabhakaras-subversion-of-sabaras-theory-of-human-motivational-behaviour/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/03/07/prabhakaras-subversion-of-sabaras-theory-of-human-motivational-behaviour/).

Prabhākara’s Subversion of Śabara’s Theory of Human Motivational Behaviour

Dear fellow readers,  
  
Hi. For my second blog post as the guest host for March 2021, I want to
provide a digest version of my recent article in *JHS* titled: *Commands
and the Doctrine of the* Apūrva *in Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā*, so that one
doesn’t have to slog through a long article written for specialists to
access and evaluate my interpretations. I herein condense 30 pages to
5.  
  
In the article’s first section, I argue that Prabhākara (fl. c. 660-680
CE?) subordinately incorporates Śabara’s earlier model of the command’s
computation, and thereby subverts Śabara’s theory of human motivational
behaviour whereupon motivation exclusively derives from a calculation of
self-interest (i.e., from desire for a result and knowledge of the means
to the result). I explore two accounts that Prabhākara offers for how
Śabara’s theory is subordinately incorporated: the command’s entailment
function (*upādāna*) and Prabhākara’s theory of linguistic signification
(*anvitābhidhāna*).

The framework within which this debate occurs is a perception model of
language (i.e., how the language-listener computes meaning),
specifically of the archetypal Vedic injunction: *svargakāmo yajeta*
(‘the man desiring heaven should sacrifice’).  
  
I’ll first briefly explain Śabara’s model, so we can then turn to how
and why Prabhākara subverts it. Connected with Śabara’s theory of human
motivational behaviour is his position that the phonetic form:
*svargakāmo yajeta* has the semantic structure: *yāgena svargam
bhāvayet* (‘one should bring heaven into being through sacrifice’). All
Mīmāṃsakas agree that verbal suffixes are the structurally predominant
items in relation to the verbal roots, but for Śabara specifically, the
finite verbal suffix –*eta* in *yajeta* directly signifies what he calls
the *bhāvanā* (lit: ‘the bringing into being,’ best understood as
intentional action to produce an outcome). This *bhāvanā* as the
governing linguistic item generates syntactico-semantic expectancies
(*ākāṅkṣā*s) for its necessary relata/thematic roles, first for an
outcome, and then for an instrument. Heaven (expressed by the nominal
stem *svarga-*) and sacrifice (expressed by the verbal root *yaj-*)
construe as the outcome and instrument respectively, even though we
don’t get case-suffixes attached to the linguistic items *svarga-* and
*yaj-* to express these thematic roles (no *svargam * \[accusative case
marker\] and no *yāgena* \[instrumental case marker\] in *svargakāmo
yajeta*). Rather, the syntactico-semantic expectancies of the governing
*bhāvanā* lead the language-listener to compute the phonetic form as
having this semantic structure *as its directly signified meaning* (for
Śabara there is no sentence-meaning of *svargakāmo yajeta* other than
this: *yāgena svargam bhāvayet* is how the term-referents floating
around in mind construe). The payout of Śabara’s model is that the
language-listener first computes a cause-and-effect relationship between
sacrifice and heaven, and human motivation occurs subsequently from
self-interest for a result when one has knowledge of the means
(sacrifice) to the result (heaven). See Cummins 2021 pp. 292-295 for
further elaboration and translations of relevant passages.

Prabhākara’s intervention is tied up in his introduction of the new the
category of the commandee (*niyojya*). Prabhākara uses this category to
create a two-layer/two-moment computational model whereupon the *initial
impulse to act* occurs at the first step of the computational process,
*prior to knowledge of sacrifice as a means to heaven* which is computed
at layer/moment two. This intervention allows Prabhākara to move
Śabara’s semantic structure: ‘one should bring heaven into being via
sacrifice’ (*yāgena svargam bhāvayet*) to a subsequent second moment &
second implicit layer of meaning within the listener’s computational
process, and thereby subvert Śabara’s position that humans are solely
motivated to act out of self-interest.  
  
We can begin to unpack Prabhākara’s intervention by way of his
justification for the computational primacy of the relationship between
command (*niyoga*) and commandee (*niyojya*). Prabhākara’s justification
is a circularity problem between action and agent in the context of the
command: the idea is that the very existence of an action (i.e., its
performance) depends upon an agent to perform the action, but no one can
ever be an agent as such prior to the action’s actual commencement.
Thus, were the command to pick out and command an ‘agent’ to do a
sacrifice, commands would fail to function: no one could recognize
oneself as the person to whom the command pertains as they’re not yet an
agent, hence the need for a linguistic category beyond that of the agent
(*kartṛ*), the commandee (*niyojya*), to account for how one recognizes
oneself as the person to whom the command pertains prior to the action
happening.

At this point, I want to pause and highlight the difference between
*justification* and *motivation*. These Sanskrit intellectuals are never
*motivated* to hold complex positions because of something such as a
circularity problem. Rather these are their *justifications*, and this
needs to be differentiated from their *motivations*, i.e., the payout of
their interventions, about whichthey are frequently silent or opaque.
The overarching goal of Prabhākara’s sub-commentary on Śabara’s *Bhāṣya*
is to square the topics of Mīmāṃsā with his countertheory of the command
(*niyoga*). To think of Prabhākara’s introduction of this countertheory
as *motivated* by a circularity problem would be deeply mistaken: the
real *motivation* is a divergent theory of human motivational behaviour.
With this in sight, let us turn back to unpacking Prabhākara’s theory of
the command (*niyoga*).

For Prabhākara, the term ‘man-desiring-heaven’ (*svargakāmo*)
communicates the commandee (*niyojya*). Recall that for Śabara, ‘heaven’
(*svarga-*) construes as the outcome of the causal action (the
*bhāvanā*). Not so for Prabhākara. For Prabhākara, the verbal suffix
–*eta* signifies the command (*niyoga*), and the command needs its
necessary relatum, the commandee. The term ‘man-desiring-heaven’
(*svargakāmo*) fills this conceptual slot. The crucial detail to
understanding Prabhākara’s intervention here is that the term:
‘man-desiring-heaven,’ whereby one recognizes oneself as the commandee,
*does not specify an outcome from the fulfillment of the command*. The
term ‘man-desiring-heaven’ functions exactly the same way as the terms
‘short’ and ‘tall’ if I say: ‘short people go to the left; tall people
go to the right’ à no outcome or reward is explicitly specified. On
Prabhākara’s model, all that happens at this first moment of the
computational process is that one recognizes oneself as someone to whom
the command to perform a sacrifice pertains, by way of recognizing
oneself as someone who has a desire for heaven, and feels the initial
impulse to act.  
  
Prabhākara’s introduction of the circularity problem (explained above)
necessitates the computational primacy of this layer of meaning between
command (*niyoga*) and commandee (*niyojya*). Prabhākara’s rationale is
that humans would never recognize commands as pertaining to
themselveswithout the linguistic category of commandee as distinct from
the category of agent (*kartṛ*), and the introduction of this category
comes part-n-parcel with the removal of an outcome being explicitly
specified from fulfilling the command. This is the real payout of
Prabhākara’s intervention.  
  
Thus, for Prabhākara, humans have a propensity to obey. We’re not quite
Pavlov’s dogs, but we are still somewhere on the spectrum. Yoshimizu is
right: this is not a Kantian categorical imperative. Put slightly
differently, Prabhākara’s intervention is not about putting morality
back into the performance of the Vedic sacrifices (even though for
Śabara the model surrounding the performance of the Vedic sacrifices is
mechanistic and amoral), but it still appears that for Prabhākara there
is a want for the Vedic rites & Veda to be something more than purely
mechanistic. This is, perhaps, part of the reason behind why being a
Prābhākara became so attractive and why the textual tradition gained
such momentum, despite the messiness and difficulty of Prabhākara’s own
treatise(s).

With Prabhākara’s intervention in sight, I want to turn to how
Prabhākara subordinately incorporates Śabara’s theory. Recall that for
Prabhākara, the language-listener’s computation of *svargakāmo yajeta*
is a two-step sequential process: the listener first computes the
relationship between command and commandee as the explicit meaning (and
explicit meaning always comes first), and then on this two-step model,
Śabara’s one-step model – of cause-and-effect between sacrifice and
heaven – is incorporated as the *subsequent* and *implicit* layer of
meaning.  
  
Prabhākara offers two accounts for how this is done via both the
command’s entailment function (*upādāna*) and via his new theory of
linguistic signification (*anvitābhidhāna*). Both accounts hinge upon
the logic of the Veda as non-misleading. For Prabhākara, the Veda is
explicit: ‘the man desiring heaven must sacrifice,’ and if sacrifice
were not the cause of heaven this would be misleading the man desiring
heaven, and so we necessarily have the implicit computation of sacrifice
as the cause of heaven.  
  
Prabhākara’s apparatus of *upādāna* was first studied in
monograph-length treatment by Yoshimizu (1997) in German. Yoshimizu
translates *upādāna* as ‘organismus’ (= incorporation), and this is
correct. The reason I translate *upādāna* as: ‘the command’s entailment
function’ is that this is the definition Prabhākara himself offers
(*niyogākṣepa upādānam*: incorporation is the command’s entailment), and
I think this translation offers insight for the non-specialist into how
the apparatus functions. My interpretation differs from Yoshimizu’s in
that I believe Prabhākara takes conscious steps to subordinately
incorporate Śabara’s computational model and thereby subvert Śabara’s
theory of human motivational behaviour (i.e., I am offering a new
account of Prabhākara’s engagement with Śabara, the predecessor whose
treatise Prabhākara writes his own treatise as a commentary upon). I
believe this is all crucial to pin precisely, as on my read Prabhākara’s
engagement with Śabara constitutes the first major point of engagement
across the aisle in what becomes a major debate on human motivational
behaviour within the framework of a perception model of commands
(Maṇḍanamiśra then inverts Prabhākara’s two-step model in the
*Bhāvanāviveka*).

Prabhākara’s account of how Śabara’s theory is subordinated via the
command’s entailment function (*upādāna*) consists of two connected
moves:  
i) The rejection that the Veda enjoins sacrifice as a means to heaven
via an *explicit* subordinate injunction (*viniyoga*).  
ii) The position that sacrifice as the means to heaven is enjoined
*implicitly* through the command’s entailment function.  

Prabhākara’s two positions here on subordinate injunctions (*viniyoga*)
and the command’s entailment function (*upādāna*) in relation to the
computation of sacrifice as the cause of heaven are two sides of the
same coin. Suppose you believe X is a duck, and I believe X is a goose.
I then make two arguments, one to reject why X cannot be a duck and one
to argue why X is a goose. This is what Prabhākara does: on 2.1.1-4 he
says sacrifice as a means to heaven cannot be explicit meaning (as per
*viniyoga*)and on 4.1.2 he says it is implicit meaning (as per
*upādāna*).

i\) In commenting on MS 2.1.1-4 – the exact same place where Śabara
outlines his theory explored earlier – Prabhākara makes the antithetical
argument that a cause-and-effect relationship between sacrifice and
heaven is *not* explicit meaning in the archetypal Vedic command.  
Prabhākara carefully side-steps direct engagement with Śabara’s core
concept of ‘bringing into being’ (*bhāvanā*) and the key cognitive
function through which it operates, syntactico-semantic expectancies
(*ākāṅkṣā*s), and introduces to the topic the question of a subordinate
injunction (*viniyoga*). The key point for our purposes of understanding
Prabhākara’s motivation for doing this is that all the subordinate
injunctive elements constituting the hierarchical list, from explicit
statement (*śruti*) to context (*prakaraṇa*), are considered explicit
meaning. Thus, by making the argument that there is no subordinate
injunction (*viniyoga*) to perform sacrifice for the sake of heaven,
Prabhākara finds a compelling way to reject Śabara’s position that the
Veda explicitly communicates sacrifice as a means to heaven (and thereby
open up a space for human motivation here to not be preceded by
knowledge of a means to an end), while side-stepping direct engagement
with Śabara’s conceptual apparatus. See Cummins 2021 pp. 298-301 for
further explanation and a translation of Prabhākara on the relevant
passage.  
  
ii) In discussing the command’s entailment function (*upādāna*),
Prabhākara is crystal clear that this is the mechanism by which the
language-listener implicitly and subsequently understands sacrifice as a
means to heaven (see Cummins 2021 p. 304 for a translation of the
relevant passage). Prabhākara speaks very minimally on this point,
perhaps *because* of what he is doing to Śabara’s model.  
For a monograph-length study of *upādāna* and surrounding matters in
German, see Yoshimizu 1997.  
For a much briefer general discussion of *upādāna* in English, see
Cummins 2021 pp. 302-4.

Let us now turn to Prabhākara’s second account for how the
cause-n-effect relationship between sacrifice and heaven is computed, as
per his theory of linguistic signification, *anvitābhidhāna*. This
requires a brief detour to first table Prabhākara’s linguistic theory
(the following ‘detour’ corresponds to Cummins 2021 pp. 306-7):  
  
The earlier and standard Mīmāṃsā doctrine of Śabara (early 500s CE?) was
that terms function exclusively to present to the listener’s mind the
*word-meaning*, not the sentence-meaning (Śabara puts the burden for the
latter on the cognitive functions of the listener). Śabara toes this
line to defend the position that terms only directly signify eternal
universals such as class-properties, behind which lies the defense of
the Veda as eternal, while also accounting for language’s infinite
productivity.  
  
Enter Bhartṛhari, the grammarian-philosopher for whom ultimate reality
consists in non-duality. An axiom of Bhartṛhari’s thought is that
language parallels reality, and in the way that phenomenological duality
is ultimately unreal, in the same way there is no reality to the
division of the utterance into words and word-meanings.

Prabhākara articulates his Mīmāṃsaka theory of ‘the direct signification
function \[of terms and term-referents\] as syntactically co-construed’
(*anvitābhidhāna*) as a concessionary position to Bhartṛhari (see
Cummins 2021 p. 306 for evidence that Prabhākara is engaging Bhartṛhari
specifically). On Prabhākara’s theory, terms have no signification
function to communicate term-referents in isolation, but only as
syntactically construed with other term-referents. As Prabhākara says,
you can’t even articulate a term in the nominative case in Sanskrit
(e.g., *ghaṭaḥ* ‘a pot’) without it entailing a copulative verb ‘exists’
(*asti*). In taking this position, Prabhākara cedes Śabara’s earlier
position that words only present to mind word-meaning (i.e., Prabhākara
concedes to Bhartṛhari that terms and term-referents have no
function/reality *in isolation*), but against Bhartṛhari toes the line
of compositionality à that the complex expression (the sentence) is
determined by the meaning of its real constituent parts (the words),
even though you can never use the constituent parts (words) apart from
as sentences (Prabhākara toes this line to uphold the deeper doctrine of
the Veda’s authority). Prabhākara grounds his defense of
compositionality in a quasi-behaviourist model of language acquisition,
where the child observes variable responses to variable stimuli (e.g.,
‘bring the horse’ vs. ‘bring the cow’).  
  
With his new linguistic theory in sight, let us now turn back to how
Prabhākara accounts for the subordinate incorporation of Śabara’s model
as per his new linguistic theory. I translate the key passage of
Prabhākara on 6.1.1-3. Prabhākara’s constructed interlocutor has now
conceded that the commandee (*niyojya*) is linguistically encoded in
*svargakāmo yajeta*, but raises the problem of how to then account for
sacrifice as the means to heaven:  
*  
\[Objection:\] What term is the grounds for \[understanding\] sacrifice
as the means to the accomplishment of the desire on the part of the man
being commanded to action? The root √*yaj *in* yajeta*, first off,
merely communicates sacrifice, but not \[that sacrifice\] possesses a
relation with something else. The verbal suffix too \[only\]
communicates the agent \[or\] the agent’s number, but not that sacrifice
\[is\] for the sake of something else.  
\[……\]  
On this we say:  
\[……\]  
\[Therefore\], the term (*pada*) is able to be called the grounds \[for
understanding sacrifice as a means to heaven, and\] as for what you’ve
said that there wouldn’t be ascertainment as to which term communicates
\[sacrifice as a means to heaven\], that is entirely rejected by*
anvitābhidhāna*.  
\[Objection:\] If so, then the \[topic at hand\] has been resolved
entirely on 1.1.24-25*.  
*\[No.\] All that’s been rejected \[there\] is that the understanding
term and term-referent is not fixed. That topic opposes an illusory or
exclusionary on the substitution \[principle\]. However, it hasn’t
\[been rejected on 1.1.24-25\] that terms \[produce\] only the awareness
of \[their corresponding\] term-referents. Therefore, it is right: ‘one
should bring heaven into being by sacrifice’ (*yāgena svargaṃ
sādhayet*).*

Prabhākara’s answer here can be unpacked to a point. Prabhākara here
says that on 1.1.24-25, he defended a principle of compositionality, but
that now *extra* non-compositional meaning can also be accounted for as
per his linguistic theory of *anvitābhidhāna*.

Alas, this is all Prabhākara says.  
  
However, in saying this, Prabhākara is clear that this ‘extra’ meaning
of sacrifice as the means to heaven is not explicit and is computed
*after* the explicit first step of the computational process whereby the
listener understands the relationship between command and commandee (as
Prabhākara says, there is no specific term to communicate this extra
meaning of sacrifice as, but since we do understand it, it must be built
in there … somehow).  
  
This is perfectly consistent with what we already saw Prabhākara say
about the command’s entailment function à the two positions are
coherent, in that they both subordinately incorporate Śabara’s layer of
meaning as the second moment/layer of meaning within the computation
process.  
  
On the one hand, Prabhākara *does* give a very compelling account of
what *svargakāmo yajeta* actually means. I would translate this
literally as: ‘the man who desires heaven should sacrifice.’ This
sentence does not seem to actually explicitly encode what Śabara wants
it to, that sacrifice is the means to heaven (*yāgena svargam
bhāvayet*), but rather implies it.

However, it is also worth noting that Prabhākara’s *two-step* model
requires either:  
i) multiple moments or layers within the computational process.  
ii) a pre-syntax function of terms to present a term-meaning to mind.  
  
And this is in tension with his position on 1.1.24-25. His concessionary
position to Bhartṛhari, of *anvitābhidhāna* – the direct signification
function of terms and term-referents as syntactically co-construed –
requires syntactic construal of all term-referents, i.e.,
sentence-meaning, to be a one-step simultaneous process.  
  
This tension is perhaps why Prabhākara himself never says anything about
syntactic construal as a simultaneous one-step process when talking
about his new linguistic theory.  
  
Śālikanātha, in fact, is the first Prābhākara to explicitly say
syntactic construal of all term-referents is a simultaneous one-step
process in the *Vākyārthamātṛkā I,* but he has a solution.  
  
Maybe more on Śālikanātha next week …  
  
Apologies for the long blog. I condense 30 pages of article to 5.
