+++
title = "Heroic pratihAras and"
full_title = "Heroic pratihAras and lessons to be learnt"
date = "2014-08-24"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/08/24/heroic-pratihara-s-and-lessons-to-be-learnt/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/08/24/heroic-pratihara-s-and-lessons-to-be-learnt/).

Heroic pratihAra-s and lessons to be learnt

We were too engrossed in personal life during the past two months to
allot time for writing. But ideas always pop up in mid, a result of the
devas’ wish. We have been hearing about the 1000 year foreign rule claim
too often these days. When I met a few kids from nearby school, I could
understand how bad the knowledge of history is among our younger
generation. It seems this punyabhUmi was an open garden into which
anyone came and looted the fruits. The successful defense offered by
hindus are never acknowledged. The arab invasion of sind under bin qasim
is mentioned but not the failed expeditions which were made earlier nor
the expulsion of arabs within a few decades.

One of the major defenders of dharma against the mahAmada AtatAyin-s
were the rulers of gurjara-pratihAra dynasty. The word ‘pratihAra’ means
door-keeper. They indeed remained as the door-keepers of Aryavarta,
holding back arab invasions for more than a century. They managed this
feat against the most formidable, expansionist armies of their times –
the arabs, who had destroyed the persian empire in a matter of years and
had pushed the byzantine empire on back feet. While they were battling
arab-s on the western front, they had to face the pAla-s of van\~ga and
rAs.trakUt.a-s of karnAt.a – both of whom were aiming to occupy the
majestic kannauj. Thus, the pratihAra empire was in a state of
continuous warfare.The glory of this dynasty begins with nAgabhat.a I.
He is credited to have thrown out the arab-s from sind by heading a
coalition against the mahAmada-s. The famous arab invasion of sind was
nullified by this nAgabhat.a who is hailed as the very image of
nArAyan.a by his descendant, mihira bhoja. nAgabhat.a’s rule is
considered to have ended sometime after 756 CE. He was followed by his
brother’s sons, kakkuka and devarAja, neither of whom distinguished
themselves. The latter’s son, vatsarAja, who had to face the pAla-s and
rAs.trakUt.a-s for kannuaj. The wars left his empire weaker with kannauj
falling to dharmapAla.

The mahAmada-s were waiting for this instance. But their resurgence was
crushed by the successor of vatsarAja, nAgabhat.a II. The dvitIya
nAgabhat.t.a proved why he was born in the line of the arab crushing
nAgabhat.a I. Even while he was enganing his enemies in north, east and
south within the indian subcontinent, he is credited to have crushed the
turushka-s in the west and captured their forts (which could refer to
the border towns held by the mahAmada-s). The mahAmada adventure was
kept in bay by this nava nAgabhat.a. He was followed by a weak ruler
rAmabhadra, who certainly did not live up to his name. This napuMsaka
rAma was followed by the greatest of pratihAra rulers, mihira bhoja.  
The rAjyas’rI of pratihAra-s gained the greatest strength under this
devotee of vis.n.u and bhagavatI, mihira bhoja. He minted coins bearing
the legend ‘AdivarAha’ and it is believed that he took the name as one
of his titles. Just as AdivarAha saved mother earth from rAks.asa
hiran.yAks.a, mihira bhoja saved the punyabhUmi from the ravages of the
rAks.asamatAbhimAnI-s. His empire extended from pan\~canada to magadha
and from himAlaya-s to narmadA. An arab, sulaimAn, refers to the might
of this king of juzr (gurjara) as follows:

“This king maintains numerous forces and no other indian prince has so
fine a cavalry. He is unfriendly to the arabs and still acknowledges the
king of the arabs is the greatest of the kings. Among the princes of
india, there is no greater foe of the mohammeddan faith than he…. There
is no country of india more safe from robbers”.

We need not look for any other evidence to establish the prowess of this
emperor. He was considered as the greatest foe of rAks.asamata. He was
followed by his son mahendrapAla who had the great kavi rAjas’ekhara as
his guru. The emperor mahendrapAla secured his western borders against
the rAks.asa-s while in the east, he gained territories even in gaud.a.
The feats of mahendra were so great that he was called ‘nirbhaya
narendra’.The poet continued as the guru of mahedrapala’s son mahIpAla
as well. He proudly calls his emperor-student as the mahArAjAdhirAja of
Aryavarta. MahendrapAla ruled till 908 CE and his son mahIpAla ruled
till 932 CE if not till 946 CE as some historians claim.  
The pratihAra empire maintained its animosity towards the rAks.asa-s and
they were forced to maintain large forces to keep their enemies at bay
in all four directions. The arab historian, al-masUdI has written that
mahIpAla maintained about 7 or 9 lAkh troops in each of the four
cardinal directions. He specifically mentions that mahIpAla’s western
army is in constant conflict with the mahAmada ruler of mUlasthAnapura.
He also mentions that the pratiharA-s were in a state of war with the
rulers of mankir (mAnykhet.a).

The destitute state of the mahAmada garrison at mUlasthAnapura (multan)
can be surmised from the words of al-masUdI: “When the unbelievers march
against mUltAn, and the faithful do not feel themselves strong enough to
oppose them, they threaten to break their idol, and their enemies
immediately withdraw”. Another writer (this one from persia),
al-ishtakhri also mentions the same state of affairs regarding the
defense of the city against hindu invaders. The self proclaimed
butshikan-s were forced to take refuge behind the famous ‘but’ of their
capital to retain their kingdom. The mUrti must be that of sUrya
(supposedly built by the son of kr.s.n.a as per tradition). This is even
more significant considering that mahIpAla titled himself as paramAditya
bhakta. Thus, mahIpAla had reduced the arab-s to such a misery that only
the existence of the temple of his is.t.a deva in the city could save
the mahAmada kingdom. The pratihAra power began to lose strength in the
second half of the tenth century – result of rAs.trakUt.a invasions and
by the time the demonic ghaznavI attacked kannauj, it was ruled by a
helpless, weakling who abandoned the city than rather than face the
rAks.asa armies.

When we consider that the victorious armies of arab-s had marched
without any great resistance such that by 732 CE, arab-s were at the
entrance of france – entire northern africa and persian empire had
fallen like a pack of cards against the arab invasions – the resistance
offered by the hindu rulers of this land is indeed praiseworthy. The
pratihAra rulers managed to keep the demonic arab-s at bay even when
they were forced to fight long wars against their neighbor kings within
the subcontinent.

But rather than feeling proud about this achievement, we must learn a
very important lesson here. Hindus had defeated mahAmada-s for more than
two centuries. But it went in vain. The hindu victories were never
consolidated. We were happy with mere defence of our territories (much
as we are doing against the western neighbor now). While every rAks.asa
victory was followed by widespread massacres and destruction aimed at
uprooting the foundation of hindu strength. Thus, we never completed our
victories, being satisfied with safeguarding our borders – which was
well utilized by our enemies. A single mahAmada victory could undo
centuries of hindu resistance. Mere defense of one’s lands isnever
enough. Lack of offensive actions taking the war into enemy territory
let us down in the long run. The short-sightedness of leaving
battlefield to protect the temple could also be seen. When the
mahAmada-s gained strength, they destroyed the temple and the mUrti.
This is lesson number two. While the rAks.asa-s may allow us to worship
and generally follow our religions when they are not in a position to
oppose us; the situation will chage drastically when they gain enough
strength. Therefore, to say that mahAmada-s of a particular place/land
are not as bad as others is nothing but illogical.

It is indeed eerie to think about the current situaion. History does
repeat. The city of mUlasthAnapura is once again ruled by the
mahAmada-s. We have won some victories against the mahAmada-s in west.
But nothing decisive came out of it. The mahAmada-s are gaining in
numbers and weapons. When they reach a boiling point, we might face a
defeat which could destroy our civilizational centres once again.

We have clear examples in history for what we could expect in future –
if we do not change our strategy. We must prepare ourselves to face this
uphill task by a u-turn in our military doctrine.

