+++
title = "Philosophical and"
full_title = "Philosophical and historical uses together"
date = "2016-11-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/20/philosophical-and-historical-uses-together/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/20/philosophical-and-historical-uses-together/).

Philosophical and historical uses together

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/11/philosophical-and-historical-uses-together/)

[Last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/10/decision-and-capacity-philosophical-and-historical/)
I examined [Andrew Ollett’s
distinction](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/12/niti-and-the-two-ways-of-using-texts/)
between “decision-oriented” texts like Kant’s Grounding and
“capacity-oriented” texts like Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga, and the ways
in which that distinction might suggest a “philosophical” versus a
“historical” approach to those texts. I discussed what I found
problematic about that application of the distinction, but noted
Andrew’s quote that points beyond it:

> Although these different uses of texts pertain to very different sets
> of questions, I’m not convinced that the “historical” use of texts is
> unphilosophical—which is a mild way of saying that attention to the
> ways in which ethical systems are constructed and lived in history is
> exactly what philosophy needs.

For me, this claim calls our attention to an important point, related to
my recent [methodological reflection on religious
studies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/10/why-the-study-of-religion-shouldnt-be-about-studying-religion/):
one of the key things valuable about religious studies is that it steps
beyond the text itself to ask about practice. Buddhist texts certainly
lend themselves to being approached this way. Buddhaghosa is not merely
trying to argue that his statements are true; he wants them to be put
into practice, in action. But then – and I think this point is key – one
could say the same thing about Kant. If a reader read the Grounding and
concluded intellectually that its claims were all true, yet continued to
make false promises and harm others without shame, I think Kant would
himself have concluded that the text had failed to do something that he
had intended it to do. Indeed, I believe Kant wrote his later [Religion
within the Limits of Reason
Alone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Religion_within_the_Bounds_of_Bare_Reason)
for just this reason: Kant there takes up a [chastened
intellectualism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/chastened-intellectualism-and-practice/),
arguing there is a “radical evil” within human beings that prevents them
from doing what is good even when they know it to be good, and some form
of practice – perhaps a community – is required to deal with it.

The important thing to me, though, is that a proper approach to ethics
requires both of these elements – as I think Buddhaghosa and Kant both
provide. We need practices to make us better people. But we also need a
vision of what being a better person actually *is!* And if we are to
avoid delusion, we cannot simply absorb this and take it for granted; we
must think about it, reason about it. For of course texts *disagree*
with each other about what the good life is. The Jaina *kevalin*,
seeking a solitary transcendence of worldly things, would look to
Confucians like a monster, and a Jain might think the same of the
Confucian life, entrapped in the delusions of family and politics.
Practices leading toward one may *hinder* the goal of the other.
Buddhaghosa and
[Sundarapāṇḍya](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/12/niti-and-the-two-ways-of-using-texts/)
would themselves not have seen eye to eye on the nature of the good
life. And that is where argument matters: we need to identify the
*right* practices, to be as sure as we can that our practices are making
us better and not worse.

Now Andrew rightly refers to [Michel
Foucault](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/foucault/) as an inspiration
for the “historical” approach to ethics. And for Foucault there is a
deliberate, programmatic reason not to ask whether *any* text one
studies is true, whether it is Christian or otherwise, for truth claims
are best understood genealogically as effects of the operation of power.
But it is worth reminding ourselves that this is *not* the approach
taken by Indian texts themselves, which tend to be quite concerned, one
way or another, with *satya* or *sacca* as something inherently good and
worthy of our realizing. A Foucauldian approach is always already
Western. And while [any approach we moderns can take will be at some
level
Western](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/06/the-west-within-the-rest/),
our approach does not have to be *only* Western. If we ourselves ask
what true dharma is, we are now asking non-Western questions as well;
but if we limit ourselves to interrogating the power dynamics behind
questions of true dharma, such a purely Foucauldian approach will be
Western and nothing more.

Instead, I think it is helpful for us to meld the “historical” and the
“philosophical” questions – making the historical more philosophical and
vice versa. As I said in my original [comment to
Andrew](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/12/niti-and-the-two-ways-of-using-texts/#comment-174355),
we should modify the “historical” questions to make them more
philosophical, such that they can apply to us. “Am I among the subjects
addressed here? What is the text supposed to actually do to me? How do I
myself understand the relations between the social, the ethical, and the
aesthetic, how does the text understand these relations, and does the
latter understanding speak to the former? Should I use this text in the
way it would have been used in the past?”

But just as much, we should modify the “philosophical” questions to make
them more historical, aware of context. When we ask “What is the
argument here?” and “Does the argument work?” it is also fundamental to
ask “[What are the argument’s
assumptions?](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/01/the-importance-of-assumptions/)
How do those assumptions affect whether the arguments work or not? How
dependent are those assumptions on the work’s historical context? Could
they be assumptions we now share as well? Should they be?”
