+++
title = "Decision and capacity,"
full_title = "Decision and capacity, philosophical and historical"
date = "2016-11-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/06/decision-and-capacity-philosophical-and-historical/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/06/decision-and-capacity-philosophical-and-historical/).

Decision and capacity, philosophical and historical

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/10/decision-and-capacity-philosophical-and-historical/)

[Andrew Ollett has recently taken
up](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/12/niti-and-the-two-ways-of-using-texts/)
the [point I made earlier this
year](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/)
that Buddhist ethics, in distinction from modern analytical ethics, is
not primarily concerned with decision procedure. He identifies Indian
non-analytic approaches as “capacity-oriented”: “They maintain that
ethical decision-making and action always presuppose being formed as a
subject with particular capacities, dispositions, habits, and so on.”
That is not quite how I would put it, because for a Buddhist thinker
like Buddhaghosa, we are not actually subjects, formed or otherwise; our
systematic delusion forms an *idea* of ourselves as subjects, but this
idea is false, and part of the goal of ethics is to un-form or at least
de-form it. I do agree, though, that in Buddhist ethics there is an
emphasis on the development of beneficial dispositions and habits –
*virtues* – that stands in distinction to the analytical emphasis on a
decision procedure. (It seems to me like this might not be the case in
[Mīmāṃsā](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C4%ABm%C4%81%E1%B9%83s%C4%81),
whose legalistic mode of ethical reasoning does seem oriented to a
decision procedure, but Andrew knows more about Mīmāṃsā than I do.)

Andrew’s post gets particularly interesting when he maps the
decision/capacity distinction onto “disciplinary and methodological
differences, or perhaps better, differences of outlook.” I think there
is something to this point. I am not entirely in agreement with it, but
I’d like to parse out that disagreement, as I think it points to
something of deep methodological importance.

The post argues, rightly I think, that differences in genre suggest
differences in use: a “decision-oriented” text (like, say, Kant’s
[Grounding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Groundwork_of_the_Metaphysic_of_Morals))
lends itself to a different use than a “capacity-oriented” text, like
Buddhaghosa’s
[Visuddhimagga](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visuddhimagga) or like the
interesting *nīti* text Andrew is reflecting on, the Nītidviṣaṣṭika of
Sundarapāṇḍya. Andrew suggests that “decision-oriented” texts lend
themselves to a use he calls “philosophical”, while the
“capacity-oriented” texts suggest more of a “historical” use – though he
is rightly aware that this way of putting it does not exactly capture
the idea. This distinction in use is best expressed in the questions we
ask of the texts. The “philosophical” use asks questions like: “What is
the argument here? Does the argument work?” The “historical” use asks
questions like: “Who are the subjects addressed here? What are they
supposed to actually do? How do the social, the ethical, and the
aesthetic relate to each other? How would these texts have been used?”

Now this use of this sort of distinction makes alarm bells go off in my
mind. Far too often, it tends to set up the sort of unfortunate
distinction – [Orientalist in the pejorative
sense](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/04/descriptive-and-normative-meanings-of-science-and-other-traditions/)
– that has characterized venues like the [Journal of Religious Ethics
(JRE)](http://bit.ly/2dRTBVf), at least in the 20th century. That is, it
sets up Western texts to be taken as works of normative ethics that we
can learn from now, and Indian texts to be taken as the mere objects of
[ethics
studies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/ethics-vs-ethics-studies/)
– texts that might help us understand *those* people out there, but that
have nothing to say to us about the way *we* live. We do not identify
its content as a candidate for truth.

I single out JRE as an example of this problematic approach because some
of its own authors, in a 1997 symposium ([issue
25(3)](https://www.jstor.org/stable/i40000785)), identified what the
problem was without really realizing that it was a problem. James
Gustafson noted that JRE began entirely with work in normative Christian
ethics, but then progressed to incorporate other traditions and move
“from normative ethics to descriptive, comparative, and analytical
ethics.” But the two changes, unfortunately, were closely linked:
insofar as JRE dealt in non-Christian ethics, the work was *no longer
normative* – no longer about what we readers of the JRE should do, but
about those curious and interesting weird people on the other side of
the world. Ronald Green in the same issue listed eight ethical thinkers
who had been the subject of JRE symposia on their contemporary relevance
– and *every single one of those thinkers was a Christian*, a point that
Green somehow managed to avoid even mentioning. The message, whether
intended or not, is clear: *we*, the readers of JRE, are Christians.
Christian texts apply to us; non-Christian texts don’t. We ask
normatively whether the ideas in Christian texts are correct;
non-Christian texts are treated, at best, with the kind of [patronizing
contempt](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/10/a-disrespectful-performance/)
that doesn’t even ask whether they could be right. (The thinkers in that
1997 symposium who show the sharpest understanding of the journal’s
situation are those, like Stanley Hauerwas, who have no problem with
taking a purely Christian approach.)

Fortunately, Andrew’s post does not hew too closely to the distinction,
as it makes this important point:

> Although these different uses of texts pertain to very different sets
> of questions, I’m not convinced that the “historical” use of texts is
> unphilosophical—which is a mild way of saying that attention to the
> ways in which ethical systems are constructed and lived in history is
> exactly what philosophy needs.

I think this last claim helps point us to a way to transcend the
distinction, and that it is vital to do so. I will take that point up
next time.
