+++
title = "Analytical Philosophy of"
full_title = "Analytical Philosophy of Religion with Indian categories"
date = "2016-11-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/25/2617/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/25/2617/).

Analytical Philosophy of Religion with Indian categories

As part of my attempts to go beyond my confort zone, Wednesday and
Thursday last week I enjoyed two days of full immersion in the
Analytical Philosophy of Religion. In fact, the
[conference](http://danielebertini73.wixsite.com/convegnorelazioni) I
was attending was about the ontological status of relations from the
perspective of Analytical Philosophy of Religion and most speakers
started their talk saying that they were not experts in the one or in
the other field. I was neither nor, which made me the sub-ideal target
for all talks —and yet one who could learn a lot from all.

A few random remarks:

1.  “God” is an ambiguous term, in fact so ambiguous that I wonder why
    does not each study about philosophy of religion start with a
    discussion of what the author means by this word. I pragmatically
    distinguish (for instance, in my
    [teaching](https://ufind.univie.ac.at/de/course.html?lv=140241&semester=2016W))
    between **god as *devatā* ‘deity’** (a superhuman being which is
    better than a human one, but only insofar as s/he has the same
    qualities of a human being in higher degree, like the Greek and
    Roman deities of mythology), **god as *īśvara* ‘Lord’** (the
    omniscient and omnipotent being of rational theology), **god as
    brahman ‘impersonal being’** (the impersonal Absolute of most
    monisms, including Bradley’s one discussed by Guido
    [Bonino](https://unito.academia.edu/GuidoBonino)) and **god as
    *bhagavat* ‘personal God’** (the personal God one directly relates
    to in prayers, without necessarily caring for His/Her omnipotence or
    omniscience, but rather focusing on Him/Her as spouse, parent,
    child, etc.). Within this classification, **Analytical Philosophy of
    Religion appears to focus on the *īśvara* aspect of God**.

1.  It is perhaps self-evident that this approach enables one to discuss
    logically about God and His/Her attributes. God is not a person one
    is in relation with (who could have whimsical desires etc.), but
    rather a perfect being who needs to be logically consistent. The
    only logical problem relates to God’s alterity, so that one could
    wonder how far can human logic reach before crashing against its
    boundaries. Nonetheless, unlike in the case of God as *bhagavat*,
    one needs not worry too much about His/Her lying completely outside
    the realm of thinkability. The *mysterium* can be understood as a
    challenge to think deeper something which, at a certain point (in
    the liberated state) we will all be able to grasp.
2.  Consequently, I could listen to several interesting discussions on
    God’s **temporality** (does His/Her omnipotence include His/Her
    producing effects which are temporal, or is rather His/Her own
    activity itself which is temporal?) and on God’s **knowability**
    (having said that God is not fully knowable by living human beings,
    the purpose of rational theology (continued in analytical philosophy
    of religion) is to find out whether what we can know about Him/Her
    is consistent with what we know through revelation).
3.  The main topic of the conference was, however, **God’s being and its
    relation to His/Her qualities**. Does God *have* wisdom? Or *is*
    wisdom (part of) God? The first definition leads to several
    problems, well-known to scholars of Sanskrit philosophy, insofar as
    one could always conceive a substance without its qualities (e.g.,
    the soul in the state of liberation according to Nyāya) and,
    consequently, God’s relation to His/Her wisdom would end up being
    adventitious. By contrast, the second solution leads to a different
    problem: How can one conceive of God as “being” wisdom? Marco
    [Damonte](https://unige-it.academia.edu/marcodamonte) suggested
    using Frege’s distinction between sense and reference: All Divine
    attributes have the same referent (God), but different senses.
4.  Summing up, it seems that the believers in a *bhagavat* do not gain
    so much out of their readings of rational theology or analytic
    philosophy of religion. This is, in Mario
    [Micheletti](http://www3.unisi.it/ricerca/dip/dsssf/Micheletti.php)‘s
    words “not foundational”: one can believe even without rational
    theology (and, one might add, vice versa: one can enjoy theological
    thinking even without believing). Nonetheless, rational theology can
    persuade believers that what they believe can be rationally believed
    (and it plays a very important role in the metaphysical and
    philosophical discourse).

Long story short, I am very grateful to the organisers, Daniele
[Bertini](https://centrostudicampostrini.academia.edu/DanieleBertini)
and Damiano [Migliorini](https://uinvr.academia.edu/DamianoMigliorini).
My only suggestion for a further improvement would be to allow for even
more time for discussion (perhaps with the help of some leading
questions by the organisers themselves?), especially insofar as their
audacity in putting together physicists, theologians and historians of
philosophy made the attempt to find a common language even more
challenging than usual.

(cross-posted, with minor modifications, on my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
