+++
title = "An interview with Anand"
full_title = "An interview with Anand Vaidya"
date = "2016-11-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/04/an-interview-with-anand-vaidya/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/04/an-interview-with-anand-vaidya/).

An interview with Anand Vaidya

[Anand Vaidya](http://anandvaidya.weebly.com) is Associate Professor of
Philosophy and Director of the Center for Comparative Philosophy at San
Jose State University, and one of this site’s bloggers. His work is in
epistemology, philosophy of mind, and critical thinking–all of which he
engages in a manner that is broadly comparative. His most recent
publication, co-authored with Purushottama Billimoria and Jaysankar
Shaw, is “Absence: An Indo-Analytic Inquiry,” in *Sophia*, but you can
see a long list of his publications on his website
[here](http://anandvaidya.weebly.com/papers.html).

**1. What are you working on right now, and what do you hope to achieve
by it?**

At present I am working on a series of articles and a book on
cross-cultural critical thinking. The core idea is to defend the view
that critical thinking must be taught by using both western and
non-western sources. We need an introductory level critical thinking
book that uses sources from as many places as possible, if we are going
to say that critical thinking is a fundamental way of engaging each
other in the human condition. I am doing this project because I want to
change how critical thinking is taught because I feel we don’t teach
students early on that non-western cultures also contributed to the form
of engagement called critical thinking, and they had interesting,
different, and novel ideas to say about it. I think it is pretty bad at
this stage of human history that we teach and sell the value of critical
thinking by referring to only western sources, such as Socrates, Plato,
Aristotle, etc… I think we ought to be teaching students about critical
thinking by using sources from Arabic, African, Buddhist, Chinese,
Hindu, Latin American, and all other kinds of sources.

**2. How did you come to study Indian philosophy, and how is it related
to your current position?**

I am the director of the Center for Comparative Philosophy at [San Jose
State University](http://www.sjsu.edu/philosophy/). I don’t have this
position because I have some special training in Sanskrit or Indian
philosophy. I have this position because I am committed to the cause of
philosophy without borders and comparative methodology as a valuable
methodology alongside experimental, analytical, and phenomenological
methods. I always knew I wanted to study Indian philosophy. But the
philosophy education system I came up in, in the US, pretty much did not
allow the serious study of it in a philosophy program. I turned to the
proper study of Indian philosophy late in my career after I had finished
working on projects I was interested in that did not relate to Indian
philosophy, such as the epistemology of possibility and necessity. The
two people that have influenced me the most and brought me into Indian
philosophy are Purushottama Bilimoria and Jaysankar Shaw. Aside from
them I have a bad habit of reading a lot.

**3. What advice would you give to students wishing to pursue the study
of Indian philosophy?**

My advice to students that want to study Indian philosophy is to simply
start reading primary and secondary sources while also pursuing other
areas of inquiry. Indian philosophy in my mind is best pursued alongside
other disciplines, like cognitive science, logic, mathematics,
chemistry, physics, western philosophy, linguistics, etc. I am a
proponent of hybrid philosophy where one is always mixing different
things together. One should learn Sanskrit and Logic (many different
kinds). These areas help. It is also useful to study an instrument or
play a sport or do yoga, to make sure your study of Indian philosophy is
balanced in another area.

**4. What have your major intellectual influences been, philosophical or
otherwise?**

My major intellectual influences are almost all western philosophers,
since I turned to Indian philosophy late in my career. However, in
Indian philosophy my major influences are all 20th century scholars of
the field, such as B.K. Matilal, D. Krishna, J. Mohanty, P. Bilimoria,
J. Shaw, A. Chakrabarti, M. Chadha, and J. Ganeri.

**5. What do you think you’ll do next?**

My next major project is to return to working on epistemology and
philosophy of mind from an Indo-Analytic perspective. I have a series of
papers I want to tie together on intuition, perception, inference, and
consciousness that brings together ideas from Analytic philosophy and
Indian philosophy (not that those two terms should be opposed in all
senses).

**6. Where do you think the field should go next, in terms of priorities
and projects?**

I am not certain there is one direction the whole field should go in
next. But I would like to see more work done on experimental philosophy
in relation to comparative philosophy. I think the unification of these
two fields could do a lot of positive good for changing philosophy, just
as Indian philosophy and embodied cognitive science has done a lot of
good.

**7. Finally, a question (originally asked on the 3AM Interview Series):
What books do you recommend to help our readers be taken further into
your philosophical world?**

At present I am reading [*Comparative Philosophy without
Borders*](http://www.bloomsbury.com/us/comparative-philosophy-without-borders-9781472576255/)
by A. Chakrabarti and R. Weber. I think this book captures a lot of
where my mind is going, what I think will be exciting in philosophy in
the near future.

**Previous interviews in this occasional series:**  
[Constance
Kassor](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/30/an-interview-with-constance-kassor/)  
[Matt
Dasti](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/08/20/an-interview-with-matt-dasti/)  
[Shalini
Sinha](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/30/an-interview-with-shalini-sinha-first-in-an-occasional-series/)
