+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-10-09"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/09/tantrika-practitioners-among-muslims/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/09/tantrika-practitioners-among-muslims/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## tAntrika practitioners amongMuslims

Practitioner of tAntrika techniques among Muslims can be broadly
classified under three categories.

1.Practitioners of Hindu mantra vidya-s secretly

2.Mixed tradition – Practitioners who deploy some shAbara like mantra-s

3.Those who stick to Quranic verses using a mix of old Persian ways
coupled with adaptation of haTha yogic practices.

Of the first kind, we have a clear and a definitive example in the case
of S.A. Sattar. He was born in a Muslim family in Andhra and completed
the Quran Sharif at the age of 9. Seeing his interest in tAntrika
matters, during high school, he was led to his Guru Shaik Mohammad
Hussain who taught Sattar many tAntrika rituals. Having achieved success
in these rituals, he helped many people get rid of graha bAdha/doSha-s
with his mantra vidya-s for decades. The following is a brief outline of
Sattar’s vidya-s.

Almost all of the vidya-s that Sattar’s deploys are Hindu. He seems to
deploy a wide variety of Hindu vidya-s ranging from kShudra mantra-s
(relatively – as opposed to mahAvidyA-s) which are in a mix of
Telugu+Sanskrit to great mahAvidyA-s like bagala or the Hindu/Jaina
jvAlAmAlinI. There is also a long garuDa mAlA mantra which is mostly in
Sanskrit but with some Telugu added towards the end. This is deployed
mainly for protection and for destroying all evils generated by standard
abhichAra-s. The other vidya-s from his tradition are aghora vIra
nArasiMha, hanumAn, vIrabhadra, sharabha, shUlinI and one or two
different mantra-s of bhetAla. The prayoga-s mentioned with the above
mantra-s are both offensive and defensive and involve deployment of
mantra, yantra and auShadhi-s. Even for divination he relies on the
Hindu system and is known to employ standard Hindu divinatory
tactics/practices. His mantra-s have some strange mistakes which might
be mispronunciations of Sanskrit words due to transmission in Urdu.

Sattar lived as a normal Muslim and whoever have benefitted from his
mantra vidya-s might have been under a false impression that some
Islamic/Quranic things cured them, while in reality it was the Hindu
devata-s behind the curing and or benefits.

Of the second, we seem to have many examples and mantra -treatises by
such kind are widely published. This kind has a list of yantra-s and
mantra-s to be deployed for various purposes. A good number of these
mantra-s are in a mix of Hindi & Urdu. There is the Hazarat mantra for
example which on examination shows that towards the end it is nR^isiMha
that is invoked.

Coming to the third, we see this kind elaborately described in the
introduction to the contemporary publication of the bhairava padmAvati
kalpa. These are the chisti-s, naqshbandi-s and others who adopted a lot
from haTha yogic practices and Islamized the same. It is possible that
there is no clear marker between the second and third kind. Anyway not
much time will be spent on this subject.

This entry was posted on October 9, 2020 at 9:42 am and is filed under
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/09/tantrika-practitioners-among-muslims/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/09/tantrika-practitioners-among-muslims/trackback/)
from your own site.

