+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-10-02"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/02/nilakantha-dharani-hindu-or-buddhist/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/02/nilakantha-dharani-hindu-or-buddhist/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## nIlakaNTha dhAraNi – Hindu orBuddhist?

![The devata of the nIlkaNTha dhAraNi – The Great Compassion
dhAraNi](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/nilakantha-tryatman.jpg?w=628)

Popular as the Great Compassion dhAraNi in the bauddha realm, the core
structure of the dhAraNi invokes varAha, nArasiMha, viShNu & rudra in
the form of siddha yogeshvara/siddheshvara & nIlakaNTha.

When stripped of the bauddha prefixes and suffixes it should be apparent
that this is a Hindu mAlA mantra appropriated by the bauddha-s.

What is notable is the fact that there is unambiguous reference to the
deeds of rudra as nIlakaNTha mUrti, tripurAri & lakulIsha and it is
interesting that it is referred to nIlakaNTha dhAraNi. It cant get any
shaiva than this.

But if we are to look into the Hindu realm to see a similar invoking of
such a combined form of rudra, varAha & nR^isiMha there is no clear
answer at the moment. However we do have one reference which matches in
a few ways, in the seven headed and 28 handed form of bhairava, where
the rudra/bhairava mukha is flanked on either side by varAha – nR^isiMha
and other mukha-s are shown on top of these three faces.

The dhyAna of this form of rudra/bhairava described in two instances has
the following elements.

“eSha yaGYa varAhaM cha nArasiMhaM cha bhairavaM

bodheshaM lokanAthaM vai sarva sattvAnukaMpanaM”

“trinetraM bhImavadanamekaviMshekShaNaM vibhuM

sapta vaktraM paraM brahma aShTAviMshatibhujAnvitaM

dakShiNe nArAsiMhaM vai vArAhaM chottare vibhuM”

What is notable about this form of bhairava is apart from the rudra
mukha flanked by varAha and nR^isiMha, the deity is called bodhesha and
lokanAtha and sattvAnukaMpana. In the mAlA mantra we have the terms
lokeshvara which has the same meaning as lokanAtha and also bodhaya
bodhaya which matches with bodhesha and the sarva sattvAnukampanaM (one
who is the embodiment of all that is good and compassionate?) which is
close the term mahAsattvAya. Of course the contemporary English
translation of the dhAraNi’s title is termed as the the great compassion
dhAraNi.

Having examined the elements of this bhairava dhyAna now one is
compelled to see if the mantra to be deployed for this bhairava has such
elements which match with the nIlakaNTha dhAraNi. However the mUla
mantra deployed for invoking this bhairava does not have any elements
which we can relate to the nIlakaNTha dhAraNi. We do not have the mAlA
mantra associated with this form of rudra available to us. At this
moment, I speculate a possibility of the bauddha-s appropriating a mAlA
mantra which is related to this seven headed , twenty eight handed form
of rudra/bhairava. There is also a distinct possibility that the
practitioners of this form of rudra, converting to bauddha mata en masse
and taking with them this mAlA mantra and the eventual loss of memory of
the dhAraNi in the Astika relam.

This mantra seems to belong to an early phase in the evolution of mantra
shAstra and its syntax has some similarity with few early
pA\~ncharAtrika mantra-s, though it might be slightly later than the
pa\~ncharAtrika mantra-s being alluded to.

Oct 8, 2020:

One would also wonder if looking into the texts of siddha yogeshvarI
mata /tradition or the mAlinI vijayA might offer any potential clues
about the origin of the dhAraNi as rudra is specifically invoked as
siddha yogeshvara twice in the extant dhAraNi.

The present bauddha form of the dhAraNi is as below:

“namo ratna-trayāya \|nama āryĀvalokiteśvarāya bodhisattvāya
mahāsattvāya mahākāruṇikāya sarva-bandhana-cchedana-karāya
sarva-bhava-samudra-śoṣaṇa-karāya sarva-vyādhi-praśamana-karāya
sarv-ety-upadrava-vināśana-karāyasarva-bhayeṣu trāṇa-karāya \|tasmai
namaskṛtvā imaṃ āryĀvalokiteśvara-bhāṣitaṃ Nīlakaṇṭha-nāma \|hṛdayaṃ
vartayiṣyāmi sarv-ārtha-sādhakaṃ śubhaṃ \|ajeyaṃ sarva-bhutānāṃ
bhava-mārga-viśodhakaṃ \|\|TADYATHĀ \|oṃ āloka e āloka-mati lokātikrānta
ehi Hare āryĀvalokiteśvara mahābodhisattvahebodhisattva
hemahābodhisattvahevirya-bodhisattvahemahākāruṇikāsmara hṛdayaṃ
\|ehy-ehi Hare āryĀvalokiteśvara Maheśvara paramārtha-citta mahākāruṇikā
\|kuru-kuru karma \| sādhaya-sādhaya vidyam \| dehi-dehi tvaraṃ kāmam
gama vihaṇgama vigama siddha-yogeśvara \| dhuru-dhuru viyanta e
mahā-viyanta e \| dhara-dhara dharendreśvara \| cala-cala
vimal-āmalaāryĀvalokiteśvara Jina \|kṛṣṇa-jaṭā-makuṭā ‘varama prarama
virama mahāsiddha-vidyādhara\|bala-bala mahābalabala-bala mahābala
cala cala Mahācala \| kṛṣṇa-varṇa dīrgha-kṛṣṇa-pakṣa-nirghātana he
padma-hasta \| cara cara niśācareśvarakṛṣṇa-sarpa-kṛta-yajñopavīta
\|ehy-ehi mahāVarāha-mukhaTripura-dahan-eśvara
Nārāyaṇa-balopabala-veśa-dhara \|he Nīlakaṇṭha he Mahākāla
hālāhala-viṣa nirjita \<lokasya rāga-viṣa vināśana dveṣa-viṣa-vināśana
moha-viṣa-viṇāśana> \<viṣa-viṣaṃ praṇāśaya \|\>hulu-hulu malla \|hulu
Hare Mahā-Padmanābha \| sara-sara siri-siri suru-suru muru-muru
budhya-budhya bodhaya-bodhaya bodhayā maitriya Nīlakaṇṭha \| ehy-ehi
vāma-sthita-Siṃha-mukha \| hasa-hasa muñca-muñca mahāṭṭahāsam \| ehy-ehi
bho mahāsiddha-yogeśvara \| ehy-ehi bho mahāsiddha-yogeśvara
\|smara-smara taṃ bhagavantaṃ lokita-vilokitaṃ Lokeśvaram tathāgataṃ
\|\<dadāhi me darśana-kāmasya darśanam \| prahlādaya manaḥ svāhā \|\>
\<darśanena prahlādaya manaḥ svāhā \|\> siddhāya svāhā \| mahāsiddhāya
svāhā \| siddha-yogeśvarāya svāhā \| Nīlakaṇṭhāya svāhā \|
Varāha-mukhāya svāhā \| MahāNarasiṃha-mukhāya svāhā \|
MahāNarasiṃha-mukhāya svāhā \| padma-hastāya svāhā
\|kṛṣṇa-sarpa-kṛta-yajñopavitāya svāhā \|mahā-Lakuṭadharāya svāhā
\|mahā-Lakuṭadharāya svāhā \| śaṇkha-śabda-nibodhanāya svāhā
\|vāma-skandha-deśa-sthita-kṛṣṇ-ājināya svāhā \|vyāghra-carma-nivasanāya
svāhā \| Lokeśvarāya svāhā \|sarva-siddheśvaraya svāhā \|namo
bhagavate āryĀvalokiteśvarāya bodhisattvāya mahāsattvāya mahākāruṇikāya
\|siddhyantu me mantra-padāni svāhā \|\|”

If we are to reconstruct it’s original Astika form, it might have looked
as below? – Following is a WIP for now.

“\<??> maheśvara paramārtha-citta mahākāruṇikā \|kuru-kuru karma \|
sādhaya-sādhaya vidyam \| dehi-dehi tvaraṃ kāmam gama vihaṇgama vigama
siddha-yogeśvara \| dhuru-dhuru viyanta e mahā-viyanta e \| dhara-dhara
dharendreśvara \| cala-cala vimal-āmala\<\> Jina \|kṛṣṇa-jaṭā-makuṭā
‘varama prarama virama mahāsiddha-vidyādhara\|bala-bala
mahābalabala-bala mahābala cala cala Mahācala \| kṛṣṇa-varṇa
dīrgha-kṛṣṇa-pakṣa-nirghātana he padma-hasta \| cara cara
niśācareśvarakṛṣṇa-sarpa-kṛta-yajñopavīta \|ehy-ehi mahāVarāha-mukha
tripura-dahan-eśvara nārāyaṇa-balopabala-veśa-dhara \|he nīlakaṇṭha he
mahākāla hālāhala-viṣa nirjita viṣama-viṣaṃ praṇāśaya \|hulu-hulu malla
\|hulu Hare Mahā-Padmanābha \| sara-sara siri-siri suru-suru muru-muru
budhya-budhya bodhaya-bodhaya bodhayā Nīlakaṇṭha \| ehy-ehi
vāma-sthita-Siṃha-mukha \| hasa-hasa muñca-muñca mahāṭṭahāsam \| ehy-ehi
bho mahāsiddha-yogeśvara \| ehy-ehi bho mahāsiddha-yogeśvara \|\<dadāhi
me darśana-kāmasya darśanam \| prahlādaya manaḥ svāhā \|\> \<darśanena
prahlādaya manaḥ svāhā \|\> siddhāya svāhā \| mahāsiddhāya svāhā \|
siddha-yogeśvarāya svāhā \| Nīlakaṇṭhāya svāhā \| Varāha-mukhāya svāhā
\| MahāNarasiṃha-mukhāya svāhā \| MahāNarasiṃha-mukhāya svāhā \|
padma-hastāya svāhā \|kṛṣṇa-sarpa-kṛta-yajñopavitāya svāhā
\|mahā-Lakuṭadharāya svāhā \|mahā-Lakuṭadharāya svāhā \|
śaṇkha-śabda-nibodhanāya svāhā \|vāma-skandha-deśa-sthita-kṛṣṇ-ājināya
svāhā \|vyāghra-carma-nivasanāya svāhā \| Lokeśvarāya svāhā
\|sarva-siddheśvaraya svāhā \|siddhyantu me mantra-padāni svāhā \|\|”
– WIP.

This entry was posted on October 2, 2020 at 4:21 pm and is filed under
[bauddha](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/bauddha/),
[shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/). You can
follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/02/nilakantha-dharani-hindu-or-buddhist/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/02/nilakantha-dharani-hindu-or-buddhist/trackback/)
from your own site.

