+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-10-12"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/12/samanya-vishamantra-vada-and-higher-rituals-naga-vashya-nigraha/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/12/samanya-vishamantra-vada-and-higher-rituals-naga-vashya-nigraha/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## sAmAnya viShamantra vAda and higher rituals – nAga vashya –nigraha

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/vishnu-padmanabha.jpg?w=960)

sAmAnya viShamantra vAda – By this is meant the ability of a mantrin to
remove poison / viSha from one who is bitten.

Implicit in the ability to perform viShamantra vAda is the power to
control nAga / sarpa at some level. For example an ancestor of mine who
was a successful viSha mantravAdin in the village is also known to be
friendly with sarpa-s. The anecdote is that in the farm sarpa-s used to
play on his uttarIya when placed on the grass and one can look at
similar anecdotes around different people with the ability or the tale
of the tribal Koya Lord (koya dora in Telugu) from the East Godavari
region which will be narrated later. Also see about a great
viShamantravAdin by name pAmula narasayya garu from Andhra:
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TC_Z8L22_ms>

Though the ability to perform sAmAnya viShamantra vAda in itself is
extra ordinary and performed only by a gifted few, there are what can be
considered as higher abilities beyond this. By abilities we specifically
speak of abilities related to sarpa / nAga and not about other siddhi-s.
Sanderson mentions a set of shAkta rites which are primarily targeted at
subduing great nAga-s / high nAga-s and extracting favors from them.

The example of a mahAmAntrika from the South narrated in kalhaNa’s
rAjataraMgiNi, who was about to capture and bind the great nAga
mahApadma is one example. Similarly the instructions relating to an
a\~Nga vidyA of kAlasaMkarShiNi by name vidyAvidyeshvarI from the same
paper reproduced below:

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/10/image-1.png?w=624)

At times, if in a place crawling with a multitude of sarpa / nAga, many
people effected by viSha approach viShamantravAdin-s, they might be
overwhelmed by the numerous requests made by clients and since the
ability of viShApaharaNa has its limits and since there is also
something called a “cool down period”, based on the specificity of the
instruction with which the siddhi is acquired, such large scale sarpa
bAdha might require a different solution.

In such cases a great pA\~ncharAtra rite might be deployed the details
of which are as below:

One is to construct a maNTapa with four pillars and four dvAra-s in a
temple or river bank or garden or near a mountain adorned around with
darbha mAla-s. Nine kalasha-s are to be installed within and a homa
kuNDa arranged to the East of the kalasha-s. Invoke the nava mUrti-s
into the nine kalasha-s and offer the ShoDhasa upachAra with arghya etc.
along with pAyasa naivedya. Then a specific yantra is drawn and sheSha
is installed into this copper yantra. A snapana is to be performed to
this nAga yantra with ghee, honey, milk, curd, and gomaya along with
mantrochchAraNa. Perform archana to this nAga yantra with gandha,
dhUpAdi and offer pAyasa and gokShIraM cow milk to the nAga yantra as
naivedya.

Now the homa kuNDa is to be dug out and the nAga yantra placed facing
the sky and perform agni pratiShTha and perform homa on top of the
yantra with milk, curd, ghee, honey and samit-s of brahma vR^ikSha as
oblations. A thousand oblations are to be made with each of the above
dravya-s. Make 10,000 oblations of wild rice cooked in cow milk. If the
rite is successful, it is said that after three days, the place
(intended area where sarpa bAdha is prevalent) will experience a great
rain and the earth drenched in the same, resulting in freedom from nAga
/ sarpa bAdha.

This entry was posted on October 12, 2020 at 4:14 pm and is filed under
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/12/samanya-vishamantra-vada-and-higher-rituals-naga-vashya-nigraha/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/12/samanya-vishamantra-vada-and-higher-rituals-naga-vashya-nigraha/trackback/)
from your own site.

