+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-10-16"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/16/mala-samskara-vidhi-in-pancharatra-vaikhanasa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/16/mala-samskara-vidhi-in-pancharatra-vaikhanasa/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## mAlA saMskAra vidhi in pA\~ncharAtra &vaikhAnasa

The vaikhAnasa one is simple which will be noted first:

On a pITha make a ShaTkoNa and inscribe the ramA bIja in centre. Place
the tulasI or padmAkSha in the center. Perform proxaNa with
dadhikrAvaNNo…, ApohiShThA… hiraNya pavamAna mantra-s. Perform abhiSheka
with pure water.

Into the padmAkSha mAlA, with the mantra ato devA… invoke and invite
viShNu and perform archana. Into the tulasI invoke, invite and perform
archana to shrI with shriyai jAta mantra. Uttering charaNaM pavitraM etc
perform samarpaNa to bhagavAn and always wear it. – From the vaikhAnasa
ahnikAmR^itaM

This is for a mAlA which is to be worn. I guess the same procedure is to
be applied for a japa mAlA also in the vaikhAnasa system?

pA\~ncharAtra:

We take the jayAkhya saMhita to make our notes and with help from
Padoux’s article on the same. The chapter begins with the usual
statements though delving more into the chapter reveals its uniqueness.

Andre Padoux’s takes the shlokas which talk about the pramANa / size of
the bead in the japa mAla to be describing the material for the bead
itself and is apparently mistaken, unless Padoux’s translation is based
on a different version, which is doubtful.

The shloka mentions that there are three acceptable sizes of the beads
namely the akSha asthi mAtra, seed of gooseberry – dhAtri phala garbha
pramANa and the seed of the badarI – badarAsthi mAtra, the former being
more preferred than the later.

Padoux takes akSha to be rudrAkSha and finds it interesting that a
pA\~ncharAtra text prefers rudrAkSha-s over the others. But the shloka
is only taking about the size of the bead and not on the material of the
bead itself. If we assume akSha to be short for padmAkSha but then the
later two sizes that are mentioned are too close to the general size of
the lotus seeds that are contemporarily available to us and hence
doubtful. So akSha here can mean either a lotus seed that is
distinguishably larger than the seed of the dhAtrI phala that might be
in vogue at the time and place of JS redaction, or it can mean the
largest size of the rudrAkSha that is regularly available i.e. the
unusually large ones – statistical outliers being discounted.

The material can be Gold Silver and other metals mentioned.
Interestingly for a mAla made to gain yakSha/yakShiNI related
achievements, beads made of tin are to be used, lead for rAkShasa-s &
piShAcha-s, bronze for sarpa-s and nAga-s. Lotus seeds and sha\~Nkha
mAla may be used by one desiring wealth.

Once the appropriate bead is determined and acquired, they are to be
cleansed with sandal water uttering the astra mantra. The thread also is
to be cleansed similarly and the beads placed in the prescribed manner
into a circle along with a meru.

Now apply sandal paste and place the mAlA in a tray / vessel and offer
puShpa dhUpa etc. Imagine that the mAlA ia being burned up by the power
of teh astra mantra after which it is to be imagined as being immersed
in parAmR^ita and acquiring a form. The form should be four handed with
vara bhaya mudras and two in a\~njali and seated on the brahma randra
like a flame. Then one is to deploy the akSha sUtra mantra to perform
the sakalIkaraNa and then pUja to the akShamAlA. The akSha sUtra mantra
being: oM kaustubha trailokyaishvaryada gopanAkShasUtrAya namaH or
alternately oM ThAM akShsUtrAya namaH. Padoux’s reading has
trailokeshvaryada and give the meaning “giver of soverignity over the
three worlds” for some reason, even though the published version reads
trailokyaishvaryda. After this one visualizes that the parA vaiShNavI
shakti “shining like the full moon moving in the sky, surrounded like
the sun by  
rays, increased in power by the energy of the fire that destroys the
cosmic  
cycles,” in the middle of hR^itpadma while performing pUraka and is
imagined to be restricted using kuMbhaka. Then one visualizes the parA
vaiShNavI shakti to be rising towards the brahmarandhra from the
hR^itpadma and while performing rechaka it is to be visualized that the
akSha sUtra is now filled with this parA vaiShNavi shakti. So now the
akShamAlA is to be visualized as lighting up the entire yAgashAla just
like a full moon lights up the night and it is to be visualized that the
highest mantra along with a multitude of mantra-s, the bhagavat shakti
constituting the mantra, the mantra akShara-s and the akShamAla as to be
visualized as one just like there is no difference between milk and the
water within. Here perhaps, the parA vaiShNavI shakti is the milk and
the akShamAla the water. By mixing these the akShamAlA is perhaps to be
visualized as being infused with the parA vaiShNavI shakti or the
mantrAtmaka bhagavachChakti and is to be “imagined falling like a shower
of sparks on the rosary so as, as it were, to pervade it with its power
and reinforce the ‘mantrisation’ of the rosary”. Then a viGYApna is made
to bhagavAn “saying: ‘O Acyuta! \[You who are here\] in the shape of the
rosary, give \[it\] to me.’ He imagines thus that the rosary is given to
him by Acyuta so as to perform the japa of the mantra.”

Having thus obtained the akShamAlA from achyuta one performs upachAra-s
to the same with puShpa dhUpa etc and a request is made to achyuta to be
present in the bead and in the thread as long as the Sun, Moon and Stars
exist. Then one shows the akShasUtra mudra. After this one performs an
act of coherent-contemplation (i.e. anusandhAna visheShaH) which seeks
to connect to the practitioner, the viShNu in the form of shakti, who
through the form of mantra, brought about this world, the different
states of consciousness (i.e. jAgrat svapnAdi), with the different
states of vAk and the evolution of the mantra from the turIya to the
jAgrat and vice versa. In short one does a complex contemplation/
meditation of the vivartana of the mantra from turIya to jAgrat and the
nivartana back to turIya. This passage describing the anusandhAna seems
slightly complex to me and will be revisited with an elaborate notes at
a later point.

Once this contemplation of complete, one meditates on parameshvara in
the hR^itpadma in the form of self luminous being emitting light. The
shabdamayI shakti is to be seen as being emitted from this light like a
flame. Like a flower blooming from a creeper over a period of time, the
mantrarAT is to be seen as emerging from this flaming shadbamayI shakti.
This visualization process is to be repeated as happening in the
akShamAla also and in the end all is to be merged again into the
sAdhaka’s hR^itpadma. After this one is to start the japa.

— There is much scope for both the translation and hence understanding
to improve. To be updated in future.

This entry was posted on October 16, 2020 at 4:43 pm and is filed under
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/),
[vaikhAnasa](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/vaikhanasa/),
[vaiShNava](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/16/mala-samskara-vidhi-in-pancharatra-vaikhanasa/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/16/mala-samskara-vidhi-in-pancharatra-vaikhanasa/trackback/)
from your own site.

