+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-10-20"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/20/two-streams-of-vanadurga-upasana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/20/two-streams-of-vanadurga-upasana/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## Two streams of vanadurgA upAsana & the evolution of the mahAvidyAsystem

From a survey of the available literature we can surmise the existence
of two distinct streams/traditions of vanadurgA upAsana. The first is
popular among some circle of practitioners in the South as the mahAvidyA
tradition. The second is the unalloyed vanadurgA upAsana.

Both traditions have special features / deployments and most importantly
each tradition seems unaware (in terms of practice) of the existence of
a parallel tradition.

The first of the these which is the popular mahAvidyA tradition comes in
different packages. The most ancient of these is the mahAvidyA stotra
followed by the related upaniShads. Then we have the vanadurgA
pa\~nchashati followed by the vanadurgA saptashati. Even as a great
river starts as a tiny stream, so does the mahAvidyA tradition seems to
have its origins in a miniature work called the mahAvidyA stotra.
At-least two different published mahAvidyA stotra-s are available to us
which give us an impression of two different stages in the evolution of
the mahAvidyA tradition. The two mahAvidyA stotra-s mentioned above are
published from the North. After this we have the vanadurgA upaniShad &
navadurgA upaniShad with almost similar content. The content of both
these upaniShad-s match the vanadurgA mahAvidyA pa\~nchashati. We can
even say that the pa\~nchashati is a structured and well organized
rearrangement of the upaniShad-s mentioned above with more content
added.

The mahAvidyA pa\~nchashati is popular in Andhra and is supposedly based
on a fragment from the rudra yAmala. A examination of the vanadurgA
saptashati popular in some upAsana circles from Tamil Nadu & Karnataka
seems like an extension of the mahAvidyA pa\~nchashati to make it 700
like the durgA / chaNDI saptashatI. There is a further enthusiastic and
recent publication from Andhra with 1300 mantra-s which is merely adding
more mantra-s to the existing 500 & 700.

Of all the above three (500 , 700 & 1300) variations of the VD mahAvidyA
systems, the pa\~nchashati system seems genuine and original and older
relatively. The VD saptashati is more like an imitation of the 500 with
more mantra-s added with a specific intent to reach the 700 number.
Having said that, the other 200 mantra-s that get added are undoubtedly
of great value. Below is a list of works which define the mahAvidyA
system in chronological order. The former being earlier work than the
later.

1)mahAvidyA stotra-s – Said to be from the bhairavI tantra and a shorter
one from unknown source. On closer examination the shorter stotra is a
part of former with minor differences)

2)navadurgA upaniShad – Said to be from the atharvaNa rahasya.

3)vanadurgA upaniShad – Also said to be from atharvaNa rahasya but
clearly later than above.

4)vanadurgA mahAvidyA pa\~nchashati

5)vanadurga saptashati

The differences between the two traditions are listed below. More can
perhaps be added on closer examination but the following are noted for
now.

1\) The usual practitioners of the mahAvidyA vanadurgA system are often
unware of the mantra-s referred to in the other vanadurgA tradition.
However, even those who have normal VD mantra without the elaborate
mahAvidyA system are not aware of the complete VD kalpa

2)Furthermore, almost all the mahAvidyA pArAyaNa publications till date
give a mantra of VD with some bIja-s prefixed and are 45 lettered
instead of the 37 lettered mantra in the given in the shAradA or
prapa\~nchasAra.  
The 45 lettered mantra with the variation is no accident and neither can
it be seen as a faulty transmission because along with the bIja-s at the
front, appear in the VD mantra varNAvalI stuti and in the VD kavacha
that are part of the mahAvidyA tradition.

3\) The other distinction being the a\~Nga-s for the VD mantra. While
the VD kalpa specifies 5 a\~Nga-s almost in all the mahAvidyA
publications, the VD mantra comes with 6 a\~Nga-s.

4)The R^iShi for the mantra in the other non-mahAvidyA sources is
araNyaka while in the mahAvidyA system, it is kirAtarUpa-dhara Ishvara

5\) The devata in non mahAvidyA systems is simply referred to as
vanadurgA while in the mahAvidyA system the devata is referred to as
antaryAmI nArAyaNa Ishvaro vanadurgA devatA or according to the VD
upaniShad it is antaryAmI nArAyaNa Ishvaro vanadurgA gAyatrI devatA

6\) A certain digbandha mantra is specified in the non mahAvidyA
tradition which does not appear in the VD mahAvidyA systems. Instead the
mahAvidyA systems have elaborate digbandhana-s and these digbandhana-s
are not referred to other stream of VD upAsana.

7\) The mahAvana mantra given in the non mahAvidyA system of vanadurgA
never appears in any of the published mahAvidyA texts. Acquainted
members of a certain tradition who have been practicing the VD mahAvidyA
pArAyaNa for many generations are not aware of this mahAvana mantra.

8\) The relation to other mantra-s: In the mahAvidyA system, all
vaiShNava and shaiva mantra-s along with those used for apotropaic rites
are seen as a\~Nga mantra-s. The other vanadurgA tradition however
recommends combination of VD mantra with other mantra-s which are
standard fare for apotropaic rites and it in even says shAntika rites
may be performed with only those other mantra-s without having to
necessarily combine it with VD.

9\) In the non mahAvidyA system there is a mention of 37 special names
of vanadurgA corresponding to the 37 letters of the mantra. This set of
names are absent in any of the vanadurgA mahAvidyA texts.

The evolution of the mahAvidyA system:

The mahAvidyA stotra-s are primarily meant for mahAshAnti i.e. to arrest
great calamities. This feature is consistently seen in all mahAvidyA
texts in the form of “mahAdevasya tejasA bhayaMkara ariShTa devatAM
bandhayAmi…” and similar utterances. The core of the mahAvidyA stotra is
addressed to rudra and is essentially a digbandhana by an extensive
deployment of the rudra dashAkShari. This is followed by again deploying
the said rudra mantra along with the matR^ika-s towards the end. This
core structure is interspersed with jvara nAshana, roga nAshana mantra-s
and occasioanlly calling upon gaNesha, durgA & bhairava. aryama is said
to be R^iShi and sadAshiva the devata in one version and in the version
supposedly from the bhairavI tantra, we have kAlikA as the devata for
this stotra. This core part of rudra digbandhana continues all the way
from the mahAvidyA stotra-s to the vanadurgA saptashati. It is as if the
mahAvidyA sarasvatI rUpa rudra digbandhana, gains tributaries in the
form of additional digbandhana-s as it traverses the path of kAla.

A clear link can be established between the navadurgA upaniShad and the
earlier mahAvidyA stotra for the following reasons:

1)The shloka mahAvidyAM pravakShyAmI mahAdevena nirmitAM from the
mahAvidyA stotra is to be found in the navadurgA upaniShad.

2)Additionally the mantra which starts with kulakarI gotrakarI in the
mahAvidyA stotra which appears in the begining of the mahAvidyA
stotra-s, though found in both upaniShads gets shifted to the middle in
the vanadurgA upaniShad to make space for new digbandhana-s and
mantra-s, unlike its appearance at the start in the navadurgA.

It is in the navadurgA upaniShad that we get introduced to the vanadurgA
mantra for the first time. When we say first, we are only taking about
the mahAvidyA system. The earliest mention of the vanadurgA mantra is in
the famous pA\~ncharAtra Agama, pAdma saMhita. The earlier mahAvidyA
stotra-s do not include it but only have the term durge mahAshAntike as
a direct reference to durgA. As for the title of the work navadurgA, it
has little or nothing to do with the standard lists of navadurgA-s found
in various works. Here nava is perhaps meant as new instead of nine.
That brings the question if this is the new durgA upaniShad, what is
being referred to as old durgA upaniShad. At-least one source refers to
the devyatharvashIrSha as the durgopanishad. This is no surprise as the
text begins with durgA and ends with durgA even though it expounds three
great shAkta mantra-s betwixt. So the contents of the navadurgA
upaniShad seem to be so titled, as to distinguish it with the earlier
durgA upaniShad i.e. the devyatharvashIrSha.

By the time we come to the vanadurgA upaniShad, we see additional
mantra-s and digbandhana-s added. Of special mention among the
additional material are the vindhyavAsinI and the manhiShamardinI
mantra-s. A rather insignificant but interesting point to note is that
in the navadurgA upaniShad the vanadurgA mantra is given in its usual
form but in the vanadurgA upaniShad it is spelled out in an inverse
form. Interestingly a recent publication on mantra-s by svAmi
shAntAnanda pUri mahArAj refers to the vanadurgA mantra as digbandhana
mahA mantra perhaps due to the association with several digbandhana-s. A
difference from the navadurgA upaniShad is the presence of kArtyavIrya
digbandhana which is one of few digbandhana-s that appears for the first
time in this system. The mantra-s of the vA\~ncha kalpalata make it to
the vanadurgA upaniShad along with vaTuka and the chaNDI mAlA mantra.

Both the upaniShads do not mention the ancient deity gAruDI which is
called upon in the mahAvidyA stotra-s. However, the memory is not
completely lost and the vanadurgA upaniShad and the pa\~nchashati do
include a few garuDa mantra-s.

Of the many pa\~nchashati, publications from Andhra, the only one which
exudes authenticity is the one published by late shrI virajAnandanAtha.
Everything else is an imitation. Equally good is the work of shrI pAtUri
sItArAmA\~njaneylu garu, though it is not pa\~nchashati but a structured
and well organized publication of the vanadurgA upaniShad. Apart from
presenting the mahAvidyA material in a well organized and structured
manner, the superiority of shrI virajAnandanAtha’s publication lies in
the presentation of many practice and deployment related details for
some of the mantra-s of this system, which are not found elsewhere. This
work has shloka-s with a short description of the mantra-s found in this
system along with the viniyoga and purashcharaNa.

While this is so, different lineages who practice the mahAvidyA have
their own secretive digbandhana-s which are unlikely to get published.
The pa\~nchashati evolving into the final vanadurgA saptashati in few
particular lineages is an outcome of such addition of secretive (or not
so popular) digbandhana-s based on lineages/transmissions or need based
additions of mantra-s. Given the popularity of durgA/chaNDI saptashati,
the final count gets rounded to 700 by addition of a few useful mantra-s
and we have the vanadurgA saptashati.

Though more can be written about the specific content of mahAvdiyA
related texts, we stop at this point.

Oct 26th:

The mahAvidyA system developed further and is recorded in the aMbikA
khanDa from the IshAna saMhita from where we have the vanadurgA
mahAvidyA sahasranAma. I wasn’t able to figure it out myself but I was
told this sahasranAma incorporates the mantra. The 1008 has an
interesting nyAsa where she is seen as siMha mukhI, vyAghra mukhI, ashva
mukhI, gaja mukhI, vR^iShabha mukhI and aja mukhI. Each mukha of the
devI will grant a specific boon like ashva mukhI being anna pradA.

Also the aMbikA khaNDa gives an unusal dhyAna of vanadurgA as below: She
is of green complexion like that of dUrvA grass and equipped with the
bow and arrow, and is seated on a great mahiSha (male-buffalo) and is
three eyed. She is accompanied by her tribal gaNa-s and canines and is
seated in the lap of kirAteshvara or kirAta rudra.

There seem to be two vanadurgA kalpa-s. One belonging to the mahAvidyA
system in the form of a dialogue between shiva & pArvatI and is claimed
to be part of rudra yAmala. The mantra varNAvalI stuti & aShTottara etc
come from this text. The second is in the form of a dialogue between the
deva skanda & agastya and belongs in the other camp. One wonders if this
is part of skanda yAmala.

This entry was posted on October 20, 2020 at 10:10 am and is filed under
[durgA -
daurgAgama](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/durga-daurgagama/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/20/two-streams-of-vanadurga-upasana/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/10/20/two-streams-of-vanadurga-upasana/trackback/)
from your own site.

