+++
title = "“Who We Are #3"
full_title = "“Who We Are #3 Neanderthals"
date = "2018-04-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/03/who-we-are-3-neanderthals/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/03/who-we-are-3-neanderthals/).

“Who We Are: #3 Neanderthals

In Chapter 2, Encounters With Neanderthals, David Reich talks about his
work in analyzing the first successfully sequenced Neanderthal genomes,
and the discoveries that led to.

Reich’s team, with Nick Patterson making an especially important
contribution, found that Neanderthals were about equally \[genetically\]
close to Europeans, East Asians, and people from New Guinea, but closer
to all non-Africans than to sub-Saharan Africans. This was what you
would expect if the ancestors of non-Africans had interbred with
Neanderthals, while sub-Saharan Africans had not.

Even thought these results were statistically very strong, Reich was
skeptical because it went against the scientific consensus of the time –
that there had been no admixture between anatomically modern humans and
archaics such as Neanderthals as AMH expanded out of Africa. This was a
question that I and John Hawks were interested in. We had concluded that
the “scientific consensus” was based on nothing and put no stock in it.
We had predicted that such admixture would be found, and that sometimes
Neanderthal alleles would have conferred selective advantages and become
common. Our reasoning went as follows:

The evidence for zero mixing was weak. It was clear that modern humans
did not carry Neanderthal Y-chromosomes or mtDNA, but that could have
occurred because they reduced fitness (a slight reduction have been
enough to eliminate them, over tens of thousands of years) or because
they were never common and were later lost by chance. Y-chromosomes and
mtDNA are only two loci. We had checked what was known about successful
hybridization in mammals: it turned out that after two species
separated, it usually took a couple of million years for serious genetic
incompatibility to develop. But we knew, from the fossil record, the
Neanderthals split off around a half million years ago. Hybridization
should have been possible. Moreover, if it happened, even at a low
level, it would be an efficient means of transmitting new favorable
alleles to modern humans, some of which might be common today.

One reason \[ we think\] for that bogus scientific consensus was a
confusion of terms. Paleontologists call two sets of fossils separate
species if they look sufficiently different \[morphological species\]
while biologists usually define separate species as populations that
can’t interbreed. Those aren’t equivalent definitions: we can
distinguish the skeletons of Labrador retrievers and poodles, yet
labradoodles happen.

Another reason: Ernst Mayr, a prominent figure in biology had opined
that hybridization was an unimportant factor in evolution, as far as I
can tell for no particular reason at all. For equally mysterious
reasons, people paid attention to him.

Anyhow, Reich’s skepticism led to even better evidence for mixing with
Neanderthals, which is the way it’s supposed to work in science. By
looking at the average length of Neanderthal-derived segments of the
genome, they were able to make a rough estimate of the time of mixing.
Later work, using ancient DNA from a modern human that lived and died in
Siberia about 45,000 years ago, gave a more accurate of 50-60 thousand
years ago for Neanderthal admixture. The fact that the amount of
Neanderthal admixture was not very different in widely separated
populations in Eurasia suggested that admixture occurred in the Middle
East, an inevitable first step in expanding out of Africa.

Later work showed something very interesting: the amount of Neanderthal
ancestry ( in regions that actually do anything) has been slowly
declining over time. In certain regions you see no Neanderthal ancestry
at all – Neanderthal gene deserts – bu the trend is general. Not
universal, since some Neanderthal genes appear to have been useful and
have become common, but the general trend is the gradual shedding of the
minority genome.

There are a couple of explanations under consideration for this genetic
rejection. One is that Neanderthals were messed up: because their
long-term numbers were lower, particularly at glacial maxima, purifying
selection would have been less efficient in Neanderthals, and slightly
deleterious mutations would have accumulated to higher levels than in
anatomically modern humans. We have more example: it looks as if most of
the functional part the Denisovan genome is also being slowly rejected
by Melanesians. But there’s more: West Africans seem to have have picked
up genes from an archaic group in Africa that are slowly being rejected,
while Altai Neanderthals seem to have picked some modern human ancestry
( possibly from the Qafzeh-Shkul population in the middle East around
100,000 years ago) and they were rejecting the modern human genome. I
can’t see how Neanderthal genomes could simultaneously be both better
than and worse than modern human genomes: I think it more looks like a
kind of mild incompatibility, where every subspecies is rejecting
minority DNA from any exterior source. If true that would be very
interesting. But I could be wrong. Probably am.

Reich believes that moderns and Neanderthals were at the edge of
biological compatibility, probably with reduced fertility. The evidence
is that there is an especially low level of Neanderthal ancestry on the
X chromosome, a known hotspot for fertility problems in crosses between
related species. And that’s good evidence. But on the other hand,
comparisons with other mammalian sister species indicates that it
usually takes a considerably longer separation before real fertility
problems show up – enough, say, to materially inhibit gene flow.

Probably we need to define terms. I think that a few-percent decrease in
fertility in people with large amounts of Neanderthal ancestry might be
enough to create those Neanderthal gene deserts on the X chromosome –
but at the time, nobody would have noticed it. Smallish effects had
something like 2000 generations to play out.

