+++
title = "Live Not By Lies"
full_title = "Live Not By Lies"
date = "2018-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/08/live-not-by-lies/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/08/live-not-by-lies/).

Live Not By Lies

The Genomics of Race and Identity

Reich starts out strong, telling the story of his work on identifying
African-origin alleles that drive increased prostate cancer risk in
African-Americans – and the dumbshit responses he got from his
colleagues. He mentions an anthropologist that questioned his mention of
“African” and ” European” DNA segments: he was flirting with racism.
What a fool. By the way, there’s something odd and interesting in that
early result: why would most of the risk variants all land in one small
segment of the genome? But back to the fools: Reich talks about the
anthropologists \[ Montagu\] , geneticists \[Lewontin\] , and
sociologists that have argued that ‘race’ has no biological reality,
that there are not really any significant biological differences between
races, that research into such differences should be banned ( why is
this necessary if differences don’t exist?), etc. All liars, of course.
Although I can think of a few people saying similar things that are not
liars: they’re just not very bright.

Speaking of such differences, here’s one Reich elucidated a few years
back. The white count (white blood cells, neutrophils) is about a
standard deviation lower in people of African descent than it is in
Europeans? Why? Turns out it is innate, biological and quite simple:
there’s a variant of the DARC gene that has a frequency \> 99% in West
Africans and \< 1% in Europeans: that variant causes the lower white
count. That African DARC variant is an almost perfect defense against
vivax malaria, which is surely why it became so common.

Reich explains how recent genetic analysis shows that people’s genes
cluster in ways that correspond pretty well with old-fashioned notions
of ‘race’. He prefers to talk about 'ancestry', because (in his view)
the word 'race' is too ill-defined and loaded with historical baggage.
Whatever.

He goes on to say that people that deny the possibility of substantial
differences between populations just can't do it anymore: they're
putting themselves in an indefensible position. He is wrong: sure, their
position is logically indefensible, the facts are against it, but what
does that matter? The significantly crazier idea that there are no
differences between the sexes – that sexual dimorphism itself is a myth
promulgated by the Gnomes of Zurich or the orbital mind-control lasers –
has become very powerful in much of the Western world: barking-mad
craziness apparently doesn't need to defend itself.

He says that geneticists have tended to 'obfuscate' on this topic,
mentioning Richard Lewontin. I'd put it a bit differently: they lie.

Reich mentions independent genome bloggers, some of them skilled
analysts, who are on the whole less inclined to go along with the usual
falsehoods. He thinks that means you can’t keep up the charade: again,
he’s very likely wrong, not least because those skilled genome bloggers
have a tiny audience. More important, Reich himself doesn’t want to keep
up the charade. That may matter.

Reich goes on to demolish some fairly common false arguments about how
different human races – excuse me, ‘ ancestral populations ‘ – really
can’t be very different, at least not in any traits that would upset
people. You know, for the same reasons that dog breeds can’t really be
very different.

First, an argument that somehow it’s very hard, or takes forever, for
natural selection to change traits that are influenced by many genes. I
have no idea where this piece of nonsense originated – we’ve been
selecting on highly polygenic quantitative traits forever and a day
without any special problems. In the standard formulation for estimating
the effects of selection, the number of genes influencing the trait
drops out of the equation entirely. It just doesn’t matter. Reich
understands this, not least because he’s done analysis of selection for
height in Europeans.

Some might say that genetic influences in height are one thing, but
surely genetic influences on cognition and behavior are mystically
unknowable. Reich knows better: he knows that recent studies are finding
those influences. Reich weasels a little, suggesting that these variants
may influence educational achievement by influencing timing of
childbirth – but probably not, since the pro-educational alleles also
result in larger brains.

He also knows that the plus alleles, the ones that increase
intelligence, are getting rarer at a scary pace, decreasing IQ at
something like a point a generation. This illustrates a pattern with
Reich: this was roughly understood a long time ago, just from looking at
demography and fertility patterns. It was known before genomic analysis
existed. Cyril Kornbluth knew about it back in the 1950s – thus his
short story “The Marching Morons”. Reich could have known this when he
was twelve, but I doubt if he did. Reich often seems to think that if a
result wasn’t proved using powerful contemporary genomic methods (what
he uses), it wasn’t really known at all. If I don’t know it, it’s not
knowledge: that’s a wrong way of thinking.

next fallacy: human populations just haven’t been separated long enough
to have changed much due to selection. He knows that’s not correct. He
points out that in many cases populations have been separated for 50,000
years, while some African groups appear to have been separated far
longer, perhaps 200,000 years. A recent study showed that there has been
noticeable evolutionary change in the English over the past 2000 years:
selection for increased height, infant head circumference, blondness,
etc etc. If it can happen there in 2000 years, it can happen anywhere.

And he expects that more such racial differences will be found – but now
he has to weasel again. He says that nobody knows what those differences
will be! So we might find that, in terms of fundamental biological
potentials, Koreans are dumb while Pygmies are tall. Suuuuuuuuuuuuuure.
That could happen.

Next he slams people that suspect that upcoming genetic genetic analysis
will, in most cases, confirm traditional stereotypes about race – the
way the world actually looks.

[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/thrown-to-the-wolves.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/thrown-to-the-wolves.jpg)

The people Reich dumps on are saying perfectly reasonable things. He
criticizes Henry Harpending for saying that he’d never seen an African
with a hobby. Of course, Henry had actually spent time in Africa, and
that’s what he’d seen. The implication is that people in Malthusian
farming societies – which Africa was not – were selected to want to
work, even where there was no immediate necessity to do so. Thus
hobbies, something like a gerbil running in an exercise wheel.

He criticized Nicholas Wade, for saying that different races have
different dispositions. Wade’s book wasn’t very good, but of course
personality varies by race: Darwin certainly thought so. You can see
differences at birth. Cover a baby’s nose with a cloth: Chinese and
Navajo babies quietly breathe through their mouth, European and African
babies fuss and fight.

Then he attacks Watson, for asking when Reich was going to look at
Jewish genetics – the kind that has led to greater-than-average
intelligence. Watson was undoubtedly trying to get a rise out of Reich,
but it’s a perfectly reasonable question. Ashkenazi Jews are smarter
than the average bear and everybody knows it. Selection is the only
possible explanation, and the conditions in the Middle ages –
white-collar job specialization and a high degree of endogamy, were just
what the doctor ordered.

Watson’s a prick, but he’s a great prick, and what he said was correct.
Henry was a prince among men, and Nick Wade is a decent guy as well.
Reich is totally out of line here: he’s being a dick.

Now Reich may be trying to burnish his anti-racist credentials, which
surely need some renewal after having pointing out that race as
colloquially used is pretty reasonable, there’s no reason pops can’t be
different, people that said otherwise ( like Lewontin, Gould, Montagu,
etc. ) were lying, Aryans conquered Europe and India, while we’re tied
to the train tracks with scary genetic results coming straight at us. I
don’t care: he’s being a weasel, slandering the dead and abusing the
obnoxious old genius who laid the foundations of his field. Reich will
also get old someday: perhaps he too will someday lose track of all the
nonsense he’s supposed to say, or just stop caring. Maybe he already
has… I’m pretty sure that Reich does not like lying – which is why he
wrote this section of the book (not at all logically necessary for his
exposition of the ancient DNA work) but the required complex juggling of
lies and truth required to get past the demented gatekeepers of our
society may not be his forte. It has been said that if it was discovered
that someone in the business was secretly an android, David Reich would
be the prime suspect. No Talleyrand he.

He doesn’t just slander, he lies. He says “most stereotypes will be
disproved.” Want to bet? Most stereotypes are true – true everywhere. In
what country do the Chinese disproportionately fill up the special ed
classes? If we we’re talking cognition and personality, the behavioral
geneticists keep finding that A. genetics matters, and B. The usual
suspects, like family environment, don’t matter much.

There may be a few exceptions to ” what you see is what you get”, and
understanding them might be very valuable: if some pop appeared to have
a lot on the ball ( genetically) but isn’t doing well, there might be
another cheap, simple solution, like iodine supplementation. And there
will be differences that are fairly subtle and not much noticed, say in
liver enzymes or the immune system, that might be highly relevant to
disease prevention and treatment.

Reich’s position is that we don’t know anything until someone (him !)
has analyzed it with modern genomic techniques. That’s ridiculous. Reich
found that on average, given similar diets, northern Europeans are about
a standard deviation taller than southern Europeans. But I already knew
that, well before Reich was born. Seneca knew it: Tacitus knew it.
There’s a reason the Byzantines hired plenty of Scandihoovians
(including 7-footer Harold Hardrada) into the Varangian Guard. Mark
Twain knew that Ashkenazi Jews were smart: he didn’t need IQ tests or
GWAS for that.

If he thinks that the genetics typically push in a way that is the
opposite of the patterns we actually observe, he must believe that
environmental influences are very powerful, so much so that there’s not
much point in even knowing genetic influence – and therefore not much
impact from discovering them . But clearly he does worry. Why?

When he says that we don’t have any idea what we’ll find, he’s lying
again.

But don’t think that deliberate deception rules out occasional
confusion. Reich talks about the success of West Africans (and their
diaspora) in track: all the male finalists in the Olympic 100-meter race
since 1980 have had West African ancestry. *Every* men’s world record at
every commonly-run track distance belongs to a runner of African
descent.

He says that A. there could have been an upward shift in West African
sprinting ability due to natural selection, which could easily lead to
vast over-representation at the top level of competition, or B. West
Africans might just have greater genetic variation, which would (he
thinks) lead to a wider spread of abilities. And maybe that greater
variation applies to cognitive traits, where Reich expects a higher
proportion of sub-Saharan Africans with extreme genetically predicted
abilities.

None of this is correct. First, we known damn well that the West African
edge in track is due to systematic racial differences, not greater
phenotypic variability. We know that blacks have shorter torsos and
longer legs, more fast-twitch muscles, narrower hips, lighter calves.
Those same characteristics are disadvantages in some other events, like
swimming. The relatively more mesomorphic build of Europeans pays off in
swimming, weightlifting, wrestling and field events. This kind of
specialization is what you expect from systematic racial differences:
you’d see a different pattern from significantly greater variability in
one group.

The ‘greater variability” theory’s biggest problem is that none of its
obvious implications actually happen. People of African descent just
aren’t in general more variable in phenotype. I checked out the
population variability in height in a number of African countries: it’s
generally about the same as in the US or Europe. I checked out black
variability in IQ (in the US) : it’s noticeably *smaller* than that in
whites – about 12 or 13 points, instead of 15 – combined with a
significantly lower average (about 85) If this “greater variability”
idea were correct, blacks would be greatly over-represented at the very
highest scores on cognitive tests – instead, they are greatly
under-represented. If African-American success in track were due to
greater variability, you’d see them dominate at the highest level of
competition, but far less so in a typical high school. But you do see it
in low-level competition, to the point where white kids increasingly
don’t even bother to compete in black-dominated events.

Or you could look at domesticated animals, which always have less
genetic variation their wild ancestors. Is the smallest wolf smaller
than a Chihuahua – is the largest wolf larger than a Great Dane? No.
Selection dominates. Or look at the results of breeding experiments: the
general trend is that increasing heterozygosity leads to *lower*
phenotypic variability.

I am surprised that Reich, who is a smart guy, would fall for this
notion.

