+++
title = "Injunction and"
full_title = "Injunction and denotation in the Veda"
date = "2015-01-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/01/04/injunction-and-denotation-in-the-veda/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/01/04/injunction-and-denotation-in-the-veda/).

Injunction and denotation in the Veda

What are the principles by which we divide texts into portions, and why
would we want to do that in the first place?

What Elisa has [referred
to](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/22/hermeneutic-principles-in-mima%e1%b9%83sa/)
as “the prescriptive portion of the Veda” is what Mīmāṃsā authors call
*brāhmaṇa*. For Mīmāṃsā, this was the most important portion of the
Vedic text, since this is where our knowledge of *dharma* in the first
instance comes from. The *brāhmaṇa*s are where our dharmic obligations
originate.

It is thus the interpretive agenda of Mīmāṃsā, which contends both that
knowledge of *dharma* comes exclusively from the Veda and that the Veda
eventuates exclusively in knowledge of *dharma*, that motivates the
priority of the *brāhmaṇa*s over other portions as well as the very
category of *brāhmaṇa* itself. This agenda has, over the millennia,
shaped both the way that people think about the Veda and the way the
Veda has been transmitted.

What I find most interesting about the division of the Veda into
*brāhmaṇa* and non-*brāhmaṇa* portions is that Mīmāṃsā grounds the
distinction in the modalities of language: the language of the
*brāhmaṇa*s is generally injunctive (*vidhāyaka*), and that of *mantra*s
(which will represent the non-*brāhmaṇa* portion for my purposes) is
generally non-injunctive (*avidhāyaka*). The definition of *mantra* and
*brāhmaṇa* in the *sūtra*s themselves (2.1.32, 2.1.33) suggests this
treatment, since it has the structure of a rule and exceptions (the Veda
itself is *brāhmaṇa*, except for parts that are denotative rather than
injunctive, which are called *mantra*).

This is not an obvious or intuitive way of talking about the division. I
say this from a “western” perspective, where the criteria for
distinguishing between texts, or between portions of texts, generally
fall into the following categories:

-   **Historical**: portion *x* was composed before or after portion
    *y*, or by different people, etc. This is by far the most
    commonly-invoked class of distinctions in the Western tradition
    (think of, e.g., the Bible, which though it was “revealed” was
    nevertheless authored by historical individuals), but it’s
    completely off-limits to Mīmāṃsā, since it holds the Veda to be an
    authorless text that was not fashioned in history. But this is how
    Indologists generally think of the Veda: the *saṃhitā* text is the
    earliest (and hence most valuable from the perspective of historical
    linguistics and Indo-European studies), and the *brāhmaṇa*s belong
    to a later period.
-   **Formal**: the formal or stylistic characteristics of portions *x*
    and *y* differ. In the case of the Veda, we can say that *brāhmaṇa*s
    mainly consist of prose, and the *saṃhitā*s of verse. Or, we could
    say that the *saṃhitā*s use a certain kind of language—say, the one
    that Pāṇini refers to as *chandas*—that distinguishes it from the
    *brāhmaṇa*s. The difference between injunctive and non-injunctive
    portions partly relates to formal differences, that is, between
    injunctive and non-injunctive verbal endings, but only partly.
-   **Transmissional**: the *Yajurveda*, for example, exists in two
    versions: the White *Yajurveda* transmits the *saṃhitā* text and the
    *brāhmaṇa* text separately, while the Black *Yajurveda* contains
    both interspersed.

From the perspective of Mīmāṃsā, these differences are either specious,
or they result from the more fundamental distinction between injunctive
and non-injunctive mentioned above.

The problem is: how can we possibly motivate the idea the *mantra*s are
non-injunctive and *brāhmaṇa*s are injunctive? Where, in other words,
does the injunctive (or non-injunctive) character of a particular
passage of text come from?

The answers to this question can be classified into language-internal
and language-external accounts. The *pūrvapakṣin* in the
*mantrāvidhāyakatvādhikaraṇa* (2.1.30–31) relies on a language-internal
account: in *mantra*s we sometimes encounter the very same verbal forms
by virtue of which the *brāhmaṇa*s are said to be “injunctive.” The
*uttarapakṣin* employs a language-external account: *mantra*s are used
in rituals, and therefore they cannot tell us to perform additional
rituals. Basically this is a dispute about the role of context (in the
wider sense, not in the sense of *prakaraṇa*). The *pūrvapakṣin* does
not include context at all in his evaluation of the modality of these
passages; the *uttarapakṣin* takes the context for granted and uses it
to argue for a certain linguistic modality. In Kumārila’s framing of the
problem, the difference is whether the injunctive force of a text arises
*before* or *after* the “assignment” (*viniyoga*), the process by which
one determines what elements of a ritual performance are primary and
secondary, in consequence of which *mantra*s are always determined to be
instrumental to, and thus subordinate to, a sacrificial act enjoined by
a *brāhmaṇa* text.

Kumārila takes aim at both positions: if injunctive force is internal to
language (*svato vidhiśaktiḥ*), then it’s impossible to see why it would
recede in some contexts and reappear in other contexts; if it is not
there in the first place (*prathamam eva nāsti*), then no amount of
contextual assignment could make it appear. His answer is to allow that
language has a modality that the *pūrvapakṣin* does not acknowledge,
namely denotation (*abhidhāna*).

Many questions about denotation, and especially about the early history
of this concept and its application in Mīmāṃsā, remain to be worked out.
But the general idea is that when the injunctive force of a text is
weakened or cancelled out, as the contextualist wants, then what remains
is the denotative power. Except Kumārila insists that it is the text
itself, and not contextual assignment, that cancels out the injunctive
force. Specifically, there are certain linguistic forms that can
neutralize the injunctive power (Kumārila gives examples of conditional
clauses, the relative pronoun, vocative forms, and first-person verb
forms). This neutralization happens *prior to* assignment; in fact, it
is the diminished injunctive capacity of such texts that give us a clue
about the role they are to play in the performance of a sacrifice.
“Denotation” as a modality applies to things that, in Mīmāṃsā terms,
“obtain” (*prāpta*)—that is, things that are epistemically available to
be referred to. Hence Kumārila arrives at a classic case of hermeneutic
codependency: we need to recall or remember (*smṛti*) certain elements
at the time of performance, and this is precisely and exclusively the
purpose which *mantra*s serve.

In this way, Kumārila argues that *mantra*s and *brāhmaṇa*s are distinct
not because of their formal features, or because they are transmitted
separately, or least of all because of the historical circumstances of
their production, but because there are language-internal features of
*mantra*s that lead us to ascertain the different modes of operation
between *mantra*s and *brāhmaṇa*s and hence the different purposes that
each serves in the integrated complex of *dharma*.

We could talk about whether this classification is compelling or
well-grounded, or how it maps against the classifications mentioned
previously. But this section is a good specimen of the interpretive
angle of Mīmāṃsā more generally. We are not supposed to take the
division of the Veda into prescriptive and non-prescriptive portions for
granted; rather, this division is supposed to arise from general
principles of interpretation, which are themselves rooted in a
philosophy of language. Even if Kumārila often gives the impression of
making up the finer points of that philosophy as he goes along, he is
very sensitive to the philosophical and hermeneutic problems generated
by both a strongly language-internal account and a strongly
language-external account, and he tries to find a viable third path.
