+++
title = "Omniscience and realism"
full_title = "Omniscience and realism Marginal notes about a workshop in Hawai’i"
date = "2017-03-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/03/23/omniscience-and-realism-marginal-notes-about-a-workshop-in-hawaii/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/03/23/omniscience-and-realism-marginal-notes-about-a-workshop-in-hawaii/).

Omniscience and realism: Marginal notes about a workshop in Hawai’i

A non-intelligible entity cannot be conceived to exist. But, if the
world needs to be known in order to exist, we need to postulate a
non-partial perspective out of which it can be known. Since the
perspectives of all human beings (as well as those of other animals, I
would add) are necessarily partial and cannot be reconciled (how could
one reconcile our perspective of the world with that of a
[bat](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2183914?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents)?),
this perspective needs to be God.  

The above is my summary of Michael Dummett’s (somehow idealistic)
position in [God and the World](http://www.iep.utm.edu/dummett/#SH3e), a
position which prompted Arindam Chakrabarti to host a three-days
workshop on “[Realism/Anti-Realism, Omniscience,
God/no-God](http://hawaii.edu/phil/international-workshop-realismanti-realism-omniscience-godno-god/)”.
During these three days, we discussed the nature of omniscience (in
fact, a more complex context than one might think), of God (as above)
and of whether they are needed for a realist position. The most striking
feature of the workshop was the constant philosophical dialogue flowing
through the various presentations and connecting them to the global
enterprise of philosophy.

Let me now enter into some detail. First, **omniscience**. The workshop
has shown that this concept is multi-faceted in Indian philosophy,
possibly even more than in the history of European philosophy and in
contemporary mainstream philosophy.  
[Sara
McClintock](http://religion.emory.edu/home/people/faculty/mcclintock-sara.html)
started the workshop with a discussion, inspired by her 2007 book
*[Omniscience and the Rhetoric of
Reason](http://www.wisdompubs.org/book/omniscience-and-rhetoric-reason)*,
on the various ways to understand “omniscience” (*sarvajñatva*), ranging
from “dharmic omniscience” to “total omniscience” —according to whether
the “omni-” (*sarva* ‘all’) is understood as meaning ‘every single
entity’ or ‘all that is relevant’ (for a certain purpose). This second
meaning might seem less convincing, but please consider the same word in
compounds such as “omni-vore”. One would not expect an “omnivore” to be
eating all (including stones, shampoo, triangles and logical formulas),
would one? In this sense, the Buddha can be said to be omniscient,
although he does not need to know exactly all, but he knows the four
noble truths and whatever is relevant for liberation. As for the general
topic of the workshop, however, this kind of omniscience has no bearing
as a guarantee of the world’s reality or of its being as it appears to
human beings. In fact, one should also bear in mind that Madhyamaka and
Yogācāra Buddhists think that the world as it appears to conscious
beings is illusory. An accomplished Buddha would see that it is in fact
devoid of substantiality.

Similarly, [Andrew
Nicholson](http://www.stonybrook.edu/commcms/asianamerican/facultystaff/AndrewNicholson.html)
elucidated the supernormal powers (*vibhūti*s) in the third chapter of
the *Yogasūtra* by drawing on other first millennium texts, such as the
*Mokṣadharma Parvan* of the *Mahābhārata* and Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on
the *Pāśupata Sūtra*s. Omniscience, he argued, is understood in these
traditions as one among the supernormal powers, not as the highest (for
instance, Kauṇḍinya suggests that a yogin who merely possesses
omniscience without commensurate powers of action (*kriyā-śaktis*) would
be like a lame man). Though Pāśupata and Pātañjala yogins are realists,
omniscience is not presented by them as a guarantee of the world’s
reality. One could argue in favour of direct realism due to the fact
that the world needs to agree (*saṃvāda*) with the perception yogins
have of it, but accomplished yogins seem to have remained rather an
exceptional case and not the foundation of any school’s epistemology or
ontology. A further interesting point is that for Patañjali, omniscience
is not an indication that the yogin has achieved the highest state (as
it is of God in some traditions—could one conceive a Christian God who
is not omniscient?). A yogin should eventually go beyond the *vibhūti*
of omniscience (*sarvajñātṛtva*, YS 3.49) to reach the *vibhūti* of
final liberation (*kaivalya*, YS 3.50). In Arindam Chakrabarti’s words,
omniscience is “the last temptation of the yogin”.

Arindam Chakrabarti, in his final talk, has highlighted ten types of
omniscience. Apart from the three referred to above, he pointed out 1.
the Buddhist idea of knowing all in the sense of knowing that all is
insubstantial, 2. the (comparable) Advaita Vedānta idea of knowing all
in the sense of knowing that all is brahman, 3. the Jaina idea of innate
omniscience of all, which is only blocked by our karman, etc., 4. the
Nyāya-based idea that by knowing universal generalities, one should be
able to know all (just like one knows all starfish by having known the
starfish-universal), and the (generally theist) concepts of 5. a God who
needs to know the elements out of which He creates the world, 6. a God
who is the maximum of what precedes Him, therefore also the maximum
level of knowledge.\*  
Can any of these concepts help guraranteeing the world’s reality? 1 and
2 point to a world much different than how we perceive it. 3 could work
—although I do not know whether any Jain author has argued in this way.
4, 5 and 6 might look more promising. One might imagine an author
arguing that the world needs to be as we perceive it, because this is
how God knows it as well. However, this depends on how one understands
God. If He is nothing but one out of the many perspectives hinted at at
the beginning of this post, there is no reason to think that His
perspective could guarantee the world’s reality, since it is not a
priviledged perspective, just like that of a bat or of a human being.

Thus, the discussion on omniscience leads one to an analysis of the
schools’ concepts of God (see part 2 of these notes, here).

\*Careful readers will have noticed that 6+3=9 and not 10. This is
because I have not been able to understand what Arindam meant by his 9th
concept of omniscience, described as *sarvākārajñāna*.  
SMALL UPDATE: Many thanks are due to Andrew Nicholson and Sara
McClintock for helping me improve this post.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
