+++
title = "Indian Ethics please"
full_title = "Indian Ethics please submit to PhilPapers"
date = "2017-03-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/03/02/indian-ethics-please-submit-to-philpapers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/03/02/indian-ethics-please-submit-to-philpapers/).

Indian Ethics: please submit to PhilPapers

Dear all,

I am the [Indian Ethics](https://philpapers.org/browse/indian-ethics/)
editor for [PhilPapers](https://philpapers.org/). PhilPapers is the
online database of publications in philosophy. It is a crowd-source
effort: individual scholars are expected to and invited to contribute
bibliographical information for their own publications, and once
contributed they are reviewed by a subject editor.

I am writing to ask any and all of you who have written on Indian
Ethics—Indic systems of values or norms and their Indian *reasons* /
*justifications*—to submit bibliographical information about your
relevant publications, if you have not already done so. I will
periodically review the references to ensure that they are within the
purview of the category. As long as the material is relevant to Indian
moral (dharma) theory, they should be included.

To include your publications, please click the “submit material” link at
the top of the PhilPapers page, and login or create an account first.

PhilPapers is a great resource. While institutions are expected to pay
and subscribe, it is free to use for the average internet surfer, from
their home or in public. PhilPaper entries show up on Google searches
for your name, and hence it is a useful way to get your work
publicized. If you are unsure about the kind of material that is
relevant, you can drop me a query.

Thanks, and best wishes,

Shyam

—

Shyam Ranganathan

MA,MA, PhD

Department of Philosophy

York University, Toronto

[shyam-ranganathan.info](http://shyam-ranganathan.info/)

*[The Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Indian
Ethics](http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/the-bloomsbury-research-handbook-of-indian-ethics-9781472587770/)*

*[Patañjali\`s Yoga
Sūtras](http://penguin.co.in/book/classics/patanjalis-yoga-sutra/)*(Translation,
Edition and Commentary)

*[Translating Evaluative Discourse: The Semantics of Thick and Thin
Concepts](https://philpapers.org/rec/SHYTED)*

[Full List, Publications](https://philpapers.org/s/shyam%20ranganathan)
