+++
title = "Global Philosophy"
full_title = "Global Philosophy Resources call for contributions"
date = "2017-03-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/03/08/global-philosophy-resources-call-for-contributions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/03/08/global-philosophy-resources-call-for-contributions/).

Global Philosophy Resources: call for contributions

Global Philosophy Resources,
[www.globalphilosophyresources.com](http://www.globalphilosophyresources.com),
provides easy-to-use resources for faculty members who are interested in
diversifying their teaching but who lack training in nonwestern
philosophy.It is looking for contributors.

Guidelines: Each entry should introduce a nonwestern text that would be
suitable for inclusion in a lower-level undergraduate class. It should
provide an approximately 100-word description of the text, a brief
annotated bibliography, a brief list of available translations, and a
few selections for texts to pair it with. For examples, see the
[site](http://www.globalphilosophyresources.com/). They are including
entries for full texts like the
[Gītā](https://globalphilosophyresources.com/?s=gita) as well as for
selections from texts or specific topics like [no-self in Questions of
King Milinda](https://globalphilosophyresources.com/?s=milinda).

Entries are kept very short. This site aims to *connect* users with
relevant primary and secondary material; it is not a substitute for such
materials or a substantial addition to them.

To submit a proposal, please use [this
link](https://globalphilosophyresources.com/submit/) or select
“Contribute” on the [web
page](http://www.globalphilosophyresources.com/). If you have questions,
please contact [Sonia
Sikka](https://arts.uottawa.ca/philosophy/people/sikka-sonia)
(University of Ottawa) or [Anna
Lannstrom](http://www.stonehill.edu/directory/anna-lannstrom/)
(Stonehill College).
