+++
title = "Educational Reform"
full_title = "Educational Reform"
date = "2012-05-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/05/29/educational-reform/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/05/29/educational-reform/).

Educational Reform

Many people talk about the dire state of American education. Naturally,
almost all of what they say is nonsense. You would expect that, since
they were educated in that awful system…

One common theme is that education has gone to the dogs. Kids aren’t
learning the way they used to. College graduates aren’t as smart as
they once were. Blah blah blah.

All false. Average academic achievement has not changed much over the
years. We have good, representative national results for the last 40
years (NAEP); not much change. We have some regional results (Iowa,
mainly) that go back further: not much change.

Within every ethnic group, there has been some improvement, but
nationally, that has been canceled out by increases in the fraction of
students from low-scoring groups. This is unevenly distributed. For
example, in California: scores are a lot lower than they were in 1965
because the kids are demographically quite different – i.e. dumber.

Now and then I have had someone say to me that schools in Brooklyn have
gone to the dogs: somehow Puerto Rican kids today score far lower than
the Jewish kids of yesteryear. Do tell.

As it happens, kids from low-scoring groups do poorly (on average)
wherever they go to school, and kids from high-scoring groups do well
wherever they go to school. For example, my kids are going to a
low-scoring, mostly-minority high school, but do fine.

Jerry Pournelle used to tell me that the school system somehow went to
hell in the middle of WWII, since hardly any draftees were excluded for
low scores in 1942 while 10% were in 1952. Of course, in practice,
nobody could figure out what to do with such low-scoring guys in WWII,
so Congress passed a law excluding the bottom 10%. Jerry has also told
me that when he was a kid, *everyone* in his county could read. The
census says otherwise.

Since within-group scores have gone up, you might think that education
is more effective than it used to be. Another point in support of the US
educational system is that members of a given ethnic group almost always
score higher in the US than they do in other countries: not enormously
higher, but some higher (PISA results).

But the fact that kids are learning a bit more does not necessarily have
anything to do with the educational system. It might, but there could be
other reasons. Way more high school kids are taking calculus than did in
1970, and math scores are up. I’d guess that the school systems are
responsible in that case. But other factors may predominate. Kids
today, on average, have parents with more education than kids in 1970.
Maybe that helps. For example, when my daughter asked for help with her
combinatorics homework, I could help, sometimes – not without feeling
the mental rust flaking off the hinges. On the other hand, my father
was a high-school graduate and hadn’t taken any higher math. In the
other direction, some studies seem to show a higher fraction of people
with high verbal scores before the late 1960s, and I wonder if watching
lots more hours of TV each day somehow cut into reading time. Between
1950 and 1970, TV changed far more than schools did. Another point:
teachers are, on average, a good deal dumber than they used to be.
Education majors score about a standard deviation lower than typical
college graduates, which I don’t think was the case in the more distant
past. It’s hard to see how this is compatible with better results, yet
there they are.

We spend a lot more money on education than we used to, but I would
guess that increased spending has had no effect at all. Higher salaries,
for dumber teachers, combined with vast increases in administrative
personnel -> nothing .

It is true that the average high school graduate is dumber than in 1940,
but then we graduate a much higher percentage today than we did then.
Most of that increase has been among weaker students. It may be that the
average 18-year old high school graduate knew more then than now: but
that does not mean that average 18 year old today knows any less. If I
were King, which should happen any day now, and suddenly conferred a
B.A. on everyone, the average degree-holder would know less, even though
everyone knew just as much as they did the day before… Or, what if
baseball expanded to three major leagues? The quality of professional
ball would decline without any player forgetting how to hit a curve
ball.

Often people quote some study showing that the average 17 or 21 year old
doesn’t know jack shit as evidence of educational decline: of course it
would only show this if they also included evidence that some earlier
generation knew more, which is generally not the case. At some future
time I may discuss what people know: average people, college-educated
people, and the Fools at the Top.

I also often hear about the awfulness of public education, compared to
private schools. In general, that’s bullshit. As far as I can tell,
adjusting for student quality, results are no different. Private schools
get to kick out troublesome kids: as far as I can tell, that is their
only advantage.

Romney says that we have a third-world school system. That is not true.
We have an increasingly third-world set of students.

What can be done about American education? We could save some money
fairly easily, by firing administrators. We don’t know how to get
substantially better results with the kind of kids we have. Nobody
knows. This does not prove that no feasible approach exists, but we
probably would have to try something fairly different. And, barring
genetic engineering or magic, it might be that there simply is no way
to make things much better – that is possible too.

‘can-do’ without ‘know-how ‘ isn’t getting us anywhere.

