+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
full_title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "2021-12-19"
upstream_url = "https://vriitrahan.wordpress.com/2021/12/19/laukika-sthiti-vivada-pt-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vriitrahan.wordpress.com/2021/12/19/laukika-sthiti-vivada-pt-1/).

vR^itrahan

Western Europe & the Anglozone are the wealthiest most industrialized
societies on earth. Life is good for an average W European or American.
With this comfort, people naturally love doing whatever they want. It’s
not in their immediate self-interests to ever be conservative. Globalism
& the post-WW2 order have made the world the most peaceful it’s ever
been. Consumerism satisfies our carnal urges & a stable, peaceful
society lets us enjoy them while also encouraging them. Nobody really
cares about returning to antiquated ideas of the past as a result. Young
people are never going to be brand-ambassadors of conservatism because
conservatism offers nothing in return. Only people stuck in the past, in
a mystical trance of the sirens of history have some romanticized urge
to return to it. It’s not gonna happen.

Smartest, most successful people I have known were either classical
liberals or progressives. There wasn’t much I could say to them that
could convince them that liberalism, globalism have not made the world a
much better, much more peaceful & richer place. Ask yourself this,
what’s your selling point? Are you going to preach about the dangers of
“free speech”, “the gays” and “marxist degeneracy” to people to get them
to subscribe to the idea that globalism, consumerism, liberalism are
bad? Or perhaps you’d like to tell them about their “ancestral blood”
and appeal to their caste, race, or ethnoregional lineage? In a world
where this means nothing and their own direct competition comes from
people belonging to the same in-group, why should they ever care?

The only things people will still care about are those that are
acceptable in the liberal framework, which sound sensible. You can tell
savarnas that caste-based reservations are bad because they’re
anti-meritocratic (meritocracy is a very liberal concept btw). You can
tell savarnas that Islam is bad because it’s regressive, because it
defies the liberal order and hence disturbs our stable world. Those were
the low-hanging fruits. You can only comfortably argue for them because
these positions are very liberal themselves. Can you ever hope to make
convincing arguments as to why priesthood should be restricted to males,
why women and non-dvijas cannot chant the gayatri mantra? Can you make
it “make sense” to your own friends or family that chanting om bhur
bhuvah svaha is bad for them? Can you argue and defend the caste system
without once again pretending to imply that it was a very humane,
liberal system? Are these arguments socially acceptable?

They are not. That’s why conservatism is dead.

Political authoritarianism has also been forever sullied by the wartime
violent excesses of the 3rd Reich and Imperial Japan. Quite simply put,
the Germans and Japanese made sure authoritarianism will never be seen
as a respectable or salvageable position in politics anymore. An analogy
I had made before was liberal ideas are high entropy. Conservative ideas
are low entropy. To borrow an analogy from chemistry, the activation
energy to catalyze the ‘conservative’ reaction is far far higher. It’s
metabolically expensive & so not spontaneous. So you need a catalyst so
that the reaction advances. Think of social taboos and the mos maiorum
as these catalysts. They “enforce” conservative values in a society.
Just to be clear, I’m not saying religion is doomed and society will
continue on a whig axis as the arrow of time leads to ever increasing
liberalization. Not saying this at all. I’m only saying what the
situation as it exists it. What society can be in the distant future
depends on many unknown variables, like technology or ideological
resistance (I’m not a dialectical historical materialist btw, so let’s
add in the role of idea formation as well). One thing that’s clear is
that the collapse of the current hegemons (NWEuropeans + Anglozone) is
necessary to create the fecund climate which will ensure a different
world order and consensus.

