+++
title = "IJA"
full_title = "IJA"
date = "2012-06-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/06/20/ija/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/06/20/ija/).

IJA

Everyone has heard of famous last stands, such as Thermopylae, the
Alamo, or the French Foreign Legion at Camerone. They are memorable
partly because they are rare – generally, soldiers surrender when all is
lost, assuming that their enemies give them a chance to do so.  Even
Spartans, products of a lifetime of military training, could surrender,
as shown at Sphacteria in the Peloponnesian War.

So an army that routinely executed last stands – one that always refused
to surrender, that kept fighting until eliminated by firepower or
starvation – would be anomalous. It’s hard to imagine, but it’s easy
to remember: that’s what the Imperial Japanese Army was like in World
War Two.

In a typical battle, less than 2% of Japanese forces were taken
prisoner. Of those that were, many had been knocked unconscious. Wounded
Japanese soldiers would try to kill Allied medics: Japanese sailors
would attack Americans trying to fish them out of the water. As a young
American infantry officer who faced them in Guadalcanal and Burma said,
“for sheer, bloody, hardened steel guts, the stocky and hard-muscled
little Jap doughboy has it all over any of us.” George MacDonald Fraser
told of a Japanese soldier he encountered in August of 1945, when they
had utterly lost the war: ” the little bastard came howling out of a
thicket near the Sittang, full of spite and fury.. He was half-starved
and near naked, and his only weapon was a bamboo stave, but he was in no
mood to surrender.”

The Japanese usually lost those battles (after their attacks in the
beginning of the war) , losing something like ten times as many killed
as their Western opponents, a ratio normally seen only in colonial
wars. The Japanese relied on ‘courage and cold steel’, which simply
wasn’t very effective. They simply did not grasp the dominance of
artillery and automatic weapons in modern war – partly because they
hadn’t fought in WWI (except for a small naval role), but, more
importantly, because they didn’t *want* to understand. They’d had a
chance to learn in the border conflicts with the Soviet Union in the
late 30’s (Khalkin-Gol), but refused to do so.

In addition, Japanese heroism is seldom fully appreciated because they
were such utter assholes, in their treatment of prisoners and of
conquered nations – cannibalism, vivisection, the Rape of Nanking and
the destruction of Manila, germ warfare experiments on prisoners…  even
the water cure, although now we’re in favor of that. Under the
Japanese, Asia was a charnel house. Regardless, their courage was most
unusual.

Compared to the last stands of the Japanese in the Pacific War,
Thermopylae is nothing special. It is hardly even noticeable. The
Imperial Army and Navy put 35,000 men on Guadalcanal – about 25,000 of
those died, some in combat, but most by starvation. Obedient to orders,
they died before surrendering. There were many such battles: whole
Japanese divisions starved to death in New Guinea and Burma. There
were no mutinies, unlike the French or Russians or Italians in WWI.
When the Germany Navy was ordered out to a suicidal battle in 1918, the
sailors rebelled and the government fell – but then, they weren’t
Japanese.

Many other nations and empires have tried to inculcate this kind of
ultimate obedience, some going to great lengths – but Imperial Japan is
the only one that achieved it, as far as I can tell. There’s isn’t even
any reason to think they they tried particularly hard to do so –
certainly they’d didn’t go anywhere near as far as the Spartans.

If cultural anthropologists had any curiosity – which of course they
don’t – they ought to find this story fascinating. How was it even
possible?

