+++
title = "Book Review of Hinduism"
full_title = "Book Review of Hinduism and Environmental Ethics by Christopher G Framarin (Reviewed by Elisa Freschi)"
date = "2015-10-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/10/27/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-elisa-freschi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/10/27/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-elisa-freschi/).

Book Review of Hinduism and Environmental Ethics by Christopher G. Framarin (Reviewed by Elisa Freschi)



**Christopher G. Framarin. *Hinduism and Environmental Ethics: Law,
literature, and philosophy.* 192 pp. London and New York: Routledge.
2014. 140 USD. Hardcover**

*\[Book Review Editor’s Note: This book has previously been reviewed on
this blog by Stephen Harris. See Harris’s review
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/08/book-review-of-hinduism-and-environmental-ethics-by-christopher-g-framarin-reviewed-by-stephen-harris/).\]*

The book is, as frequently the case when Framarin writes, very clearly
argued. In each chapter, the Introduction anticipates the gist of the
argument and the Conclusions summarise it again. Each step is fully
argued for by taking into account all possible scenarios. Thus, as with
his previous book, *Desire and Motivation in Indian Philosophy*(2009),
and as readers of the Indian Philosophy Blog have seen in his lecture
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/04/04/karma-the-lecture/),
the book starts with long discussions of the competing views and only at
the end reaches the view which is the one Framarin endorses. For his own
argumentation, Framarin appeals to intuitions, in the way analytic
philosophers do. Examples of the intuitions he uses are the intuition
that in case of a car accident we should save the person involved,
although this could lead to harming a plant. Slightly less controversial
(in my opinion) is the intuition that *ceteris paribus* we should prefer
humans over animals and animals over plants, but I will come back to
that later.

A further asset of the book is that it is an extensive bibliographical
survey of Anglophone literature related to the topic of environmental
ethics in Hinduism. I wrote “Anglophone” because most articles and books
cited are either originally written in English or are quoted from their
English translation, but an important exception are Framarin’s important
references to Madeleine Biardeau’s interpretation of the episode of the
burning of the Khāṇḍava forest in the *Mahābhārata*.

Framarin analyses the literature with upmost attention, the kind of
attention other scholars (probably: me included) only reserve to primary
texts and extracts out of the scattered or systematic remarks of the
various scholars three competing interpretations of why flora and fauna
should have moral stand in “Hinduism”. Framarin labels the first
interpretation “Instrumentalist interpretation” and explains that
according to it we should avoid harming flora and fauna because
non-violence leads to merit and merit leads to good things, whereas
violence leads to demerit, which leads to bad things (thus, non-violence
is instrumental to something else). The second interpretation is the
“Interconnectedness interpretation” according to which we should avoid
harming flora and fauna because, due to karman and rebirth we are all
part of the same continuum and sooner or later the harmed animal will in
turn harm us. The third interpretation, called “Sameness Interpretation”
holds that the whole world, including flora and fauna is either an
emanation of *brahman* or nothing but *brahman* erroneously conceived as
something else. Thus, we should not harm it, because the *brahman* has
moral standing.

Framarin shows how all interpretations have flaws (actually he is so
convincing that the flaws seem obvious). Framarin discusses the issue
with much more detail, but starting with the last theory, the main
problem appears to consist in the fact that if the world is (as with the
Advaita Vedānta-flavored version of the Sameness interpretation) just
illusion and only the *brahman* exists, then there is nothing bad we can
do at all when we affect the illusory world, whereas if the world is an
emanation of *brahman* (as with the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta-flavored
version of the same interpretation), then the theory is just wrong,
since hairs also emanate from human beings, and yet do not derive from
this derivation the fact that they have also moral standing. The
Interconnectedness interpretation is wrong, among other things, since it
stands on premisses not found in the texts (which do not mention
interconnectedness as a value) and since it leads to the
counter-intuitive conclusion that all living beings have equal moral
standing. Last, the Instrumental interpretation does not work, since
this leads to the counter-intuitive conclusion that if *ahiṃsā* led by
itself to salvation although flora and fauna had no moral standing, then
this would lead either to circularity (*ahiṃsā* leads to *mokṣa*because
it is meritorious but, given that fauna and flora have no moral
standing, it can only be meritorious because it leads to *mokṣa*) or to
arbitrariness (*ahiṃsā* leads to *mokṣa* by chance), which is
counter-intuitive.

By contrast, Framarin maintains that the texts he examines
(*Mahābhārata*, *Mānavadharmaśāstra,*and *Yogasūtra*, henceforth MBh,
MDhŚā and YS respectively) uphold the moral standing of flora and fauna
on the basis of the fact that they say that *ahiṃsā* leads to merit and
merit leads to pleasure. Now, given that this pleasure is not
instrumental to liberation (in fact, it might even be counterproductive,
as shown by the fact that in heavens where there is too much pleasure no
one can reach liberation), it must have an instrinsic value. If it has
an intrinsic value, then it makes sense that causing pleasure to one is
at least a prima facie reason for performing a certain action. The
reverse applies to pain and its intrinsic disvalue. Thus, entities which
can feel pleasure and pain have moral standing (with “moral standing”
being described as that which should orient our actions).

So far, so good, or even very good, and the book (which contains way
more than I could summarise here) recommends itself as a clear and
analytic study of the issue both for analytic philosophers and for
Sanskritists.

Given that the book solved all it directly raised, in the following, I
will need to focus on some questions the book implicitly raised, hoping
to initiate a discussion with Framarin.

1\. Is it really the case that the case in which “a human agent must
choose between destroying an animal and allowing a plant to live, or
destroying an animal and allowing a human being to live” is not a
“genuine moral dilemma”? I agree that we would all save the human being
trapped in the car, but would we necessarily save a tree over an insect?
Or a rare tree over a common rat? Or over a starfish which is
reproducing too fast and devouring coral reefs? And, more importantly,
is the fact that we would save the human being trapped in the car even
if this meant killing thousands of rare plants and rare animals a moral
choice or just a speciesist choice, just like the choice of one who
would save her own sibling even if this meant letting thousands of other
people die?

2\. Framarin’s argument from the intrinsic value of pleasure to the
moral standing of flora and fauna seems to me to neglect an aspect of
the question, namely the fact that the texts speaking of pleasure and
pain as the results of merit and demerit could be just trying to engage
people of lower intellect, who would not understand that the only things
which really counts is *mokṣa*. Thus, they could claim that merit leads
to pleasure because claiming that merit leads to *mokṣa* would not be
enough to motivate people to undertake a certain meritorious action. I
think we can still reasonably argument (as Peter Singer does, and as
Śaṅkara and Arindam Chakarabarti do, see p. 86 and p. 121 of Framarin’s
book respectively) that pain is in itself bad and that we need to avoid
it for us and for any other being. But I am not sure that the intrinsic
value of pain follows directly from merit according to the texts (MBh,
MDhŚā and YS) that Framarin quotes.

3\. One of the reasons in favour of his final interpretation that
Framarin quotes is the fact that it “contribute\[s\] to an explanation
of the common Hindu dietary recommendations \[=vegetarianism\] that the
other accounts have trouble explaining” (p. 165). However, vegetarianism
could also be justified on the basis of the fact that plants are deemed
not to be sentient at all, a position which was common in philosophical
texts (see Schmithausen 1991, unfortunately not present in the
bibliography of Framarin, and see also
[my](https://www.academia.edu/8544445/Systematizing_an_absent_category_discourses_on_nature_in_Pr%C4%81bh%C4%81kara_M%C4%ABm%C4%81%E1%B9%83s%C4%81)
[own](https://www.academia.edu/524636/Nature_in_Indian_Philosophy)
[studies](https://www.academia.edu/202297/Do_plants_live_Do_they_feel)
thereon), although common sense might have rather run against it, as
attested by the formula “from Brahmā to grass”, to refer to all living
beings. I imagine that Framarin could easily reply that he is not
concerned with Indian philosophical texts, but only with MBh, MDhŚā and
YS, which is completely legitimate, but leads me to the following point:

4\. The only aspect of the book I am not completely satisfied with is
its dealing with generic categories such as “plants”, “animals” and
“Hinduism”, although (see again
[this](https://www.academia.edu/8544445/Systematizing_an_absent_category_discourses_on_nature_in_Pr%C4%81bh%C4%81kara_M%C4%ABm%C4%81%E1%B9%83s%C4%81)
article of mine and more importantly Findly 2009) Indian authors
distinguished between the status of grass and that of trees, that of
cattle and that of wild animals and although different Indian schools
had different attitudes towards these issues. But, again, *ad
impossibilia nemo tenetur* and no one can expect an author to take
everything into account!

*Reviewed by Elisa Freschi, Institute for the Cultural and Intellectual
History of Asia, Vienna*

