+++
title = "On translating out of"
full_title = "On translating out of order"
date = "2019-04-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/07/on-translating-out-of-order/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/07/on-translating-out-of-order/).

On translating out of order

[Last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/03/on-new-translations-in-indian-philosophy)
I expressed my gratitude and praise for Matthew Dasti and Stephen
Phillips’s much-needed recent selective translation of the Nyāya Sūtras
and commentaries. I stand by all of it – and also noted that the book
drives me crazy.

Why? Dasti and Phillips made two decisions that I think are
characteristic of an analytic approach to Indian texts. One was to
publish selections and excerpts – probably the right choice, as
discussed last time. The second one, however, was to publish those
selections entirely *out of order.*

When I taught Nyāya from Gangopadhyaya’s more difficult translation, I
simply had the students read the commentary on the first ten *sūtra*s,
sūtras I.i.1-10. These provide a fairly succinct introduction to the
Nyāya school in its own terms: the ultimate purpose of Nyāya
philosophical reasoning, the way the reasoning leads there, the core
idea of *pramāṇa*s (reliable sources of knowledge) and what the
*pramāṇa*s are. But in the Dasti-Phillips translation, the first two
sūtras – the self-described point of Nyāya –don’t appear until chapter
8, near the end of the book. The commentators’ introductory material
from *before* those sūtras appears in the first Dasti-Phillips chapter,
along with the *following* six sūtras (I.i.3-8), but sūtras I.i.1-2
themselves are excised from this natural continuity even though they
appear later in the book. The *next* sūtra, I.i.9, appears in a
different chapter entirely (DP chapter 5), and the one after *that*,
I.i.10, appears in the chapter *before* it, chapter 4. If I wanted my
students to learn just this relatively short part of the text in the
order the Naiyāyikas intended, I would need to make them jump around
chapter 1, then chapter 8, then chapter 1 again, then chapter 5, and
chapter 4.

So I don’t make my students do that, not with this text. Instead I
proceed topically, which the book does as well. The problem is that I
don’t find Dasti and Phillips’s own organization of topics to work well.
It seems to me that the Nyāya discussion of self is based above all on
acknowledging a whole that is not reducible to its parts (in rebuttal to
the sort of Buddhist position articulated in the
[Milindapañhā](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/)).
But the discussion of parts and wholes is itself split between DP
chapters 3 and 5 while the self is in DP chapter 4. So when I try to
assign a topical discussion of the self, my students now have to muddle
through *three* different ways of organizing the topic: mine, Dasti’s
and Phillips’s, *and* the original. Likewise on logical standards of
discussion and debate: the discussion of the fallacy of equivocation in
DP chapter 8 belongs naturally with the other fallacies in chapter 9,
and DP chapter 9’s discussion of debate spells out the discussion of
inference in DP chapter 1.

So this translation, unfortunately, frustrates me and my students. I say
that in spite of its many merits as a translation; there are good
reasons why I continue to use it, exclusively, as my source on Nyāya,
and not Gangopadhyaya or the selections in [Radhakrishnan-Moore or
Sarma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/03/on-new-translations-in-indian-philosophy).
It is the best introduction to Nyāya that exists in English. I would
still love to see a new edition or revision of the book that was in a
more coherent order – especially, one that left the sūtras in the order
their authors (including the commentators) intended.

Why would I like to see the sūtras in the authors’ intended order? There
is a philosophically interesting question here that goes beyond the
organization of undergraduate textbooks. It has to do with how, and why,
we read the ideas of philosophers from times and places different from
our own –and perhaps from our own as well. I said before that Dasti and
Phillips are taking an analytical approach, in part because I remember
the analytic philosopher who [once said to a
friend](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/11/reading-the-zhuangzi-as-a-composite-text/),
“if it’s an interesting argument, we don’t care whether it was found in
the writings of David Hume or on a piece of pasta.” It seems to me that
such a view is implicit in this translation’s organization: we are
interested in arguments taken individually, more than in any worldview
that they might add up to. The organization suggests adaptation for
comparative courses on philosophical topics: we could extract individual
arguments about self in isolation from other arguments about parts and
wholes, let alone about reliable means of knowledge.

I have not generally found such an approach helpful. I think
philosophical worldviews tend to make sense much more as wholes. Such a
holism can be greatly overdone, and indeed in religious studies it is
overdone all the time. Religionists often treat worldviews as such
seamless webs that the distances between them can never be crossed, and
so the idea that we ourselves might learn from thinkers of the past is
viewed with bemused puzzlement: never the twain shall meet. I find
analytic approaches preferable to that. Still, I think it is hard to
learn from another tradition’s argument taken in isolation when that
argument is directed at people whose assumptions are also very different
from ours – as they must be for people from a millennium before us. I
think we learn more from them when we understand those very assumptions
and unstated premises; overall, I think [I learned more from Śāntideva’s
assumptions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/01/the-importance-of-assumptions/)
than from his arguments. That is why I want to [understand a coherent
worldview](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/looking-for-coherent-authorship/),
and why I want my students to do so as well, to the extent possible. And
that makes me more predisposed to a teaching approach that looks to read
past authors on the terms they set out themselves (like reading Nyāya
Bhāṣya I.i.1-10 in its entirety in order).

I suspect that Dasti and Phillips have a different take on the
understanding of distant philosophers and their arguments and
assumptions, so I’m not going to hold my breath for a differently
ordered translation. But in a venue like this, I think such differences
are worth airing.

[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.](http://wp.me/pxfBj-19R)
