+++
title = "The importance of"
full_title = "The importance of reading Buddhaghosa closely"
date = "2019-04-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/21/the-importance-of-reading-buddhaghosa-closely/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/21/the-importance-of-reading-buddhaghosa-closely/).

The importance of reading Buddhaghosa closely

A while ago, Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad made a thoughtful
[reply](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/#comment-221579)
to the
[last](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/05/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/)
of my
[post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1/)
[series](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-2/)
on Buddhaghosa. I thank Ram-Prasad for that reply; I appreciate his
willingness to engage with my rather cheeky attempt to reply to an
article before it was even published. Now that his and Maria Heim’s
article has reached publication (in *Philosophy East and West* 68(4),
October 2018), I think it is time to take that reply back up again.

I do find his criticisms of me in his reply to be unfair. I had intended
my [“challenge accepted”
remark](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1/)
to be a playful response to the inviation that he and Maria Heim made
for a textually justified defence of a traditional ontological view of
Buddhaghosa; I realize it may have come across as arrogant or obnoxious,
and I apologize if so. But since I have been accused of “helping myself”
to a reading that I was “supposed to establish through argument”, my
arguments in the coming posts will be long and add significant detail to
the arguments I made last time. (They will get into the technical
details of Pali translation, but I intend them to still be readable by
non-specialists.) It is still my hope that this discussion can proceed
equanimously, as a wholesome inquiry into the views of this important
thinker.

I also want to reiterate that I very much appreciate his and Heim’s
claim that “It would be a welcome development in the study of
Buddhaghosa if other scholars were to offer further or contrasting
interpretations… based on such textual analysis…” (1109) The original
series of posts was written in exactly that spirit, and these rejoinders
are as well. I suspect my writing here might eventually become an
article of its own, because I think the topic merits it. (Indeed, by the
time I’m done, the number of words I’ve written in response to Heim and
Ram-Prasad[^(\[1\])](#f1) will have added up to enough for an article; I
beg my readers’ patience!) Considering his vast influence and
philosophical power, Buddhaghosa is a thinker deeply under-studied by
philosophers, and Heim and Ram-Prasad have done us a great service by
giving him the attention he deserves.

Buddhaghosa is also a thinker constructively important to my own
philosophical thought, and that is why it is important to me to spend
this time on him. The Buddhism I [first saw the truth
in](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/)
was Theravāda, and as I have come to think through [my own
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/) I
have come to identify it as at least primarily Theravāda. And
Buddhaghosa is surely the preeminent philosopher of Theravāda tradition;
my Pali teacher once described him as “Mr. Theravāda Buddhism”. His
importance to Theravāda thought is even more important than Augustine’s
to Christianity. If one wishes to think philosophically as a Theravādin,
one has no choice but to wrestle with Buddhaghosa.

And I am trying to wrestle with him specifically on the difficult
question of self and no-self, the Buddhist position with which I have
[had some of my greatest
difficulties](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/how-can-you-be-yourself-if-there-is-no-self/).
It is therefore very important to me to understand what Buddhaghosa’s
position on the self actually is, even if I ultimately disagree with it
–indeed, perhaps, [*especially* if I ultimately disagree with
it](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/).
Some of the positions I attribute to Buddhaghosa are ones I would likely
prefer he *didn’t* hold. Especially, in my own constructive reflection I
have been moving toward a position where the ultimate is not more highly
valorized than the conventional–but I can’t on good conscience accept
Ram-Prasad’s claim that that is Buddhaghosa’s own view, because I think
it is in such dramatic contrast to what Buddhaghosa actually says. On
the other hand I *do* tend to agree with Buddhaghosa, as I see him, that
the conventional and the ultimate are helpful ways to describe actual
existence, not merely our own experience.

I will develop both of those points in posts to come. In the next post I
will also turn to *nāmarūpa*, the compound on which Heim’s and
Ram-Prasad’s article focuses. Ram-Prasad claims my earlier posts
“sidestep the core argument of the article” by not mentioning
*nāmarūpa*. I didn’t mention *nāmarūpa* because of the nature and point
of the blog posts: they were an explicit response to [a comment of
Ram-Prasad’s](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/#comment-206692))
that had originally directed me to the then-unpublished article. That
original comment was not at all about *nāmarūpa* but about conventional
and ultimate, and the conventional/ultimate split is what those posts
focused on as well. *Nāmarūpa* seemed a separate point. But there is a
more general discussion here that goes beyond conventional and ultimate
to questions of the relationship between ontology and phenomenology –
between what is and what we experience. I concede that *nāmarūpa* is
quite relevant to that discussion. So I will pick it up next time.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/04/the-importance-of-reading-buddhaghosa-closely)

[\[1\]](#a1) Since this post is in reply to a blog comment, I considered
trying to write it on a first-name basis to signify its conversational
nature. Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad’s
[comment](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/#comment-221579)
referred to me by my first name, after all, and I enjoy that
informality. However, for consistency with the previous posts in the
series, and because these posts might eventually become an article, I
eventually decided to continue referring to Maria Heim as “Heim” and
Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad as “Ram-Prasad”. I hope this is not construed as
representing a chilly distance of formality, as that is far from my
intent. As ever, I greatly appreciate Ram and Maria’s work to shed light
on this deeply under-studied philosopher, and I have learned much from
it; I want to reiterate that my disagreement is offered in a spirit of
friendly critique.
