+++
title = "Is the Karmayogin a"
full_title = "Is the Karmayogin a Moral Saint?"
date = "2019-04-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/25/is-the-karmayogin-a-moral-saint/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/25/is-the-karmayogin-a-moral-saint/).

Is the Karmayogin a Moral Saint?

In his book *Hindu Ethics: A Philosophical Study* (1998), Roy Perrett
defends what he calls “Hindu ethics” against a range of contemporary
western objections. In the second chapter of the book, entitled “Saints
and the Supramoral,” Perrett develops an objection that is meant to
parallel Susan Wolf’s objection to western moral saint ideals. Perrett’s
version of the objection might be interpreted in a number of different
ways. In this post, I offer what I take to be the most straightforward
interpretation of the objection, and provide a supplemental argument for
its central claim. I’d love to know what you think. Is the *karmayogin*
subject to a version of Wolf’s objection to western moral saint ideals?

Susan Wolf (1982) argues that the moral saint’s single-minded pursuit of
the general welfare precludes the pursuit of non-moral ends for their
own sakes. Typically, the moral saint does not indulge in diversions,
develop hobbies, cultivate close relationships, or pursue personal goals
more generally, since such pursuits are usually not the best means to
improving the general welfare. The moral saint might pursue a non-moral
end if it improves the general welfare. Wolf’s example is the person who
cultivates their golf game to secure a donation to Oxfam. Even in this
case, however, the moral saint pursues the non-moral end only because it
contributes to the general welfare. Such a person does not indulge in
diversions, develop hobbies, cultivate close relationships, or pursue
personal goals more generally for their own sakes. A life entirely
devoid of every such pursuit might seem deficient.

Initially, Perrett develops the parallel objection in the context of the
*Bhagavadgītā*. He says,

the moral ideal presented in the *Gītā* is to become a kind of saint.
But the single-minded pursuit of such a goal would involve giving up too
much of what makes a life worth living; even if we could achieve such a
standard, to do so would be undesirable (27).

It makes some sense to assume that the moral ideal that Perrett has in
mind here is the *karmayogin* – the person who continues to perform
their obligations in virtue of their class and stage in life
(*varṇāśramadharma*), but without desire. The most straightforward
version of this objection simply counts the *karmayogin* as a moral
saint, who single-mindedly pursues the general welfare.

Kṛṣṇa’s injunction to act for the sake of *lokasaṃgraha* alone (eva)
(3.20) might seem to support this interpretation. The most common
translation of *lokasaṃgraha*, after all, is ‘welfare of the world’. In
his commentary to BG 3.25, Śaṅkara explains *lokasaṃgraha* in terms of
*parānugraha* – the benefit (*anugrahaḥ*) of others (*para*) – and
repeats the claim that the wise person pursues this goal alone. “The
benefit (*anugrahaḥ*) of others (*para*) alone (*eva*) is to be done
(*kartavyaḥ*).” The point seems to be that the *karmayogin* acts only
for the sake of the welfare of others.

If the *karmayogin* acts only for the welfare of the world, however,
then the *karmayogin* – like the ideal western moral saint –
single-mindedly pursues the general welfare. And if the *karmayogin*
single-mindedly pursues the general welfare, then presumably they do not
pursue non-moral ends for their own sakes. If this is right, then the
*karmayogin* does not indulge in diversions, develop hobbies, cultivate
close relationships, or pursue personal goals more generally – at least
not for their own sakes. If Wolf is right, then a life entirely devoid
of every such pursuit is deficient.

One seemingly obvious reply to this objection notes that the
*karmayogin* pursues *lokasaṃgraha* by performing their
*vaṇāśramadharma* as a householder. The householder, however, remains
embedded in a close-knit community that includes parents, spouse,
children, and friends. They pursue a vocation. They have time to pursue
hobbies, diversions, and other personal goals. If the *karmayogin* acts
just as the householder does, then the *karmayogin*, too, indulges in
diversions, develops hobbies, cultivates close relationships, and
pursues personal goals more generally. This implies that the
*karmayogin* is not precluded from pursuing non-moral ends.

As Wolf points out, however, the fact that the moral saint might pursue
non-moral ends does not imply that they pursue non-moral ends for their
own sakes. The moral saint pursues such things – if they do at all –
only because they contribute to the further end of improving the general
welfare. This point might be made in the context of the *karmayogin* by
saying that the *karmayogin* indulges in diversions, develops hobbies,
cultivates close relationships, and pursues personal goals more
generally, but only because doing so contributes to *lokasaṃgraha*. This
is what it means to pursue *lokasaṃgraha* alone. This implies that the
*karmayogin* does not pursue non-moral ends for their own sakes. A life
entirely devoid of every such pursuit might seem deficient.
