+++
title = "Viśiṣṭādvaita and Nyāya"
full_title = "Viśiṣṭādvaita and Nyāya on qualities"
date = "2016-10-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/04/visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-and-nyaya-on-qualities/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/04/visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-and-nyaya-on-qualities/).

Viśiṣṭādvaita and Nyāya on qualities

Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta authors claim that the whole world is made of the
brahman and that everything else is nothing but a qualification of
it/Him.

This theological content, it will be immediately evident, crashes
against the (Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika) idea of a rigidly divided ontology, with
substances being altogether different from qualities. In other words,
the Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika world if seen from outside is similar to the world
of today’s folk ontology, the one influenced by scientism, while its
structure resembles the one of Aristotle’s ontology.

It is populated by subject-independent entities which are ontologically
solid and persistent through time and to which qualities accrue which
need them as their substrate. It goes without saying that this is a
reciprocal distinction (substances are not qualities and qualities can
never become substances), since it is grounded in an ontological
difference (akin to Aristotle’s ουσια). In other words, qualities cannot
be further qualified by other qualities, since they cannot be their
substrate (this leads to some complications, but I will not focus on the
specific Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika answers now).

This scheme can not work if one wants to imagine the world as being
constituted by just one reality (the brahman/God) with all the rest
being an attribute of Him. In fact, this idea implies that there is one
substance (God), which is qualified by further things which, however,
cannot be called qualities, such as human beings and other material
entities. Veṅkaṭanātha is not afraid of stating explicitly that his
school does not use the term *guṇa* in a technical (*pāribhāṣika*)
sense, like Nyāya did (*Nyāyasiddhāñjana* 4.4) and that for
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta everything can be considered a quality of
something else when it specifies it.\* This, however, does not amount to
say that qualities and substances are only subjective constructs. The
ontological grounding is provided by God’s existence as the world’s
foundation. The fact that all human beings are qualifications
(*viśeṣaṇa*) of Him is not a subjective construct, since it is rather a
state of affairs which exists independently of all subjective minds
apart from God’s one.

This brings us to the next step, namely, the importance of God’s
existence to ground the world. Given that Viśiṣṭādvaita authors have
given up the subject-independent ontology of Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika, they need
another way to ground the objective existence of the world and this
cannot be achieved but through God. He is ultimately existent and
therefore we can opt for Being and avoid plunging into nihilism. But
what tells us that the world as we see it is also subject-independent?
The fact that it is conceived by God. It is a content within God’s
knowledge. Thus, the main thing to be analysed for Viśiṣṭādvaita becomes
the status of God’s knowledge. Knowledge is said, in *Nyāyasiddhāñjana*
4 and before that in Rāmānuja’s *Śrībhāṣya* ad 2.2.27, to be a
substance. This seems a daring statement in a context which was used to
the idea that cognitions are rather qualities of the self. Rāmānuja does
not want, in fact, to deny that cognitions are qualities of the self, he
only wants to state that they are also substances. They are, therefore,
not *kevalaguṇa*s ‘sheer qualities’ but rather *dravyātmakaguṇa*s
‘qualifications being substances’.

NOTA BENE\*\* The terminology used so far presupposes an ontological
approach in which things exist outside, i.e., independently of the
subject. In the case of Rāmānuja’s thought, the picture is further
complicated by the fact that God Himself is in some sense (see Ram
Prasad’s *[Divine Self, Human Self: The Philosophy of Being in Two Gītā
Commentaries](http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/43847-divine-self-human-self-the-philosophy-of-being-in-two-gt-commentaries/)*
2013) beyond (*para* as in *param brahman*) being, so that Rāmānuja’s
cannot be easily called an ontology, nor, in Ram-Prasad’s terminology,
an ontotheology. In other words, Ram-Prasad argues that God is not just
*an* entity, though excellent. If this were the case, Rāmānuja would
also be guilty of ontologising the Being, like all European philosophy
after Parmenides. Instead, Ram-Prasad shows several passages by Rāmānuja
in which he seems or appears to assume that God is beyond being and that
He is clearly not just one entity, not even the biggest one encompassing
all others within Himself. The Rāmānuja depicted by Ram-Prasad does not
explicitly solve the tension between his theological “beyondism” (God is
beyond being), with his accent on faith and devotion as ways to access
Him, and his seemingly ontological statements about the plurality of
selves and of material entities, so that one does not find an explicit
solution reconciling both approaches. Hence, like all Europeans after
Parmenides and who have not fully understood Heidegger, one is left
asking further ontological questions, such as whether God ultimately
exists or not and whether the world exists within Him, as Him
(panentheism), in dependence of Him… As a partial answer, one might note
that the relation between God and the other material or conscious beings
remains asymmetrical, insofar as they depend on God for their existence,
whereas God could be related to other beings than the ones present in
this world and might decide so through His free will. Thus, God is “in a
different league”. He can decide to be involved in one or the other
world and in fact does get involved in our world, which only exists
because He wishes it to. And He does get involved by ruling from within
ourselves and all other conscious and unconscious beings.

\*As a homage to Veṅkaṭanātha I will also not try to render the
Viśiṣṭādvaita *guṇa*s with a term different than the one I use for the
Nyāya *guṇa*s. Viśiṣṭādvaita authors are not talking about other types
of qualifications, they rather claim that what Nyāya authors call
qualities are indeed not necessarily a different class from substances.

\*\*I am grateful to Ch. Ram-Prasad for discussing with me the topic of
ontotheology in Rāmānuja.  
(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
