+++
title = "Horsepower"
full_title = "Horsepower"
date = "2014-11-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/11/04/horsepower/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/11/04/horsepower/).

Horsepower

[![300px-Comanche_Feats_of_Horsemanship](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/11/300px-comanche_feats_of_horsemanship.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/11/300px-comanche_feats_of_horsemanship.jpg)

The Comanche used to raid into Mexico. In the fall, small groups joined
up and rode south on a network of trails, called the Comanche Trace.
Some came from as far away as the Arkansas River. In places, there was a
beaten path as much as a mile wide. They often rode at night, when the
moon was full. Some allied tribes, like the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache,
accompanied them. Each warrior took three or four horses with him.

The Comanche raided as far as Jalisco. The Kiowa-Apache, who were the
most daring, once came back with *parrots*. Mostly, though, they stole
cattle and horses – tens of thousands of them – and kidnapped people.

Unless stopped by a real army, the Comanches could and did push back the
frontier of settlement. “The Legislature of Chihuahua described the
situation it faced in 1846. “We travel the roads…at their \[i.e. the
Comanches and Apaches\] whim; we cultivate the land where they wish and
in the amount they wish; we use sparingly things they have left to us
until the moment that it strikes their appetite to take them for
themselves.” “ Traveler [Josiah
Gregg](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josiah_Gregg "Josiah Gregg") said
that “the whole country from New Mexico to the borders of Durango is
almost entirely depopulated. ”

During the Civil War, when the US Cavalry and Texas Rangers were
otherwise occupied, the Comanche pushed back the frontier in Texas by
100 kilometers or so.

These guys didn’t have to fight from horseback, although they could and
did. if 50 raiders showed up suddenly at a small village, the local
farmers were screwed, unless of course they had Yul Brynner, Charles
Bronson, and Steve McQueen around.

The Comanche generally inflicted far more casualties than they suffered:
in the winter of 1845-1846, 652 Mexicans and 48 Comanches were killed.
At that, the Comanche lost more than they had t0 – they took extreme
risks to recover the bodies of fallen warriors. And sometimes they
seemed to seek out a fight rather than just raid – presumably in search
of ‘undying fame’.

If the Yamnaya Indo-Europeans could ride, they could have inflicted
similar havoc on Old Europe. They didn’t need dramatically better
weaponry: mobility makes it work. Without a state and army, how could
Old Europe have stopped it?

I wonder if multispectral satellite imagery could find signs of
something like that Comanche trace coming out of the Ukraine.

