+++
title = "Guns, Germs, and Steel"
full_title = "Guns, Germs, and Steel revisited"
date = "2017-09-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/09/04/guns-germs-and-steel-revisited/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/09/04/guns-germs-and-steel-revisited/).

Guns, Germs, and Steel revisited

Jared Diamond’s thesis, in Guns, Germs, and Steel, is that regional
differences in civilizational achievement are entirely caused by
biogeographical factors, while regional differences in ability have had
no effect. It isn’t that he believes that there are no such regional
differences: he argues that the populations with the fewest achievements
are the most intelligent !

In particular, Diamond argues that people in PNG (Papua New Guinea), are
significantly smarter than the average bear. “in mental ability, New
Guineans are probably genetically superior \[my emphasis\] to
Westerners”: p21. “Modern ‘Stone Age’ peoples are on the average
probably more intelligent, not less intelligent, than industrialized
peoples. ” p 21.

This is sufficiently odd that readers of GGS often refuse to admit that
Diamond ever said it. They’ll deny that it’s even in the book. They tend
to replace this meme with another of their own device: you see,
hunter-gatherers are innately better at hunting and gathering – at their
own way of life – than developed peoples would be. Of course that
doesn’t really work either, since innate superiority at obsolete tasks (
a born buggy-whip maker?) doesn’t necessarily translate to modern
superiority, or even adequacy.

I’ve only seen this claim – PNG Über Alles – in one other place, ever. A
character in a book by Poul Anderson said “The only true humans on
earth, my friends, the main line of evolution, the masters of the
future, are the lordly Melanesians. ”  
Of course that character was feigning insanity, but still.

In arguing that the last actually are first – that populations that
invented calculus and gunpowder and penicillin are duller than those
that invented very little – Diamond dismisses the entire field of
psychometrics. He mentions no evidence, doesn’t even bother to argue
about it. It’s his personal impressions of the locals in PNG versus
everybody from Alfred Binet to the College Board. The word “IQ” isn’t
even in the book.

It’s a ballsy approach – implying that the whole field is just pointless
crap, not even worth discussing. It’s how I would deal with astrology or
gender studies. It’s how everybody should have dealt with Freudian
analysis.

The problem with Diamond’s non-argument is that aptitude tests actually
work. A one-hour paper-and-pencil test gives a reasonable estimate of a
student’s general problem-solving ability, which is why everybody uses
such tests. The Army find that the top scorers make much more accurate
tank gunners – it’s hard to ignore a 120-millimeter DU shell.  
Regional scores on IQ tests and other educational tests ( PISA, etc) do
track regional differences in S&T achievements. Not perfectly –
northeast Asians have the highest scores but have not made the largest
contributions to the development of modern technology – but pretty well.
Populations that have low average scores on such tests have contributed
very little to the development of modern science and technology.

If there was some fatal flaw in our methods of testing academic
aptitude, you’d see some people (or whole populations) that scored low (
say 80) but were still whizzes at electrical engineering or molecular
biology. That doesn’t happen. To be fair, we do see many people with
high scores embrace various forms of madness, everything from
[Koreshanity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koreshanity) (Why, this is
Pellucidar, nor are we out of it.) to Fomenko’s [New
Chronology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Chronology_(Fomenko))
(Gary Kasparov). But then they’re intelligence tests, not sanity tests.

If Diamond were right (and the tests wrong), there would be tremendous
opportunities for arbitrage, just as sabermetrics let baseball managers
identify undervalued players. For example, if people from PNG were
indeed significantly smarter than the world average, UCLA could develop
powerhouse departments, full of likely future Nobelists, at low cost.
People would eventually try to look intelligent by putting a bone
through their nose. Why hasn’t this happened? Pure stubbornness?
Shouldn’t Harvard pre-emptively adopt this policy, in order to stay on
top?

If Diamond were right, hunter-gatherers and other backward peoples
should be able to catch up with the developed world rather easily, being
smarter. In fact, they should be able to rapidly surpass us: even a
moderately higher average IQ in a population greatly increases the
fraction that scores above a high threshold. PNG should be shot with
genius. Yet there’s no sign of it.  
Diamond acknowledges as much. “We see in our daily lives that some of
the conquered peoples continue to form an underclass, centuries after
the conquests or slave imports took place. ” p 25. ” Yes, the
transistor, invented at Bell Labs in the eastern United States in 1947,
leapt 8,000 miles to launch an electronics industry in Japan – but it
did not make the shorter leap to found new industries in Zaire or
Paraguay. The nations rising to new power are still ones that were
incorporated thousands of years ago into the old centers of dominance
based on food production, or that have been repopulated by peoples from
those centers.”  
“Prospects for world dominance of sub-Saharan Africans, Aboriginal
Australians, and Native Americans remain dim. The hand of history’s
course at 8000 B.C. lies heavily on us.” p 417.

Why should that be so? If hunter-gatherers are ” probably more
intelligent, not less intelligent, than industrialized peoples”, why
doesn’t it show? Maybe they aren’t plugged into the old-boy networks,
but why don’t they win the math contests and chess tournaments? Where’s
their [Paul Morphy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Morphy), their
[Ramanujan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Srinivasa_Ramanujan), their
[George
Green](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Green_(mathematician))?
Mathematicians, at least, would cheerfully hire a grizzly bear as long
as it ate fewer undergraduates than it solved [Hilbert
problems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert%27s_problems).

Where are the practical payoffs? “Many of the living descendants of the
Aborigines who survived the era of European colonization are now finding
it difficult to succeed economically in white Australian society.” p 19.
Again, if they’re so smart, why aren’t they rich? Why do they flunk
algebra?

Perhaps we should consider dysgenic effects. Because of low birth rates
among highly educated women, IQ is probably declining today in developed
countries, at \~1 pt a generation. Probably this hasn’t been going on
for very long. . But if it goes on long enough, a day may come when the
minds of the men of the industrialized countries fail, leaving the
inhabitants of [Sentinel
Island](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_Sentinel_Island) the
smartest people on Earth.  
But it is not this day.

Enough about the thesis: it’s a mess. Measurements don’t support it, and
none of its implications have gone through the formality of actually
happening. Back to the book itself, which is not all bad.

You see the idea that biogeographical circumstances shaped the rise of
civilization and technology is not at all crazy. The mistake is assuming
that that is the only factor, or that those circumstances never change
the peoples exposed to them: never change them above the neck, that is.
Diamond is happy enough to admit that selection for disease resistance
changed Eurasians and Africans.

Diamond emphasizes the important of domestications of animals and crops,
the big step towards civilization. This allowed vast increase in
population size and social complexity: you can’t overemphasize its
importance.

He discusses various ways in which parts of this big story support his
thesis. Often they don’t really, but the discussion can still be
interesting.

Most significant domestic animals were domesticated somewhere in Eurasia
or North Africa, only a couple in South America (llamas and vicuna),
nothing in the rest of the world. Diamond argues that this wasn’t
because populations varied in their interest in or aptitude for
domestication. Instead, the explanation is that only a few large animals
were suitable for domestication.

He’s unconvincing. Sure, there were places where this was true: what
were the Maori in New Zealand going to domesticate –
[weta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weta)? And Australia didn’t have a
lot of large mammals, at least not after people wiped out its megafauna.
But there are plenty of large animals in Sub-Saharan Africa, yet none
were domesticated. He argues that zebras were wilder, more untameable
than horses – but people have tamed zebras, while the wild ancestors of
horses (tarpans, which survived into the 19th century) were usually
described as untameable. The wild ancestors of cows (aurochsen, which
survived into the 17th century) were big and mean. They enjoyed impaling
people on their horns and flinging them for distance. The eland is a
large African antelope, and by Diamond’s argument it must be untameable,
since the locals never tamed it. But in fact it’s rather easy to tame,
and there’s now a domesticated version.

The key here is that one can select for disposition, for tameness, as
well as obvious physical features, and an animal can go from totally
wild to cuddly in ten generations – remember the selection experiment
with Siberian foxes. In the long run disposition is not a big obstacle.
Selection fixes it – selection applied to above-neck traits.

Diamond makes a similar argument about domesticating plants as crops:
only a few plants were suitable for domestication, and part of the
reason that some populations never developed crops was a lack of
suitable plant species. I’ll give him Eskimos. but that’s about it.

Here his argument is far weaker: there are a buttload of plants that
could be domesticated and might be quite useful, yet have not been.
Enthusiastic agronomists keep trying to get funding for domestication of
[jojoba,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jojoba) or [buffalo
gourd,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cucurbita_foetidissima) or
[guayule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parthenium_argentatum) – usually
government interest runs out well before success.  
The reason that a few crops account for the great preponderance of
modern agriculture is that a bird in the hand – an already-domesticated,
already- optimized crop – feeds your family/makes money right now, while
a potentially useful yet undomesticated crop doesn’t. One successful
domestication tends to inhibit others that could flourish in the same
niche. Several crops were domesticated in the eastern United States, but
with the advent of maize and beans ( from Mesoamerica) most were
abandoned. Maybe if those Amerindians had continued to selectively breed
sumpweed for a few thousand years, it could have been a contender: but
nobody is quite that stubborn.  
Teosinte was an unpromising weed: it’s hard to see why anyone bothered
to try to domesticate it, and it took a long time to turn it into
something like modern maize. If someone had brought wheat to Mexico six
thousand years ago, likely the locals would have dropped maize like a
hot potato. But maize ultimately had advantages: it’s a
[C4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C4_carbon_fixation) plant, while
wheat is [C3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C3_carbon_fixation): maize
yields can be much higher.

Why didn’t people domesticate foxes, back in the day? Is it because
foxes are solitary hunters, don’t have the right pack structure and thus
can’t be domesticated, blah blah blah? No: they’re easy to domesticate.
But we already had dogs: what was the point? You had to be crazy like a
Russian.

One other factor has tended to suppress locally-domesticated plants –
what you might call alien advantage. If you grow a crop near its origin,
there will be local pests and pathogens that are adapted to it. It you
try growing it in a distant land with a compatible climate, it often
does very much better than in its own country. So… crops from Central
and South America have done very well in Africa, or sometimes in
Southeast Asia. Rubber tree plantations work fine in Malaysia and
Liberia but fail in Brazil. Maize is the biggest crop in Africa, while
manioc and peanuts are important. Most cocoa is grown in Africa: most
coffee is grown in South America.

Sometimes, Diamond was wrong, but in a perfectly reasonable way, not in
the devoted service of a flawed thesis, but just because the facts
weren’t all in yet. We all need to worry about that.

He considered the disastrous impact of Eurasian and African diseases on
the inhabitants of the New World, contrasted with a much smaller impact
in the opposite direction, and concluded that a major factor had
probably been transmission from domesticated animals. Eurasians
domesticated quite a few animals, Amerindians not many – perhaps that
was the explanation. In Guns, Germs, and Steel (p 207), he mentions
measles, tuberculosis, smallpox, influenza, pertussis (whooping cough),
and falciparum malaria as likely cases of transmission from domesticated
animals.

We know a lot more about this we did twenty years ago, since we’ve been
sequencing the genes of everything in sight – and it appears that
Diamond was mistaken about the most important members of that list. TB
appears to be ancient in humans, smallpox probably came from some East
African rodent, while falciparum malaria seems to have derived from a
form of malaria carried by gorillas. Measles really does descend from
rinderpest, a cattle plague, but then rinderpest (and mumps) probably
descend from bat viruses. Domesticated animals do play a role in
influenza, along with wild birds. I don’t think we know the origins of
pertussis.

So why then was the Old World such a fount of infectious disease? Well,
it’s bigger. Civilization was older, had had more time to pick up crowd
diseases. Humans have close relatives in the Old World that carried
important pathogens (chimps and gorillas), while Sasquatches are
germ-free. Important pathogens, especially those with insect vectors
like malaria, maybe couldn’t make it to the New World through ice-age
Beringia. Transportation and trade were more advanced in the Old World,
and spread disease more efficiently.

I don’t think that Diamond was making excuses for Amerindians in this,
as he was when talking about domestication: having lots of plagues isn’t
usually considered an accomplishment. Origination in livestock seemed
like a reasonable idea at the time, considering the state of the art. It
seemed so to others as well, like William McNeill. It’s not totally
wrong – definitely true for measles – but it’s not a huge part of the
explanation.

Sometimes Diamond was right. He says that it’s a lot easier for crops to
spread east and west than north and south, and he’s correct. Middle
Eastern crops worked in much of Europe, especially southern Europe, and
also were important in India and China. On the other hand maize had to
adapt to shorter growing seasons as it spread into North America: this
took time. Post-Columbian spread of maize in Africa was much faster.  
Geographical barriers were major factors in slowing the spread of
civilization. Although a few distressed mariners must have occasionally
crossed the Pacific in ancient times, nothing significant (in terms of
crops or ideas) seems to have made it across before Columbus.
Amerindians had to develop everything themselves, while populations in
the Old World were sharing seeds and ideas (and plagues). Having to
invent everything from scratch is a disadvantage, no question.  
The geography of the Americas greatly inhibited contact between
Mesoamerica and the Andean civilization: even today the Pan-American
highway doesn’t go all the way through. The Sahara was even worse, but
most of the budding civilizations of Eurasia did manage some contact.

Conclusion  
We could use more serious work on macrohistory and the rise of
civilization: it’s an interesting and important subject. In particular
I’d like to see a really smart and detailed comparison of the two
totally independent births of civilization in the Old and New Worlds.
But this book isn’t serious. The thesis is a joke, and most of the
supporting arguments are forced ( i.e. wrong). Perhaps the most
important thing we can learn from Guns, Germs, and Steel is that most
people are suckers, eager to sign on to ridiculous theories as long as
they have the right political implications.

