+++
title = "Interview with Mark"
full_title = "Interview with Mark Siderits, a guest post by Debajyoti Gangopadhyay* (part 1)"
date = "2016-05-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/30/interview-with-mark-siderits-a-guest-post-by-debajyoti-gangopadhyay-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/30/interview-with-mark-siderits-a-guest-post-by-debajyoti-gangopadhyay-part-1/).

Interview with Mark Siderits, a guest post by Debajyoti Gangopadhyay* (part 1)

(This dialog is part of the Dialog mission, about which see
[here](http://sciencephilosophydialog.wordpress.com) and
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/20/dialog-between-science-and-philosophy-a-new-event/)
post)

**Debajyoti Gangopadhyay: Professor Siderits, you are widely acclaimed
for your contribution in Buddhist Philosophy. What precisely motivated
you to study Philosophy in Asia? The Question put in another terms – as
a Western Philosopher, what was your point of departure towards Buddhist
Philosophy? Was it purely Logic or something else? And even if I accept
your kernel of initial interest to be some alleged overlap between
Western and Buddhist Thought, do you think this ‘overlap’ is meaningful
today? Does it serve some ‘practical’ purpose other than historical?**

MS: Like many others of my generation, I first became interested in
Buddhism when I was in high school and was exploring alternatives to the
religious tradition in which I had been raised. At that time,
popularizers of Buddhism were presenting it to Westerners as a
soteriological tradition that is compatible with naturalism (i.e.,
accepting the methods of the natural sciences as the best way of finding
out the nature of reality). But this popular representation was very
much dominated by the then-widespread image of Zen Buddhism as
anti-intellectual. So when during my first year at university I read
Wittgenstein’s Blue Book it occurred to me that the line of thought
presented there might be a better way of understanding the Buddhist
teaching of non-self than what I then took to be the Buddhist approach
(i.e., seeking to attain a state of non-conceptual intuition through the
practice of meditation). I then decided to pursue the study of both
Western and Asian philosophy simultaneously. It was through that study
that I came to see that in the Indian Buddhist tradition philosophy has
a prominent place, and that the practice of philosophy in India involved
the same commitment to clarity and rigorous argumentation as what I
found and valued in analytic philosophy in the West. I continue to be
interested in the question of the existence of a self, and at least some
of my interest could be characterized as stemming from soteriological
concerns. So to that extent one could say that I see a practice of
philosophy informed by knowledge of the Buddhist tradition as having
some ‘practical’ value. Of course I also do what I do at least in part
because I derive so much intellectual pleasure from it. While doing
analytic metaphysics is hard work, it can also be lots of fun.

**DG: We have seen that the sources of modern interest in Buddhist Logic
lies mostly in the various possibilities to compare it with some
variants of non-standard Western Logics. Buddhist Logic, developed
surely within the scope of metaphysical jurisdiction of momentariness,
had been frequently compared with some non-standard versions of its
Western counterparts like Free logic, Logic of Empty subject term, or,
more recently, with Paraconsistent Logic.**

What comes immediately after this, is the question of independence of
Logic in Indian Philosophical context – independence of Logic of its own
beyond the scope of jurisdiction of the presiding metaphysics this was
originally meant for. The issue, put a bit differently, is that Nyāya –
both in its Hindu and Buddhist versions, in the context of Indian
Knowledge dynamics, doesn’t seem to have an independent Agenda of its
own. Logic in the Indian context doesn’t seem to have independent
relevance outside the scope of jurisdiction delineated by the presumed
framework of metaphysical necessity in connection with Brahmajijñāsā.

As a modern Philosopher of Western origin, what do you think in this
regard about your Indian Logical Ancestors?

MS: While I have difficulty taking seriously the idea of karma and
rebirth, I still think the idea of liberation from the suffering that
results from our ordinary conception of our identity makes sense. And
this is how I see the classical Indian concern with self and liberation.
I think the Naiyāyikas, Sāṃkhyans, Vedāntins and Buddhists were all
trying to work out whether a self exists, and if so just what it is
like, because they wanted to solve the problem of existential suffering.
And that problem arises whether there is rebirth or not. I also think
this is as good a place as any (and better than some) to start
philosophizing. Of course soteriological concerns can also lead away
from the philosopher’s commitment to follow the argument wherever it
leads. But in the classical Indian context, where there are many
different views about the nature of the self, there would naturally be
interest in working out how to conduct inter-school debates, and that
naturally leads to the development of pramāṇavāda. What differences
there are between rival theories about the number and nature of the
pramāṇas have very little to do with doctrinal commitments of rival
schools. Even the epistemological theory that the Mīmāṃsakas use to
argue for the authoritativeness of the Vedas is defended on grounds that
should be acceptable to nāstikas like the Buddhists.

Indeed I would go further than just saying that their soteriological
concerns did not adversely affect how the Indian schools understood the
practice of attaining knowledge. In fact I suspect they did a better job
than their modern Western counterparts despite their soteriological
concerns. This is because their conception of veridical cognition is
externalist and reliabilist in nature, whereas epistemological
internalism has dominated Western epistemology ever since Descartes. And
I think it is fairly clear that Descartes introduced epistemological
internalism as a way of trying to carve out a separate sphere for reason
and faith in light of the new ascendancy of the natural sciences.
Ironically, the classical Indian approach to epistemology turns out to
be far easier to reconcile with the naturalistic stance than is the
approach that has dominated recent Western epistemology.

I should add that I do not believe any of the pramāṇavādins accepted the
idea that there can be true contradictions, or held any other views that
might require employment of a non-classical logic.

-   Edited for the IPhB by Matthew Dasti and Elisa Freschi
