+++
title = "Beckwith on the"
full_title = "Beckwith on the lateness, corruption, and lack of scholarly editions of Indian sources on early Buddhism"
date = "2016-05-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/06/beckwith-on-the-lateness-corruption-and-lack-of-scholarly-editions-of-indian-sources-on-early-buddhism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/06/beckwith-on-the-lateness-corruption-and-lack-of-scholarly-editions-of-indian-sources-on-early-buddhism/).

Beckwith on the lateness, corruption, and lack of scholarly editions of Indian sources on early Buddhism



GUEST POST\* BY: Monte Ransome [Johnson](http://www.montejohnson.info/),
Philosophy Department, UC, San Diego

I’d like to thank the editors of this blog for inviting me to post here,
and for allowing me to introduce myself. I work in the Philosophy
Department at UC, San Diego. My teaching and research focuses on
Greco-Roman Philosophy, specifically Early Greek Philosophy, Aristotle
Studies, and Hellenistic Philosophy. I am currently involved in a
project to reconstruct a lost dialogue of Aristotle, the *Protrepticus*
(*Exhortation to Philosophy*). I was introduced to Indian Philosophy by
Professor James Duerlinger at the University of Iowa, and I then went on
to study with Professors John Bussanich and John Taber at the University
of New Mexico. Although I did not specialize in Indian Philosophy, these
teachers sparked my interest in Comparative Philosophy, especially
Comparative Ancient Philosophy.

Recently, I taught a graduate seminar on Pyrrhonian Scepticism, and I am
currently supervising a doctoral thesis on Sextus Empiricus. In the
context of this research I encountered a new publication by Christopher
I. Beckwith entitled *Greek Buddha: Pyrrho’s encounter with early
Buddhism in Central Asia* (Princeton University Press, 2015). I have
found the book thought-provoking and also fascinating, but also baffling
in parts, frequently making very striking claims about the history and
hermeneutics of Indian, Greek, and Chinese Philosophy. Nevertheless, I
agreed to write a review of the book for the journal *Ancient
Philosophy*.

Already three useful, and fairly positive, reviews have appeared (and
please let us know in the comments section if you know of others).

\(1\) Matthew Neale’s
[review](http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0041977X15001305) in *Bulletin of
SOAS* 79/1 (2016)

\(2\) Jerker Blomqvist’s
[review](http://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2016/2016-02-32.html) in *BMCR*
2016.02.32 (2016)

\(3\) Robert M. Ellis’
[review](http://www.middlewaysociety.org/books/the-middle-way-in-buddhism-books/greek-buddha-by-christopher-i-beckwith/)
at the *Middle Way Society* (2015)

There is a lot to discuss with respect to Beckwith’s myriad claims and
arguments, for example about his methods of interpreting and comparing
Greek and Indian philosophical texts. Each of the reviews listed above
gives a nice synopsis of Beckwith’s extraordinary claims. But I would
like in this post to focus on some specific claims that Beckwith makes
about the chronology and value of the Indian sources on Buddhism. Since
this falls outside of my area of competence, I am very interested to
hear what Sanskrit and Pāli scholars make of some of Beckwith’s claims.

One striking claim arises in the context of a discussion of the value of
Megasthenes (350-290 BC) as a source of information on early Buddhism.
Megasthenes’ Indica is a lost work, some fragments of which are
preserved in the Geography of Strabo (64 BC-AD 24). Beckwith explains
that Strabo’s version of Indica “had been interpolated and expanded by
others”, that Strabo’s method of selection was compromised by the
period’s preference for “light, chatty, titillating stories”, and that
the process of transmission through medieval scribes was imperfect,
being especially corrupt when it comes to foreign names. Nevertheless,
“it preserves part of the earliest *dated* eyewitness account of Indian
philosophical-religious practices and ideas by far. It is therefore
incalculably more important than any of the other texts traditionally
considered to represent or reflect Early Buddhism” (*Greek Buddha*,
p.68, emphasis in original).

Beckwith remarks in a footnote to the above passage: “It must be noted
that Indologists in particular are wont to discount Greek sources on
early India, referring to all the above-noted problems. However, the
same problems, and much worse ones, affect Indian sources, which are
mostly a millennium or more younger, have never been properly edited,
and consist largely of fantasy” (Greek Buddha, p.68, n.23).

Again, I would like to hear what Indologists make of these claims. I am
less interested at present in hearing about the perceived value of
Megasthenes as a source, or about the relative value of the Indian and
Greek sources. What I am eager to learn is what readers of this blog
think of Beckwith’s low estimation of the value of the Indian sources
themselves, which seems to be based on three issues:

\(1\) the remoteness and lateness of the Indian sources;

\(2\) the lack of properly edited critical editions of the texts; and

\(3\) the later contamination and corruption of the ideas expressed in
the texts.

Since it seems like the most tangible issue, perhaps we can begin by
focusing on the claim about the lack of properly edited critical
editions, since this is presented as a matter of empirical fact. Is it
true that the Indian sources on early Buddhism have never been properly
edited? Beckwith makes an even more striking claim about Chinese texts,
stating: “unfortunately, *there are no true critical editions of any
Chinese texts”* (p.xix, emphasis in original). — but that is an issue
for another discussion (or another blog). But feel free also to comment,
or point us to research, that bears on the lateness or corruption of the
Indian sources on early Buddhism.

\*(for further information on guest-blogging, please check
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/call-for-guest-posts/) page.)

