+++
title = "Why philosophy"
full_title = "Why philosophy departments have focused on the West"
date = "2016-05-22"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/22/why-philosophy-departments-have-focused-on-the-west/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/22/why-philosophy-departments-have-focused-on-the-west/).

Why philosophy departments have focused on the West

Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.

Jay Garfield and Bryan Van Norden have a [widely circulated
article](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html?_r=0)
in a recent New York Times, chastising American philosophy departments
for paying insufficient attention to non-Western traditions of thought.
It will surprise nobody that I sympathize with them, since I’ve been
trying to get non-Western thought a hearing for years. But in part for
that reason, I’ve also been thinking a lot about why it *hasn’t* got
that hearing so far. The reasons for this are not all bad ones, and
anyone working to change the situation needs to understand what those
reasons are. Perhaps most importantly, they need to ask a vital question
that I don’t see asked in Garfield and Van Norden’s article: *why should
we study philosophy?*

Before getting into the detail of the argument, a quick note on
terminology. Garfield and Van Norden replace the usual term “Western”
with the far worse term “Euro-American”, or sometimes “European and
American”. Overall, these latter terms are *less* accurate than
“Western”, since they exclude not only Australia and New Zealand but
Canada as well. A term for Western philosophy that leaves out [Charles
Taylor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Taylor_(philosopher)) and
[Peter Singer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Singer) makes no
sense. (No, “American” does not include Canada. Calling a Canadian an
American is as likely to cause offence as calling a Scot an Englishman.)
We haven’t found a precise and accurate term here ([don’t get me started
on
“white”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/of-white-buddhism/)),
so we are far better off with the term in common and widespread use. So,
“Western”.

Now to the arguments. Garfield and Van Norden confront an important and
major objection: “it is unfair to single out philosophy: We do not have
departments of Euro-American Mathematics or Physics.” Here is their
response:

> This is nothing but shabby sophistry. Non-European philosophical
> traditions offer distinctive solutions to problems discussed within
> European and American philosophy, raise or frame problems not
> addressed in the American and European tradition, or emphasize and
> discuss more deeply philosophical problems that are marginalized in
> Anglo-European philosophy. There are no comparable differences in how
> mathematics or physics are practiced in other contemporary cultures.

*Is* this “shabby sophistry”, though? Consider medicine. Indian āyurveda
and Chinese and [Tibetan traditional
medicine](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/08/on-tradition-and-observation-in-tibetan-medicine/)
certainly offer distinctive solutions to problems discussed within
modern Western medicine: i.e. how to treat illnesses of the body. They
raise or frame holistic questions that are rarely addressed or
marginalized in Western medicine. That is *quite* comparable to the
situation in philosophy. But I don’t want to rely on āyurveda to prevent
malaria or fix a broken leg, and I doubt Garfield or Van Norden do
either. There are very likely ideas of value in āyurveda, but there are
reasons for excluding it from the mainstream of medicine. It is accepted
in the West and in Asia that those traditions of medicine developed
largely in Europe and North America for the past few centuries (out of
the earlier Islamic Golden Age) have demonstrated their value enough to
get pride of place.

Now is the same true of philosophy? No, but the reason is more
complicated than the glib dismissal of “shabby sophistry” lets on. The
value of modern Western medicine over its competitors has been
demonstrated time and again through its pragmatic efficacy at solving
what the vast majority of people in any tradition can agree are
problems: everybody whose leg is broken would like to see it put back
together the way it was before, thank you very much. Ascertaining the
relative worth of different traditions of philosophy is a more
complicated task.

But ascertain this worth one must, when one is making the difficult
decisions of what to teach and what not to teach. Not everything is
philosophy, and not everything has the same value. We do not teach the
aphorisms of [Forrest Gump](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forrest_Gump)
as philosophy, nor should we. The most dangerous thing I see in
Garfield’s and Van Norden’s article is that they do not *ask* what makes
philosophy a worthwhile activity in the first place, why one would study
philosophy rather than anything else. It leaves the impression that the
selection of which philosophy to study is essentially arbitrary – that
in terms of what a student can get out of studying them, there’s no real
difference between Rāmānuja and Nietzsche except that one is Indian and
one isn’t.

What makes the assessment of philosophical worth a complicated task is
[incommensurability](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/12/choosing-a-few-traditions/),
as MacIntyre describes it: the clearest standards of worth are those to
be found within a given tradition of inquiry. It is the traditions of
thought in which we are situated (whether Yogācāra Buddhism or liberal
scientism) that give us reasons why anything, including philosophy, is
worthwhile. No standard is truly neutral. So there is a certain
circularity in the choice of what to include and what to leave out.

But here is the thing: this circularity is *not arbitrary*. Our
preexisting standards for what is good and bad, our
[assumptions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/01/the-importance-of-assumptions/)
or
[“intuitions”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/against-moral-intuitions/),
are shaped by history, not by whim.
[Gadamer](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/gadamer/) reminds us,
correctly, that we are always already formed by some sort of
philosophical tradition, whether we like it or not and whether we know
it or not. The study of philosophy comes to matter most at those moments
where [our existing beliefs come into
question](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/09/why-care-about-philosophy/)
– but those now-questioned beliefs still form the starting point from
which we are able to move somewhere else.

And a great deal of what forms us is Western. When we argue for
political change on the basis of human rights, we are arguing from
within [a Western history centred on William of Ockham and
others](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/03/the-history-of-rights-ii/).
When we claim that observation of the empirical world is always fallible
and could potentially be overturned, we are thinking in ways made
possible by Western thinkers like David Hume. (And Muslims of the Golden
Age before him, I would argue, but that is because they are themselves
part of the history of Western thought in a way that the Indians and
Chinese are not.)

There is more to be said about the point that what forms us is Western –
some objections that I will pick up next time. For now, though, I hope
it’s obvious that I am *not* saying philosophy departments should just
stick to their Western status quo. Coming from me, such a claim would be
ludicrous. They should be teaching far more non-Western works than they
do. But they should do it because of the *content* of those works: the
fact that [Mencius’s ideas on
partiality](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/01/of-drowning-children-near-and-far-i/)
or the [epistemology of
*pramāṇa*s](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/10/sabda-and-the-sciences/)
are ideas worthy of consideration in their own right, as judged from the
preexisting starting point of the students and instructors who might
learn them. The instructors might not *know* that those ideas are worthy
from such a standpoint, but they are – and as advocates of Asian
philosophy it is our job to show them that fact.

Contrast the current structure of the American Philosophical
Association, with its [committee for “Asian and Asian-American”
philosophy](http://www.apaonline.org/group/asian). That title indicates
to me that this committee is there for the wrong reasons. There is no
committee for “Greek and Greek-American” philosophy, and there will
never be one, nor should there be – even though American philosophy
departments study more Greek philosophy than Asian philosophy, and will
in all likelihood continue to study Greek philosophy for as long as they
exist. They study Greek philosophy, and should study it, not because
they are trying to attract more Greek people to the study of philosophy,
but because they recognize the merits of Greek philosophy and find it
worthwhile. That is what Asian philosophy can be and should be. If there
is a need to represent the interests of contemporary Asian-American
philosophers as an underrepresented minority (and there probably is), it
is quite separate from the reasons to study the great ([and internally
distinct](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/does-asian-philosophy-exist/))
traditions that have emerged in Asia.

I share Garfield’s and Van Norden’s hope “that American philosophy
departments will someday teach Confucius as routinely as they now teach
Kant, that philosophy students will eventually have as many
opportunities to study the Bhagavad Gītā as they do the Republic…” But
this will and should happen only when Confucius and the Gītā inform the
background of everyday American thought as much as Kant and the Republic
do. To make that happen, we must address the merit of their ideas, not
merely geographical diversity. If the latter is our main reason for
advocating their inclusion, philosophy departments will have good reason
to continue to resist including them. Let us change that.
