+++
title = "Of “White Buddhism”"
full_title = "Of “White Buddhism”"
date = "2016-05-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/08/of-white-buddhism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/08/of-white-buddhism/).

Of “White Buddhism”

\[Cross-posted from [Love of All
Wisdom](http://Permalink:%20http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/%20of-white-buddhism%20/).\]

Mindfulness meditation has become so mainstream that it’s not just
[doctors who prescribe
it](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/of-mindfulness-meditation-buddhist-and-otherwise/).
A couple weeks ago, Boston University had a workshop on mindfulness for
its information-technology staff. Google made a splash for having an
in-house mindfulness coach, Chade-Meng Tan, who was recently
[interviewed in Religion
Dispatches](http://religiondispatches.org/rich-people-need-inner-peace-too-an-interview-with-googles-jolly-good-fellow-chade-meng-tan/).

Tan makes some startling claims in the interview – most notably that
American Buddhism is “purer Buddhism” because mindfulness is its “source
teaching”, which temples in Asian countries have supposedly moved away
from. I have spent plenty of time
[debunking](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/09/precis-of-beyond-enacted-experiences/)
such an approach in Ken Wilber and others, and there’s no need to say
more here. What *does* need a response is a recent [discussion of
Tan](https://rkpayne.wordpress.com/2016/04/29/white-buddhism-a-skeptics-guide/)
by Richard K. Payne. Payne says:

> The recent interview of Chade-Meng Tan appearing in Religion
> Dispatches provides an opportunity to examine—oh yet again, sorry—the
> nature of what now seems appropriate to call “White Buddhism.” This
> purposely annoying phrase can serve to displace the more academically
> respectable “Buddhist modernism,” which of course remains a useful
> category. But the phrase White Buddhism allows our attention to focus
> specifically on the cultural imperialism at work in White Buddhism’s
> representations of itself and others. While it seems that Tan is quite
> aware of his status as the only mindfulness teacher who is not white,
> the kind of Buddhism he promotes is quite White.

We return here to the question of what to call the kind of Buddhism
whose history goes back to 19th-century Sri Lanka and now expresses
itself in the likes of “secular” mindfulness meditation. “Buddhist
modernism” is a good enough term, as is “Enlightenment Buddhism”. I’ve
previously discussed what is wrong with the godawful and hopefully
waning term [“Protestant
Buddhism”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/).
But let’s think about the “*White* Buddhism” that Payne proposes as an
alternative.

Readers will recall that I coined and generally use the term
“[Yavanayāna](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-what-it-is/)”
to describe this new strain of Buddhism. *Yavana* is the Sanskrit term
for Hellenistic Greeks and therefore for Europeans generally. I have
used this part of the term in the hopes of playfully highlighting the
roots of this tradition in European thought, to indicate that it is a
tradition rooted in the European-rooted cultures we refer to as “the
West”. But for me the more important part of the term is the *yāna*:
portraying this newer Buddhism as an emerging Buddhist subtradition, in
the footsteps of Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna before it. As Theravāda Buddhism
came to find its geographic home to the south of India (Sri Lanka and
Southeast Asia), Mahāyāna to the east and Vajrayāna to the north, so the
past two centuries have seen the emergence of a new form of Buddhism at
home to the small- and capital-W west, outside of Asia. It is, to my
eyes, a form of Buddhism [as
legitimate](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-a-defence/)
as Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna. And while I am critical of many aspects of it
(especially of [Engaged
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/)),
there is enough of it I accept – especially the [rejection of
rebirth](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
and other supernatural elements – that I am at least to some extent a
Yavanayāna Buddhist myself.

Like many premodern terms (and some modern ones) for what we might now
call ethnicities, the term *yavana* has both a racial and a cultural
dimension. I have always intended “Yavanayāna”, however, to refer only
to the cultural side. Obviously, referring to “White Buddhism” does the
exact opposite. What purpose does the racial meaning of this
“purposefully annoying” term serve? In Payne’s terms, the term “allows
our attention to focus specifically on the cultural imperialism at work
in White Buddhism’s representations of itself and others.”

This “cultural imperialism” is a phrase that could be defined many
different ways, and Payne does not attempt a definition. [Commenter
Lyone used the
term](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/31/the-double-standard-of-misinterpretation/#comment-36697)
in a previous exchange on a related subject, and the problems I noted to
her remain the case here. The use of the term “imperialism” is always at
least questionable when one is not dealing with actual occupations
conducted by military empires. As I noted [regarding Deepak Sarma’s
related
accusations](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/11/in-defence-of-white-hindu-converts/),
the US never conquered India; except for a very short-lived occupation
of Japan, it did not conquer any Buddhist countries either. So it is far
from clear what sort of “imperialism” would be at issue here. Moreover,
it is strange to claim that the term “White Buddhism” puts the focus on
cultural imperialism when it specifically and intentionally moves our
focus *away* from culture and instead toward race. As far as I can tell,
the main purpose of using the “White Buddhism” term seems to be to
*insult* it and its practitioners, a task at which Payne has certainly
succeeded.

When Payne says more about “cultural imperialism” in the post, it is
this: “The promotion of it \[White Buddhism\] is a form of cultural
imperialism, no different from nineteenth century missionaries who while
bringing the Gospel to the colonies, also participated in the
destruction—whether intentional or not—of local cultures.” There is
something rather worrying about this phrasing, one which echoes
contemporary Indian right-wing polemics against Christian conversion.
What does it say about freely converted Indian Christians to claim that
their local culture has been “destroyed”? ̇What respect does it have for
their agency and their culture to view their choices and
self-determination as a destruction?

This is not even to begin to discuss the disrespect he implies toward
“White Buddhism” itself and the people who practise it. [Parallel to
Sarma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/11/in-defence-of-white-hindu-converts/),
Payne repeatedly condemns the “condescension” that White Buddhists
express toward older forms of Asian Buddhism, but if you can read [his
piece](https://rkpayne.wordpress.com/2016/04/29/white-buddhism-a-skeptics-guide/)
as exhibiting anything *but* condescension toward “White Buddhism”, you
have a far more generous spirit than I do.

The ones particularly effaced by the “White Buddhism” label, of course,
are non-white White Buddhists like Tan – [and
myself](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/). Since
his article is *about* Tan, Payne appears to be thinking of this
effacing as a feature of the label rather than a bug. For Payne, despite
the colour of our skin, despite the [racism we have
experienced](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-value-of-forgetting/),
our Buddhist practices – if not we ourselves – are to be labelled
“White”. With a capital W.

To portray our Buddhism as “White” – especially when attached to the
label of cultural imperialism – carries with it more than a whiff of an
accusation that we are [race
traitors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_traitor), complicit in some
sort of imperialism against ourselves. What we brown-coloured White
Buddhists are doing, for Payne, is “a form of cultural imperialism, no
different from nineteenth century missionaries who while bringing the
Gospel to the colonies, also participated in the destruction—whether
intentional or not—of local cultures.”

This sort of accusation could be dismissed if it was simply an isolated
insult from one person, but it isn’t. It is part of a pattern that is
very familiar to me. I have received accusations of not being brown
enough before, from Rajiv Malhotra and other [Hindu nationalists
outraged](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/how-not-to-defend-hinduism-in-academia/)
that Western academics dare say something critical about their
traditions. “European soul in an Indian body”, “sepoy in training” –
yeah, I’ve heard those terms before, from the people who wish we Western
academics would shut up about like annoying details like caste and sex,
and just let the brahmins tell everyone their version of what India is.A
label like“White Buddhism” calls to my mind how a Chinese-Canadian
former friend of mine, who spoke (as I do) with no Asian accent, told me
other Chinese-Canadians would refer to her as a “banana” – yellow on the
outside, white on the inside. It saddens me to see this kind of
accusation reproduced by people who seem to think themselves left-wing
fighters against racism, but I can’t see Payne’s description of Tan in
any other light.

Śāntideva tells us [not to feel
offended](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/santideva-on-offensive-words/)
at others’ words, and I take his advice seriously. I’d be lying if I
said I *didn’t* feel insulted by Payne’s words – my practice is not as
effective as Śāntideva’s – but the insult is not the point. What *is*
the point is that modernized or Westernized forms of Buddhism should be
judged by the truth of their ideas and the effectiveness of their
practices, not by unfair attempts to tar them by association with
imperialism and racism.
