+++
title = "Brief Book Notes on"
full_title = "Brief Book Notes on Beckwith, Carpenter, and Siderits/Katsura, by Ethan Mills"
date = "2016-05-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/10/brief-book-notes-on-beckwith-carpenter-and-sideritskatsura-by-ethan-mills/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/10/brief-book-notes-on-beckwith-carpenter-and-sideritskatsura-by-ethan-mills/).

Brief Book Notes on Beckwith, Carpenter, and Siderits/Katsura, by Ethan Mills

As the Book Review Editor for this blog, I invite readers to submit
their own reviews (see:
<http://indianphilosophyblog.org/book-reviews/>). To encourage
interest in book reviews, I’m trying something a little different: brief
book notes, or what you might call a “review of reviews.” (Thank you to
Matthew Dasti for stepping in as Guest Book Review Editor).

**Christopher I. Beckwith. *Greek Buddha: Pyrrho’s Encounter with Early
Buddhism in Central Asia*. xx + 275 pp., index. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2015. $29.95 (hardcover).**

This book has generated a bit of controversy, even here on the blog
(<http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/05/06/beckwith-on-the-lateness-corruption-and-lack-of-scholarly-editions-of-indian-sources-on-early-buddhism/>
). Beckwith is not the first scholar to argue that Pyrrho and early
Indian Buddhism are historically related in some way (e.g., Flintoff’s
“Pyrrho and India,” McEvilley’s *The Shape of Ancient Thought:
Comparative Studies in Greek and Indian Philosophies*, and Kuzminski’s
*Pyrrhonism: How the Ancient Greeks Reinvented Buddhism*). As with
previous studies, the evidence available is not quite up to the task to
which Beckwith puts it. Uniquely, however, Beckwith takes a more
“scientific” approach that relies on “hard evidence” from archaeology,
history, and linguistics.

This approach makes Beckwith’s study more provocative, especially the
ways in which it challenges orthodox interpretations of early Buddhism
(he sees it as a reaction to Zoroastrianism, not Brahmanism) and in his
more philosophical claims (Beckwith claims that the Buddha, Pyrrho, and
Hume all argue against a form of absolutism). Another issue is that
Beckwith sometimes loses the forest for the trees. I sometimes found it
difficult to determine exactly what Beckwith’s claims were; for example,
I remain unsure whether chapter three is claiming that the Buddha and
Laozi are the same person.

A larger problem is that the book is a bit dogmatic – perhaps an ironic
aspect of a book about skepticism! This is especially odd considering
how little “hard evidence” there is when it comes to ancient Central and
South Asia. Surely a lot of interesting things happened in Central and
South Asia in the first millennium BCE, and perhaps just as surely many
such happenings are not accounted for in any “hard evidence.” Beckwith
seems to forget another dictum of scientific inquiry: absence of
evidence is not evidence of absence. So, while Beckwith’s book provides
provocative and healthy challenges to traditional understandings in
several disciplines, the biggest flaw is perhaps philosophical: it fails
to take seriously the skeptical message of the philosophers discussed.

**Amber Carpenter. *Indian Buddhist Philosophy: Metaphysics as Ethics*.
xviii + 313 pp., index. New York: Routledge, 2014. $39.95 (paperback).**

This book is difficult to categorize. It’s not exactly an introduction,
but neither does it dwell on specialist minutiae. It’s not a
straightforward historical overview, but neither is it arranged purely
thematically. Instead of fitting into the typical categories, Carpenter
does something more interesting: she presents a great example of what I
would call expanding the history of philosophy. Carpenter treats these
texts as partners in philosophical dialogue, partners from whom we can
learn and whom we should feel free to interrogate whether we agree or
not. Like Carpenter, I’ve been coming to see that comparisons between
Hellenistic and classical Indian philosophy can be extremely fruitful.

The combination of historical and thematic organization sometimes feels
disjointed, especially for readers already familiar with the history of
Indian Buddhist philosophy. On the other hand, sometimes Carpenter’s
own critical views on the debates are difficult to track; for instance,
I’m not entirely sure what she thinks about non-self, Madhyamaka, and
*apoha*.

But Carpenter’s book does work for the most part. A lot of her
discussions, like her treatment of suffering in chapter one, are
insightful for beginners and specialists alike. While this may not be
an ideal book for readers entirely unfamiliar with Buddhist philosophy,
it would be ideal for readers with a little background in both Western
and Indian philosophy hoping to delve more deeply. And people such as
myself who are seeking to expand the history of philosophy, especially
in a Hellenistic-Indian mode, will find a lot of inspiration here.

**Mark Siderits and Shōryu Katsura. *Nāgārjuna’s Middle Way:
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā*. x + 351 pp., index. Boston: Wisdom Publications,
2013. $28.95 (paperback).**

Translating Nāgārjuna’s *Mūlamadhyamakakārikā* (MMK) is no easy task;
the Sanskrit text is often obscure and has long history of varied
interpretation, commentary, and translation in Asian and European
languages. One might wonder whether we need yet another English
translation, or more cynically, whether another translation will merely
mirror the translator’s interpretation.

For the most part, this translation from Siderits and Katsura, both
eminent scholars of Buddhist philosophy, offers both a novel, insightful
translation and allows readers to come to their own conclusions. Like
Inada’s translation, this includes the Sanskrit text along with the
English translation, which is helpful for those who read Sanskrit or who
are merely familiar with Nāgārjuna’s key terms (*svabhāva*, *śūnyatā,*
etc.). The translators provide their own commentary on the verses while
drawing on the major Indian commentaries of Candrakīrti, Bhāviveka, and
Buddhapālita. They don’t dip much into non-Indian commentaries, nor do
they say much about contemporary scholarship. I think Siderits and
Katsura are wise to take this approach: let readers wade into the text
with a little help before diving into the oceans of scholarship and
commentary.

While the translators generally background their own interpretations (to
the extent that this is possible), there are places in which Siderits’s
anti-realist interpretation takes center stage. The translation of
*prapañca* as “hypostatization” instead of something like “conceptual
proliferation” (e.g., p. 15, 125-126) is stacked a bit in favor of an
anti-realist interpretation. Also, the inclusion of “metaphysical” in
square brackets before “views” in verse 13.8 (p. 145) is a strange move
unless one were convinced that Nāgārjuna could not literally mean “all
views” (although this tactic is not taken in verse 27.30, p. 334).

Still, I think this is now the best English translation available. I
recently used it in a comparative philosophy course. While Nāgārjuna is
never easy, this translation presented the text to newcomers in a way
that allowed them to get something out of it. It also helps me make
more sense of a text with which I’ve been grappling for years.
