+++
title = "A Stolen King: Alexander III of Macedon"
date = "2020-12-23"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/12/23/a-stolen-king-alexander-iii-of-macedon/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/12/23/a-stolen-king-alexander-iii-of-macedon/).

It’s June 323 BCE in Babylonia. In the grand palace of one of the most
powerful Neo-Babylonian emperor of the past, Nebuchadnezzar II lies the
lifeless body of another powerful monarch, Alexander III of Macedon. But
the scorching heat of the Mesopotamian summer apparently does not take
its toll on the body of the king. You see, in Alexander, the lines of
history and myth tends to blur to the point of looking the same.

What caused his death is as much a matter of speculation today as it was
then. From poison to malaria to typhoid, every theory has been suggested
and the cause still remains inconclusive. But the reason of his death is
not the topic of this post. Rather it’s what happens afterwards.
Alexander was one such figure of ancient history whose death didn’t put
a stop to the adventures that his short life had involved. This is the
post about a snatch, a heist of not just anyone but of Alexander
himself. This is a post about a stolen king.

![***Alexander III of
Macedon^(a)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/alexander-1.jpg?w=721)

**Background**

Ever since crossing the Hellespont (ancient name of Dardanelles Strait)
in 334 BCE, Alexander had been unstoppable. The two pitched battles
between the armies of Alexander and Darius at Halicarnassus and Issos
had proved the might of the Macedonian far and wide. Even for that time,
the news traveled fast about the hitherto invincible army and also of
the brutal punishments that awaited anyone who dared to stop the
invader. But the Egyptians were in a dilemma. The current rulers of
Egypt, the Persians were very much hated in the country. The entire
Persian rule in Egypt had seen many rebellions which were surely and
brutally crushed. People were tired of this endless cycle of one
unsuccessful rebellion after another. They had been impatiently waiting
for a saviour but there was no native-born hero.¹ Egypt was waiting for
another Ahmose I, the man who freed the country of the foreign Hyksos.
But unfortunately, no one was coming.

***“…faced with a stark choice between Darius and Alexander, the
Macedonian looked like the lesser of two evils.”²***

Like a gale, Alexander came in the closing of the year 332 BCE and Egypt
surrendered. There was no resistance whatsoever. Out went the Persians
and came the Macedonian. And then commenced another era of rule by yet
another foreigner in Egypt. As to why is it important to know about the
role of Egypt in this saga will be explained in a short while.
Alexander’s first act after conquering Egypt was a strategic
masterstroke when he went to “*pay his respects to the sacred Apis
bull*.”³ But after this, quite opposite to the expectations, Alexander
decided to stay and halt for a while in Egypt rather than go and fight
another awaited battle with Darius. He just had laid the foundation of
the city that was to be immortalized in the annals of history,
Alexandria. May be the ancient and famous culture of Egypt was having
its effect on him or may be he just had a penchant for knowing the
mysteries of future, mysteries of life. We already know about his
interactions with philosophers and *yogis* in India. But whatever was
the reason, Alexander decided to go to the Siwa Oasis with its famous
oracle of Amun, deep in the Sahara desert.

***“He put his question to the oracle and received (or so he said) the
answer that his soul desired.”⁴***

Alexander left Egypt shortly afterwards, never to return. His brief stay
of four months in Egypt and his visit to the Siwa Oasis was to be used
masterly by a companion general of his, Ptolemy, son of Lagus. It was
Ptolemy who later became the Pharaoh of Egypt and it was his ingenious
and infamous plan of having Alexander in Egypt at any cost,
notwithstanding Alexander’s death that resulted in the robbery of
Alexander’s body.

**Ptolemy and the Chaos**

The untimely death of Alexander in 323 BCE, had left many unanswered
questions. His body remained neglected in the peak summer of Babylon.
The generals were busy in carrying out the business of the empire
instead. The designated successor of Alexander III, Alexander IV was a
little child at that time.

***“Rather than admit that the king was dead, the leading men
Alexander’s generals tried to carry on as before administering the
empire, allocating*** ***governorship, minting Alexander’s coins,
putting down the revolt in Greece.”*** ***⁵***

According to Quintus Curtius Rufus, Alexander was not given a funeral
immediately. His corpse lay there, neglected for seven days. No one
bothered with what was to be done. As one writer puts it perfectly –
*“This was an empire in denial.”* Perdiccas, another important companion
general of Alexander was now regent of the child Alexander IV and
therefore of the empire. But between all the discussions regarding the
body of Alexander, a decision was finally arrived at. Alexander was to
be embalmed. Why? That we’ll discuss shortly.

![***Bust of*** **Ptolemy I**
***^(b)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/220px-ptolemy_i_soter_louvre_ma849.jpg?w=220)

From this chaos of uncertain circumstances, Ptolemy was granted the
governorship of Egypt. The fact that Ptolemy, a childhood friend of
Alexander accompanied him to the Siwa Oasis played an important role and
Ptolemy was able to convince his fellow generals that he deserved the
governorship of Egypt. He quickly moved to remove the unpopular satrap
Kleomenes of Naukratis who was on his way to becoming the dictator of
Egypt. It needs to be made clear that Ptolemy on his part was not doing
some charity in removing Kleomenes. He very well knew that Egypt was one
of “*the wealthiest and easiest to defend of Alexander’s many conquests
– ideally suited to become once again..a powerful kingdom in its own
right.”⁶* Wily as ever, Ptolemy was just acting on a given opportunity.
This story is about opportunities rather than integrity.

**The Embalming**

As explained above, the body of the king was to be embalmed. How this
decision was arrived at? Well the generals finally took the hint from
Alexander himself who had had given a huge funeral and embalmed the
corpse of his companion Hephaestion the previous autumn in Ecbatana.⁷ As
per Curtius, the Chaldeans and the Egyptians who were made in charge of
the embalming were scared and shocked to see that the body of Alexander
had no signs of decay even after so many in days in the summer. He
looked alive! At this time it is perhaps better to remember that there
could be fair amount of mythical storytelling behind this. But some have
suggested that this could very well be a reasonable explanation for a
biological phenomenon. Whatever was the case, the embalmers were scared
not just of the lifelike appearance but also of the fact that the Greeks
and the Macedonians never mummified there dead and were therefore
unaware of the gory procedure. What if while carrying out the procedure,
something went wrong? Macedonians might just come for their heads!
Nonetheless, they proceeded to embalm the body.

> ***“…Al******exander unlike Hephaestion, was a king, and mummifying
> his corpse broke with the royal Macedonian tradition in spectacular
> fashion…It seems likely that following the example of
> Hephaestion…Alexander’s body was embalmed to preserve it for later
> cremation or burial in its final resting pla******ce. Perdiccas,
> Ptolemy and Seleucus probably did not intend Alexander to be mummified
> for eternity.”***
>
> ***N. J. Saunders, Alexander’s Tomb.***

**The Hearse**

An order was given, probably by Perdiccas, that a magnificent hearse was
to be made for the embalmed king. Construction was promptly started but
the readers will be amazed to know that that the hearse took two years
to complete and in the meanwhile, the dead king waited somewhere in
Babylon. The hearse was to be an elaborate structure. On the orders of
the generals, it was to signify the status of the body it was to carry.
It had to be worthy of a monarch of multi ethnic empire.

![***A mid-nineteenth century reconstruction of Alexander’s
catafalque^(c)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/12/hearse-of-alexander.jpg?w=800)

Diodorus, probably deriving from the contemporary account of historian
Hieronymus of Cardia, gave a detailed description of the catafalque that
was to carry the corpse of Alexander. Twenty feet in length and thirteen
feet in breadth,⁸ the giant vehicle was built with enormous use of gold.
The entire design resembled a Greek temple with its Ionic columns. It
was fit for a king who was being deified with each passing moment.

***“On each of the four corners, perched a Nike victory statue, and a
gold olive wreath on a stylized palm stood on the top of a barrel roof
fashioned from golden scales.”⁹***

In the interior of the temple, Alexander lay in a golden sarcophagus and
a golden net hid the body. Four large paintings covered the sides, one
of which involved a painting of Indian war elephants and the other
showed Alexander in chariot with “*his companions and a Persian Royal
Guard*.” As per Diodorus, it took well fed and ornately decorated sixty
four mules to pull the enormous structure! It is said that Perdiccas had
covered Alexander’s body with a royal purple cloak and even *“tied a
royal diadem across his forehead.”¹⁰*

**The Imagery**

Like a poet who writes his poetry in a fashion that produces lifelike
experiences in the minds of the reader, the same way Perdiccas and his
fellow generals had chosen such an elaborate style for the final journey
of Alexander that took two years to finish. Some may say that they
genuinely wanted to pay such a homage to their king but when it comes to
politics and power, each and every symbolism is just that in the end – a
symbolism, a way to enhance and project power in the minds of its
subjects. While not denying that there might be a hint of piety in this
story, as far as Perdiccas was concerned, it was definitely and more
importantly a propaganda machine

It signified the all encompassing empire of Alexander. After all, it is
fact that the wheeled funerary cart was not Greek but an Asian
concept.¹¹ The carefully chosen design of the cart, the imagery of
Persian guards and the Indian elephants, the Egyptian embalming of the
body, the very Greek design of the cart that resembled a Greek temple on
wheels, every little nuance was there to project the might of an empire.
The might that existed while Alexander was alive and the might that was
to exist in future as well, the might whose reins were for now in the
hands of the regent of the empire, Perdiccas. At the end, Alexander’s
existence was never futile. His presence was fundamental when he was
alive, his corpse was going to be useful as well.

But Perdiccas was not the only one thinking of the future and the
utility of having Alexander’s tomb in their sphere of influence. Ptolemy
was going through a churning of his own. There had existed an
interesting Macedonian tradition, the one in which the person who had
the honour of burying the king was considered to have received
legitimacy to be the future ruler, the successor himself. And Ptolemy
knew this fact that if Perdiccas was to be allowed to have his way with
the final journey of Alexander, he would become paramount. The aura and
the myth around Alexander which had been created to the point of him
being deified was not going to go waste.

**Trouble in Egypt**

After removing Kleomenes, Ptolemy might have thought that his ascent to
the throne of Egypt was going to be smooth but that was not the case.
Having political and economic power in his hands was not enough to rule
Egypt which in the ancient world in general, it never was actually.
Ancient kings ruled with a perfect combination of political and economic
authority at one hand and religious and moral on the other. Egypt was no
exception to this rule. This is the reason that every Pharaoh in the
vast past of ancient Egypt had made sure to get this message across its
subjects that they had Gods on their side. Some even went to the limit
of proclaiming themselves as Gods. Ptolemy as a foreigner was seriously
lacking in this department.

But he had one aspect going in his favour – Alexander himself.
Alexander’s personality and his appeal in Egypt was different. Politics
abhors vacuum – this was as much a reality then as it is now. Persian
rulers in Egypt were very loathed and as mentioned above, the very first
act of Alexander after conquering Egypt was to pay his respects to the
sacred Apis bull and then his journey to the Siwa Oasis for the oracle
of Amun. This had worked wonders and created an aura of him being a
legitimate ruler of Egypt in the society at that time. But Ptolemy knew
that a foreigner was not going to get lucky twice. Egyptians might have
accepted Alexander, but they were not going to easily accept Ptolemy.
Having Alexander’s tomb in Egypt might solve that problem for Ptolemy.
And he was therefore resolute to have the dead king in his kingdom!

**The Chosen Destination**

It is said that it was Alexander’s dying wish to be buried in Siwa, the
place where he had heard his oracle, the oracle that had confirmed his
divinity for him, that he was the son of Zeus Ammon. But the marshals
were against this idea. Another option for the burial was Babylonia.
What was the role of the territory of Babylonia in this game of musical
chairs? Perdiccas was ruling there, so why not bury the king in
Babylonia itself? Some even favoured this choice but the conservative
ranks of the army wanted a mausoleum of Alexander in his ancestral land.

They thought that it would be fitting to have him buried with
traditional rites along with his ancestors in the royal burial ground at
Aegae (Vergina) in Macedonia. While the negotiations were going on,
Perdiccas had to leave Babylonia at an urgent business of quashing a
rebellion in the Cappadocian mountains, before finally deciding the
chosen destination of Alexander’s body.

But, another fact was tempting Perdiccas to have Alexander buried in
Macedonia – the marriage proposals. Antipater, another important
Macedonian general who was left incharge of the European possessions of
the empire offered his daughter Nicaea’s hand in marriage to Perdiccas.
Before Perdiccas could think much about it, another counter proposal was
made by Alexander’s mother Olympia to give the hand of her daughter and
Alexander’s sister Cleopatra in marriage to Perdiccas. These reasons
were tempting Perdiccas to confirm Macedonia as the final resting place
of Alexander.

On the other hand, knowing very well that having Alexander buried in
Egypt was certainly going to be helpful to Ptolemy, there was no way
Perdiccas was going to allow that. Relations between Ptolemy and
Perdiccas were getting fractured all the more. It is even said that
Ptolemy had in fact got Kleomenes murdered on the suspicion of his
loyalty to Perdiccas. So having Alexander’s mausoleum in Egypt would be
equal to giving the kingdom to Ptolemy on a platter and Perdiccas was
not going to be an accomplice in his rival’s ascent to power.

> ***“..Perdiccas also had long term issues to consider. He would
> control the empire only until Alexander’s son reached maturity.
> Controlling the final destination of Alexander’s body and
> administering Macedonian funeral rites was vital if he was to act as a
> strong and effective regent who could count on the backing of the
> army. It was a difficult balancing act.”***
>
> ***N. J. Saunders, Alexander’s Tomb.***

But Perdiccas made a mistake. he didn’t consider that Ptolemy might be
thinking the same. A heist was going to take place right under their
noses. A king, albeit a dead one was going to be stolen!

**The Stealing**

This whole time, Perdiccas had given Arrhidaios the responsibility to
monitor the construction of the hearse. When the hearse was about to be
completed, as mentioned above Perdiccas went north to Cappadicia. This
was to be his biggest mistake. Arrhidaios had decided to side with
Ptolemy in this saga and he was keeping Ptolemy updated about the
current situation and what Perdiccas was thinking about Alexander’s
destination. On the other hand, Antipater got to know about the marriage
proposal of Cleopatra to Perdiccas and the messenger was Antigonas, the
general in charge of Asia Minor. Perdiccas knew that this proposal of
Cleopatra which he was seriously considering would become a problem if
Antipater got the hint of it. But it was too late. The cat was already
out of the bag and Antipater decided to take revenge. Perdiccas had to
now open a second front in Hellespont and he left Eumenes, his loyal
confidant in charge there. But Perdiccas was clearly outstretched.

Taking advantage of the chaos, Arrhidaios contrived a plan with Ptolemy.
They were to take the cortege out from Babylon and towards Egypt without
telling Perdiccas. With Alexander’s body safe under the sarcophagus, his
final journey began. The journey must have been a spectacle for the
populace. With the hearse decorated with such enormous amount of gold,
the effect that it must have had on the onlookers must had been awe
inspiring. It is said that thousands of people came to admire it
especially when it did start moving.¹²

Diodorus paints a rosy picture suggesting that Ptolemy went to greet the
body of Alexander, that he “*went to Syria to meet it, and recieving the
body, considered it worthy of greatest care.”* But that was not the
case. Ptolemy in fact had decided to have Alexander in Egypt by hook or
by crook. And the fact that Perdiccas had intended otherwise was not
going to be an hindrance in his scheme. The scheme might not have been
that difficult to carry out as well. A funeral cortege after all was not
going in speed even if being pulled by sixty four mules.

***“..the army that Ptolemy sent to give a dignified military welcome to
the body may have been there to defend his winnings.”¹³***

Perdiccas got to know about the latest developments within days and he
sent his two brother in laws – Attalus and Polemon ¹⁴ to intercept and
stop the cortege in its way which as already stated, wasn’t going to be
that difficult given the speed of cortege. They met with Arrhidaios near
Damascus and argued with him about the treason but before anything could
be finally decided, Ptolemy reached there with his army to “greet”
Alexander’s body. And now Alexander was to be taken to Egypt. Alexander
was successfully stolen.

**When in Egypt**

Turning southwards, going through the coastline of Palestine and Gaza,
Ptolemy then turned westwards and reached Egypt but rather than taking
Alexander’s body to Siwa where Alexander had intended to be buried,
Ptolemy took the body to the city of Memphis, the traditional capital of
the Pharaohs. He was using Alexander to legitimize his own rule and
consolidate his hold on Egypt. Now he moved quickly to have Alexander
buried in Memphis before anymore disturbances can be created by
Perdiccas which Ptolemy was sure were to come.

***“If Alexander could be buried*** ***quickly enough, then Perdiccas’s
dilemma would become a crises. It was one thing to seize an unburied
body, quite another to desecrate a tomb in order to retrieve it.”¹⁵***

Ptolemy finally buried Alexander with proper Macedonian funerary rites
in Memphis knowing very well what it meant in Macedonian tradition.
Perdiccas on the other hand was not going to let this humiliation go. He
now had plans of his own. Within weeks of the burial, Perdiccas marched
on Egypt in 320 BCE leaving Eumenes to defend Hellespont against
Antipater. The two generals, Ptolemy and Perdiccas were against each
other across the Nile. But Perdiccas’ s attack was ably confronted by
Ptolemy who by blinding the lead elephant of his enemy and killing his
*mahout*, completely outmaneuvered Perdiccas. Perdiccas now decided to
stage another attack, this time in the night and capture Alexander’s
body and reverse his defeat. But his army suffered huge losses while
crossing the Nile and another defeat followed. The army was now
frustrated. They have had enough of this war which many of them had
grown to consider as futile. The army mutinied and Perdiccas was
assasinated.

**Conclusion**

A writer has correctly summarised the whole affair – “*Alexander after
his death traveled more than many Greeks in their lifetime.”* He while
being alive had created an empire and was to be an important instrument
of establishment of a kingdom even after his death. Alexander when alive
had prayed in the temple of the patron deity of Memphis, Ptah and that
had increased his popularity in Egypt. Ptolemy used this ingeniously to
create an aura of divinity around Alexander and bring the powerful
priesthood of Ptah under his influence, thereby consolidating the
foundations of the Ptolemaic rule.

After the capital was moved to Alexandria, Alexander was moved there as
well and was made the patron deity of Alexandria where he was to lay for
ever. The stolen king was now *“reinterred in a glass sided coffin”¹⁶*,
but not in a public place for everyone to see but rather in the royal
grounds of the Ptolemaic dynasty. And this is how a stolen king was made
the foundation of an entire kingdom.

**References**

1.  [Toby Wilkinson, *The Rise and Fall of Ancient
    Egypt*.](https://archive.org/details/theriseandfallofancientegypt_202002/)
2.  *ibid.*
3.  *ibid.*
4.  *ibid*
5.  Erskine, A. (2002). Life after Death: Alexandria and the Body of
    Alexander.*Greece & Rome,**49*(2), 163-179. Retrieved December 21,
    2020, from <http://www.jstor.org/stable/826904>
6.  Toby Wilkinson, *The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt*.
7.  [Nicholas J. Saunders, *Alexander’s Tomb: The Two-Thousand Year
    Obsession to Find the Lost
    Conquerer*](https://www.google.co.in/books/edition/Alexander_s_Tomb/-TJADgAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=alexander%27s+tomb+nicholas+j+saunders&printsec=frontcover)
8.  *ibid*.
9.  *ibid*.
10. *ibid.*
11. *ibid*.
12. Andrew Erskine, *Life after Death: Alexandria and the Body of
    Alexander.*
13. *ibid*.
14. N*.* J*.* Saunders*, Alexander’s Tomb.*
15. *ibid*.
16. Toby Wilkinson, *The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt*.

**Photo Credit**

[a. Encyclopaedia
Britannica.](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Alexander-the-Great/images-videos)

[b. WikiMedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ptolemy_I_Soter#/media/File:Ptolemy_I_Soter_Louvre_Ma849.jpg)

[c. WikiMedia
Commons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Mid-nineteenth_century_reconstruction_of_Alexander%27s_catafalque_based_on_the_description_by_Diodorus.jpg)

