+++
title = "śāntyudaka vidhī ("
full_title = "śāntyudaka vidhī ( preparing pacifying water )"
date = "2014-07-18"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/07/18/santyudaka-vidhi-preparing-pacifying-water/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/07/18/santyudaka-vidhi-preparing-pacifying-water/).

śāntyudaka vidhī -( preparing  pacifying water )

The term ***śāntyudaka***, meaning ***pacifying water**,* often
translated as “***holy water”***, denotes the substance, as well as the
rite that is succinctly prescribed by the Kauśikasūtra (KauśS)
8.23-9.11. More detailed descriptions of the rite are given by the
commentator Keśava, the Atharvanīya Paddhati (AthPaddh), a so-called
commentary on the KauśS and the prayogas. The usage of the pacifying
water and the rite for its preparation are specific to Atharvavedic
ritualism. Its employment is at length mentioned in the KauśS. the
propitiatory water is used in various actions, in domestic and public
rituals alike, with the aim of consecrating, appeasing and removing the
evil spirits .  
The rite for the preparation of the pacifying water is explained. “Now”
means the state of being subsequent. “\[The priest\] prepares the
pacifying water while \[the sacrifier \] touches \[him\] \[from
behind\]” ***(KauśS 53.5-6)***. He should touch from behind by means of
grass. Then “wearing new cloths”. “The priest is wearing new cloths”
***(Keśava on KauśS 9.8).*** “He prepares the pacifying water in a
copper vessel” ***(KauśS*** ***9.8).*** With the hymn ***16.1*** he
pours the water in a continuous flow in the copper vessel ***(cf. Keśava
on KauśS 9.9).*** In the flow, he pours outside the copper vessel some
warm water. He skips over some water out of the flow. In this pacifying
water he pours the pacifying \[plants\] and the pacifying waters. He
pours rice and/or81 barley. These pacifying \[plants\] are said to be of
two kinds in ***the Gopatha Brāhmaṇ***a: ones denoted by the words
“related to *Atharvan*”, and ones denoted by the words “by those related
to *Angīras*”. “For he, indeed, has prepared the pacifying water with
the plants belonging to Atharvan and those belonging to Angīras ”, it is
said in the brāhmana ***(GoBr 1.2.18).*** The ones belonging to Atharvan
are mentioned in the ***Kauśika*** ***Sūtra***. Those belonging to
Angīras are mentioned in the ***Vaitāna Sūtra:*** kapu, viparvā, rodākā,
vakkāvatī, nāḍā, nirdahaṁtī ***(VaitS 5.10),*** thus the terms connected
to Angīras are mentioned in the ***Vaitana Sūtra***. Here, those desired
in respect of the rite should be taken: the domestic \[fire\], agnihotrī
and so on. The names of the plants such as citi and so on related to
Atharvan are mentioned in the ***Kauśika Sūtra***. The statement is thus
done by the learned ***Keśava***, the author of a commentary. Now, the
teacher prepares the pacifying water in the copper vessel, \[holding
it\] in the right hand, \[with\] the pacifying plants and the pacifying
waters together. Here is the example. At first the priest asks the
brahman priest. He touches \[and asks\]“****\[Are there\] all the waters
\[and\] plants?”**** The brahman says: ***“Yes, they are all.***” What
does “all” mean? “With all the plants, such as citi and so on”
***(Keśava on KauśS 9.8)***, with all the waters such as Gangā, etc,
with stagnant water such as the sea, etc, “with all sort of waters
collected from pilgrimage places, such as Prabhāsa, etc” ***(Keśava on
KauśS 9.8)***. This is the meaning. “The priest says: “***Oṁ, impelled
by Bṛhaspati, may I do \[the rite\]?***”. Then the brahman says:
***“Ohṁ, do thou, impelled by Savitar!”***. Once given the permission he
performs the rite for the preparation of the pacifying water”
***(*******Keśava on KauśS 9.8)****. \[The brahman\] causes \[the
priest\] to proclaim the plants, such as citi, etc. The pacifying
\[plants\]: citi, prāyaścitti, śamī, śamikā, śavanśā, śāmyavākā, talāśā,
palāśa, vāśā, , śimbala, sipunā, i.e. karī, darbha grass, apāmārga,
,valmīkamvapā, tips of dūrvā grass, rice, and barley. ****If one does
not find something from these plants, he should use rice and/or barley
as a substitute.**** Paithīnasi, the author of a commentary, \[has\]
this statement. “\[He recites\] twice the sāvitrīmantra ***(RV
3.62.10)*** \[and\] twice ***śan no devī (1.6.1)***” ***(KauśS 9.7)***.
Why twice? “In the beginning and the end of śāntyudaka he should recite
***RV 3.62.10*** and ***ŚS 1.6.1.*** As \[says\] the commentary: At the
beginning he recites ***RV*** ***3.62.10*** and ***ŚS 1.6.1***, and at
the end ***RV 3.62.10*** and ***ŚS*** ***1.6.1*.” (Keśava on KauśS
9.7).** Thus says the statement of Keśava, the author of the commentary.
He should recite “twice ***śan no devī (1.6.1)*** together with the
***sāvitrī (RV 3.62.10)”***, thus is the opinion of ***Dārila***, the
commentator ***(Dārila on KauśS 9.7).*** Then the author of KauśS.
According to the digest *Siddhasukśamī (??****)*: “Three \[are\] the
writers of a commentary: Dārila, Rudra, and Bhadra.”** The order \[of
the hymns recited\] \[is ascertained\] in the śloka from this
\[digest\]. Then, as there are two groups beginning with ***1.4,*** he
should perform \[the rite\] with either the long or the short one. Or
elsewhere he performs \[the rite\] with the four groups. The pratīkas of
the \[second\] group are enumerated: one stanza of ***RV***
***3.62.10,*** one stanza of ***ŚS*** ***1.6.1, 1.4***,
***śaṁbhumayobhū*** in the order ***1.5*** and ***1.6*** ,the hymn
***1.33***, śamtātī i.e. the hymn ***4.13*** –, one verse of
***7.66,*** one verse of ***7.67***, one verse of ***7.68.3***, one
verse of ***7.69***, \[and\] ***11.698***. \[These last (i.e.
***7.60***\[which\] are given in replay in the beginning of the ritual
of preparing the holly water. The use of the 69) are\] consecutive hymns
having the same purport. As long as one recites, he should avoid \[the
verse\] ***11.6.23***. Now, as to the subject of the first shaving the
hymn ***1.4*** should be added, then ***11.6.23***, again RV
***3.62.10*** and ***ŚS 1.6.1.*** Then, holding \[the boy\] for the sake
of pacification, he pours \[some available\] pacifying water in the
pacifying water with the hymn ***6.10***. Again \[with the hymn\]
***6.10*** he be sprinkles even the fire. Again, with the hymn of three
verses ***6.10 he sprinkles the fire, with each verse. Then he makes the
boy to sip the water and sprinkles around with each verse. In the first
tonsure he adds the hymn 2.28***. Similarly, in the subject of the
initiation he should add ***3.8***. In the subject of vratamoksha \[the
hymn\] of four verses ***7.89*** is added. Afterwards \[the verse\]
***11.6.23*** in all these instances. It should be done as per the
instruction. In the situation when a tooth is shaking and when it is
falling, ***RV 3.62.10*** should be added. If in the eleventh day from
the cremation he performs the rite for releasing a bull, he should first
do the rite for the preparation of the pacifying water. In all other
rites of releasing a bull, \[and also\] in all the rites for obtaining
prosperity, wealth, \[and\] heaven one should avoid the rite for the
preparation of the pacifying water.

***Time and place***  
Now the place and the time of the performance are being described. These
two should be understood as explained by the teacher elsewhere. As \[it
is prescribed\] in the fifth \[chapter of the KauśS\], in the rite of
the cow immolation: “ Having seated to the west of the sacred fire,
facing the east, \[the priest\] prepares the pacificatory water,
touching \[the cow\] \[from behind by means of a stick or a blade of
grass\] “ (KauśS 44.3). And as \[it is prescribed\] in the seventh
\[chapter of the KauśS\], in the rite of the first shaving: “Having
offered the obligatory purastādhomas and the two ājyabhāgas, having
seated to the west of the sacred fire, facing the east, \[the priest\]
prepares the pacificatory water, while \[the sacrifier\] touches \[him\]
\[from behind\]” (KauśS 53.5-6). “He even besprinkles thrice the sacred
fire \[on one hand\], and he sprinkles around thrice, makes the
sacrifier to sip thrice and besprinkles thrice \[the utensils\]” (KauśS
53.8-9). Therefore, in general, when there is no specific mention \[of a
procedure\] (anādeśa) it should be prepared in all atharvanic karmas
respectively.

Animesh’s blog

