+++
title = "shAntI Udaka in"
full_title = "shAntI Udaka in paippalAda tradition"
date = "2014-07-18"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/07/18/the-santyudakavidhi-in-the-paippalada-tradition/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/07/18/the-santyudakavidhi-in-the-paippalada-tradition/).

shAntI Udaka in paippalAda tradition

I have used manual composed by the Oriya scholar **Umakanta panda**
(belongs to paipalada shakha ) in the year 2000 under the title
***Paippalādavivāhādisaṁskārapaddhati***, for this post, which seems to
be a compilation based on the ***Karmasamuccaya***. With this caveat,
the description of the ***śāntyudakavidhāna*** is as follows: The
sacrificer should pour through two kuśa blades un uninterrupted flow of
water from a copper pot on the earth, at the south of the fire, outside
the altar, while reciting the hymns from the ***Paippalāda Samhitā
(PS)*** ***18.44*** and ***10.9***. He should sprinkle the remaining
water in the copper pot with the hymns connected with water ***(apām
stotragana): PS 1.25, 1.33, 3.4, 6.3, 14.1-2, 19.4.10-12, 19.45.8-10,
20.33.4-6, 20.60.3-4.*** Next, he places the plants beginning with vāsā,
etc, on three or *five palāśa or aśvattha leaves,* with the recitation
of the verse ***P.S***. ***11.6.7***. He binds them with a thread
together with a ***putikā*** (Cardamoms) and holds them in his hand. A
brahmin (sic!), or the priest or the person who collects herbs asks the
sadasya priest from the vicinity ***“\[Are there\] all the plants?”***
The respondent replays: “***Yes, they are all.”*** After taking hold of
the plants he recites the ***sāvitrīśānti (RV 3.62.10)*** and then he
consecrates the plants with the ***oshdhīstotragana (PS 11.6-7, PS
16.12-14, PS 19.4.4)***. Having placed the plants in the water from the
brass pot, he recites the ***mahāvhyāhatis, sāvitrī (RV 3.62.10),*** the
verse ***pārthivī śāntiḥ (ŚS 19.9.14)***, the ***śāntigana*** made of
the hymns ***PS 1.1, PS 12.16.1, the verse PS 20.34.11***, and the
***kalpajā verse śāntā dyauḥ (cf. ŚS 19.9.1).*** He concludes with the
***mahāvhyāhatis***, the ***sāvitrī***, and the ***śānti***. Afterwards
he recites again the verse ***pārthivī śānti (ŚS 19.2.14).*** He
meditates again with the ***mahāvhyāhatis*** and ***PS 5.2.2***. Next,
he recites again ***sāvitrī*** and outside the altar, at the north of
the fire, he draws out a charcoal from the fire pit. On this charcoal he
pours little water from the pacifying water by means of his hand
reciting ***sāvitrī*** and ***somāya svāhā***. He offers at once an
oblation (of ***ājya***). With the two verses ***PS*** ***10.1.12-13***
he twice sprinkles with pacifying water the fire, the chair, the altar
and the utensils. Next he performs the cleansing of the mouth as
follows, he twice meditates upon the pot of pacifying water with ***PS
19.55.12-15,*** he takes some water from this and he does twice the
***ācamana***.

Animesh’s blog

