+++
title = "Yagnopavitham A short"
full_title = "Yagnopavitham A short description With Dharan vidhi and yagyopavita nasha prayachhita"
date = "2014-07-30"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/07/30/yagnopavitham-a-short-description-with-dharan-vidhi-and-yagyopavita-nasha-prayachhita/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/07/30/yagnopavitham-a-short-description-with-dharan-vidhi-and-yagyopavita-nasha-prayachhita/).

Yagnopavitham- A short description With Dharan vidhi and yagyopavita nasha prayachhita

“***Yajnasoothram***” technically known as or “***Yajnopaveetham***” is
worn by the ***Braahmanan*** and certain other communities, around the
trunk of their body over the left shoulder and under the right arm, and
represents clothing. In early times, clothing was of two kinds,
“***Anthareeyam***“, a piece of covering cloth, and “***Uthareeyam***“,
a cloth or hide to cover the chest to keep the lungs warm and strong
during ***Vedam*** recital. ***Yajnopaveetham*** got the name
***Yajnopaveetham*** as it is to be specially worn during sacred rituals
such as yajnam. ***Yajnam*** means Vishnu, while ***Upaveetham***
connotes a covering, and thus, together the word could mean a cover for
the god that dwells in the heart. Since the soul is supposed to dwell in
the heart, ***Upaveetham*** got the other name , ***Soothram***.  
It is made of cotton thread or cloth or of ***Kusa grass*** wound around
three times with the ends formed into a knot. There are different
versions as to what the three represent – ***Sat-Chit-Aanandam;
Sathwa-Rajas-Thamo Gunams; Brahmaavu-Vishnu- Maheswaran;
Jnaana-Itchha-Kriyas; Bhoor-Bhuva-Swar Lokams, etc.*** Each of the three
has nine strands representing nine ***Devans : 1. Pranavam (Omkaaram),
2. Agni, 3. Naagam ( sarpam ), 4. Soman, 5. Pithru, 6. Prajaapathi, 7.
Vasu, 8. Yaman, and 9. Vishve devtas,the rest of the Devathas.***

Wearers of ***Yajnopaveetham*** shall have control over their mind, word
and body. It is worn to make one eligible to perform sacred rituals, for
improving ***Brahma-Thejas***, to receive God’s blessings through
destruction of all troubles, and to enable one to perform all the daily
rites and rituals prescribed in the ***Sruthi*** and ***Smrthi*** texts.
It is to be worn while serving teachers, the elderly and guests, and
while performing ***Homam, Japam, consumption of food, Aachamanam,
Vedam-learning, etc***. which have led to wearing it all the time.

In olden times, women also wore ***Yajnasoothram***. The husband brings
her to the Homasaala with ***Yajnasoothram*** worn around her. During
later periods, wearing of women was considered unnecessary perhaps
because unmarried women were a rarity in ancient Hindu families, and the
husband and wife were considered as one entity, and the
***yagnopavitam*** worn by the husband was considered to represent that
of the wife too. This might later have led to the present stricture that
women shall not wear it.

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/wpid-images-28.jpeg?w=700 "images-28.jpeg")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/wpid-images-28.jpeg)

Boys begin wearing ***Yajnopaveetham*** with ***Upanayanam***, which
is the initiation into ***Brahmacharyam***. It is made on an auspicious
day and the maker is clean (***Sudhham***), and in the prescribed manner
with “***Pavithram***” knot representing ***Brahmam***, and symbolises
the three “***Gunams***” that emerge from, and then merge with Brahmam.
Though no Manthram is needed, first, a prayer is offered to Ganapathy
and then Gaayathri may be chanted while making it. However, the
prescribed Manthram is to be chanted while wearing a new yagyopavitam.
It is worn over the left shoulder and under the right arm, reaching down
almost to the right hip.

It is not to be touched with unclean hands. Bramhans hang the lower part
of it after removing through the right arm, over the right ear lobe
while in the urinal or latrine. It prevents polluting it ,both
literally and also due to the belief that Braahmanan’s right ear is
blessed with the spirit of the sacred “Ganga”, thereby preventing
pollution. It is to be reversed to the right shoulder and under the
left arm during some ceremonies like “Sraaddham”, “Pindam”, etc., and is
called “prachina viti” (wearing towards left).

A broken and mended or lost yagyopavita should be replaced at the
earliest opportunity. It is to be worn while in an open space facing
east and looking at the sun, accompanied by the chanting of prescribed
Manthrams, after the morning bath and Sandhyaavandanam. The old sutra is
broken, removed, tied around a small stone and thrown into the tank.  
The strands of the sacred thread have symbolic meaning that varies by
community and region. The sacred thread has three strands. A bachelor
wears only one ***sacred thread***; a married man wears ***two*** of
them making it six strands. If the man has married and has fathered a
child, h***e wears three***, which makes nine strands. Ancient texts
refer to the wearing of the Yajñopavītam in three forms:

***(1)Upavītam***,

where the Yajñopavītam is worn over the left shoulder and under the
right arm. This is for Gods. Upavītam is also called savya (Katyayana
Shrauta Sutra, etc.).

***(2)******Nivītam’,***

where the Yajñopavītam is worn around the neck and over the chest.
Nivīta form is to be used during Rishi Tharpana, sexual intercourse,
answering the calls of nature, etc., and during ancestor worship/funeral
rites (Shadvimsha Brahmana, Latyayana, etc.).  
***(3)Prachīnavītam***

is where the Yajñopavītam is worn above the right shoulder and under the
left arm. This is for Spirits and is used by men when performing the
death ceremonies of an elder. Prachīnavītam is also called ***apsavya***
(Katyayana Shrauta Sutra, Manusmriti, etc.).

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/wpid-images-10.jpeg?w=700 "images-10.jpeg")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/wpid-images-10.jpeg)

In some communities, later, at the occasion of wedding, a further three
strands of Yajñopavītam are added to make for a six-strand bunch. In
some communities, the custom is of one thread more being added at the
birth of every child. In some interpretations, these strands of
Yajñopavītam are intended to constantly remind the man of his worldly
responsibilities. Three original strands of Yajñopavītam (each
consisting of three) make up nine strands of Yajñopavītam, to which
three are added for wife and one for children, making a total of 13
individual strands of Yajñopavītam in some communities.  
***Yagnopaveeta dharanaa Vidhi***:  
After Ganesha Prathana of ***Suklaambaradharam Vishnum Shashi Varnam
Chaturbhujam prasanna vadanam dhyaayet sarva Vighnopashaantaye/***  
there should be Sankalpa: ***Mamopaathaa Samasta duritaksaya dwaaraa
Shri Paraneshwara Preetyartham Shrouta Smaarta vihita sadaachaara
nityakarmaanushthaana yogyataa siddhyartham Brahma tejobhi vriddhartham
yagnopa dhaaranam karishye***/  
After the Sankalpa: ***Yagnopaveeta dhaarana Mahaa Mantrasya, Parabrahma
Rishih, Trishthup chhandaya Paramatma Devataa, Yagnopaveeta dharanye
viniyogah/***   
Then while wearing each of the three threads separately each time
reciting the Mantra as follows: ***Yagnopaeetam paramam pavitram
Prajaapateryat sahajam purastaat, Ayushyamagriam pratimuscha shubhram
yagnopapeetam balamastu tejah/***  
There-after, prokshana Mantras be recited as follows: ***Om Aapohishthaa
mayo bhuvah, Taana Urjey dadhaatana Maheranaaya chaksasey/
Yovisshavatamo rasah tasyabhaajayateha nah, Usiteeriva Maatarah tasma
arangamaavah/ Yasya Kshayaaya jinvatha Aapo janayathaa nah,
Bhurbhuvassuvah/***  
Then the Sacred Thread is touched thrice by way of Abhimantrana of the
Three Brahma Granthis pra-

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/wpid-images-5.jpeg?w=700 "images-5.jpeg")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/07/wpid-images-5.jpeg)

ying to Brahma-Vishnu- Maheshwaras. Some pray to nine Devatas holding
the nine threads. This would be followed by ten times ***Gayatri*** and
***Jala prakshalana*** of the ***Upaveeta*** and its exposure to Surya
Deva reciting the Ruchas viz. ***Uddhutyam Tamasaspari pashyanto
Jyotiruttamam, Devam Devatraa Suryamaganma Jyotiruttamam/ Uddhtyam
Jaatavedasam Devam Vahanti Ketavah , Drushey Vishgvaaya Suryam/***
Finally after showing the ***Upaveeta*** to ***Surya***, wear it
reciting the ‘***Yagnopaveetyam Paramam Pavitram’*** Mantra again from
the left shoulder around the neck down to the right side of the back.
This posture is called ‘***Upaveeta***’, while the revese is
‘***Praacheenaa veeti’*** and wearing it around the neck as a
***Maala*** or garland is callewd ‘***Niveeta***’. The ***Yagnopaveeta
Dhaari*** is required to bathe and change it as per the Vidhi prescribed
above in case of touching :***Chiti kaashtaa, Chiti Dhuma, Chandaala,
Rajaswalaa, Shava, Sutikaa/( Burnt wood, Chandala, Rajaswala, dead body
and Garbhini).*** At the time of performing ablutions, one should
observe ***Kantha limbana*** or circling one’s neck and circling the
right ear. Every four months the Sacred Thread should be changed as per
the afore mentioned procedure. Also some persons change the old Thread
in the eventality of births and deaths of the near ones. At the time of
***Visarjana*** or removal of the old or torn or otherwise impure
***Yagnopaveeta***, the ***Visarjana*** Mantra states: ***Upaveetam
Bhinna tantum Jeernam kashmala dushitam, Visrujaamki punarbrahma varcho
Deerghaayarastumey!*** So saying the Sacred Thread is discarded. If the
same has come out or slided off by mistake, then without Mantra wear a
replacement and by reciting ***Manojyotih*** and ***Aagney Vratapate
Vratam charishyaami taccha-keyam tanmeraadhyataam, Vaayo vratapatey
Aditya Vratapatey/*** ,  
perform ***Aajyaahutis*** and wear a new ***Yagopaveeta*** as per the
procedure laid as above.

***Yagnopaveetaabhava Prayaschitta***:

In case of non-wearing of ***Yagopaveeta*** and non-observance of
minimum duties expected of a Brahmana, there is a ***Prayaschittha
Vidhi*** prescribed. The Sankalpa for this Vidhi is: ***Yagnopaveeta
naasha janya dosha niraasaartham Prayaschittam karishye/*** As per the
instructions of Acharya, the ***Kartha*** has to perform homaas to
***Savitra Devata / Surya ***of thousand eight times or of minimum
hundred eight times with ***Tila*** and ***Aajya***. On wearing the
***newYagnopaveeta*** as per procedure, the Kartha should intensify the
***Gayatri Japa*** to atone for the lost time of ***Sandhyaa -vandanaadi
Vidhis***. In the case of the non wearing of ***Upaveeta***, then
hundred ***Gayatri Japa*** is required; if without the Sacred Thread one
performs Bhojana, then he has to perform eight thousand ***Gayatri***;
if the ***Upaveeta*** falls from the left shoulder to mid-arm or fore
arm then three or six ***Pranaayamaas*** are to be done and a new
***Upaveeta*** is required to be worn. To ‘***Brahmachaari***’ only one
***Yagnopaveeta*** is required but to a ***Snaataka Vratastha*** two or
three required. Those who desire to live long should wear more than many
Sacred threads.

Animesh’s blog

