+++
title = "Lessons from History"
full_title = "Lessons from History"
date = "2013-03-09"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/03/09/lessons-from-history/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/03/09/lessons-from-history/).

Lessons from History

Few know that the emergence of bahmani sultanate was due to the help
rendered by kApaya nAyaka. kApaya had helped the bahmani-s against the
delhi sultAn-s. Maybe the monarch thought that the new muslim rulers
will be more favorably disposed towards hindus. But when their position
became strong, the bahmani-s attacked kApaya. He was forced to part with
a large part of his territory to the bAhmani-s. The famous fort of
golkon.d.a was annexed by the bahmani-s and it remained with muslim
rulers till 1947. kApaya might have thought that by propping one sultAn
against another, he might gain a valuable ally. But the new sultanate
proved to be as much a kAfir-hater as the sultAn of dillii. Hindus never
seem to learn from history. The mogul tyrant, humAyun, was given refuge
by the hindu rAjan of amarkot. The next mogul ruler, akbar, was born in
amarkot. Akbar repaid this gratitude towards hindus by massacring 30000
kAfir-s when he stormed the pride of mevAd.a, chittaud. We can never
expect an aikarAks.asa to become our true ally. Their enmity towards
pagans and intolerance of the heathen faiths will lead to our disaster
if we covet them as our allies. In 1971, we repeated the same mistake of
kApaya. We helped the formation of a new Islamic state in van\~ga. The
newly formed Bangladesh has proved to be no different from the earlier
Pakistan in hating the kAfir-s. Hindus are still suffering in the
prAcya-van\~ga. Export of faithful believers to the land of asom and
pas’cima van\~ga is continuing. Hindus in the border lands are forced to
flee towards inner districts. We gained nothing from the 1971 war. We
simply created another enemy. A sensible hindu ruler must have occupied
the district of khulna and north western parts of prAcya-van\~ga (where
the indian connection to its north-east is through the narrow siliguri
corridor which is a security nightmare). But we failed to do this. And
currently, we are facing the problem of muslim influx from
prAcya-van\~ga. The van\~ga-north east region seems to be heading
towards a disaster.

Down south, some medieval hindu rulers had a far better strategic vision
than the current crop of rulers. When the portuguese were attacking the
hindu state of jaffna, nAyaka-s of tanjAvUr provided much needed help to
the Arya-cakravati dynasty of jaffna. sevappa nAyaka had provided aid to
sankili I. The greatest of jaffna rulers, sankili I, had crushed
portuguese intervention vigorously. When the portuguese tried to settle
converted fishermen in the lands of jaffna (the converted local people
were considered as subjects of portuguese empire, their loyalty was
towards portugal and not to any local ruler), sankili had them all
beheaded on the sea-shore. The tanjAvUr nAyaka-s continued to see jaffna
as part of hindu lands. The greatest of that dynasty, raghunAtha, even
helped sankili II to regain his throne from the portuguese by invading
jaffna personally as per the literary work, raghunAthAbhyudayam. A few
years later, sankili II was again deposed by the portuguese. RaghunAtha
sent small teams of his armies (numbering 1000 to 2000) to help the
jaffna royals between 1619-21. It is to be noted that in 1620,
raghunAtha would have been tied down in north as the sultan of
golkon.d.a was attacking the vijayanagar empire. Thus, even at such a
time, raghunAtha did try to help the hindu kingdom of jaffna. He had
given up these attempts only when it had become clear that the jaffna
royal house had virtually become extinct and that he could not open
another front in that precarious situation. The current Indian
government is in a far better position than raghunAtha. raghunAtha was
ruling over a small part of tamil country. The current Indian government
must have decisively intervened in favor of the tamil hindu-s of lan\~kA
when the sinhala-s began their extermination campaigns against the
tamils. But we failed to achieve that and are still committing injustice
to the tamil hindus of lan\~ka.

We have already written about the treachery of christians and muslims
against their heathen overlords (see <http://tinyurl.com/a3r5uqm>). This
is another important lesson for us. The mApilla muslims joined hands
with tippu sultAn and massacred the hindus of malabAr. The fate of rAma
rAya is well-known – he was killed by the muslim troops of his own army.

Three simple lessons:

1.  Never consider any aikarAks.asa power (abrahamists) as our true ally
2.  Help the hindus and pagans. Identify the common cause. We are facing
    annihilation and to help our brothers from becoming extinct is our
    duty.
3.  Do not trust the aikarAks.asa-s in our land. To give them an
    important place in armed forces is an invitation for disaster. Do
    not let them gain a strong foothold anywhere. Their loyalty is not
    towards us.

