+++
title = "Jews in the Roman Empire"
full_title = "Jews in the Roman Empire"
date = "2013-06-14"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/14/jews-in-the-roman-empire/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/14/jews-in-the-roman-empire/).

Jews in the Roman Empire

Everyone now and then you see someone say that Jews made up 10% of the
population of the Roman Empire. If you dig deeper, you find that this is
based upon the Claudian Census – or, more exactly, upon something Bar
Hebraeus said about that census, since we don’t actually have the
census. Bar Hebraeus was a bishop of the Syrian Orthodox Church who
lived between 1226 and 1286 AD. He wrote “At the same time Claudius
Caesar ordered the Jews to be counted, and their number was 6,944,000
men.”

On historical details that can be checked, Bar Hebraeus is highly
inaccurate. One more thing: St. Jerome mentioned a report by Eusebius
on Claudius’s census of Roman citizens: ” there were found to be of
Roman citizens 6,944,000. ” Interesting coincidence.

Romans routinely counted the number of Roman citizens, and that number
is reasonably consistent with earlier numbers from census records that
*have* survived. It is not so obvious why the Romans would do a head
count of Jews.

In other words, Bar Hebraeus screwed up. Those who have based their
arguments upon him have screwed up as well.

So how many Jews were there in the Roman Empire? What fraction were
they of the population? Nobody knows. We have possibly-ok estimates
for Rome at certain points in time. Two comments by Josephus suggest
4-8 thousand – if you believe *him –* and one by Tacitus mentioned
4,000. That may mean adult males only: 8 thousand adult males would
imply a total population of something like 40,000 in Rome. Or maybe
not. There were certainly Jews in classical Rome, enough to sustain a
number of synagogues, including a Samaritan synagogue.

Philo says that there were 1,000,000 Jews in Egypt. Not hardly: they
mostly seem to have lived in Alexandria, where they maybe made up a
third of the population -out of a total of perhaps half a million? Our
estimates of the population of Classical cities are also extremely
uncertain.

In another but perhaps related vein, many confused puppies have written
about the “demographic miracle” of Jews in the Polish-Lithuanian
Commonwealth – they went from \~15,000 to about a million in three
hundred years. Explanations of this miracle have invoked Khazarian Jews
– but all that you need is families that average three surviving kids.
Maybe we should start now on bullshit explanations of the rise of the
Amish. Suggestions are welcome.















