+++
title = "Ancient British"
full_title = "Ancient British Diversity"
date = "2017-09-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/09/19/ancient-british-diversity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/09/19/ancient-british-diversity/).

Ancient British Diversity

Some archaeologists apparently think that there was a lot of diversity
in Roman Britain, which means black people. There’s zero hard evidence
of a single one. Which doesn’t prove that some Nubian with a serious
case of wanderlust didn’t end up in Londinium, but it can’t have been
common, and possibly it never happened at all. Ancient DNA could settle
the question once and for all.

Some of this has been fueled by archaeologist claims of finds of
non-local skeletons. North Africans were part of the empire and must
have showed up occasionally, but I wouldn’t think in very large numbers.
There’s no genetic trace, any more than there is of ancient sub-Saharan
African admixture.

A lot of this confusion seems to have originated in a craniometric
analysis program, FORDISC. Which is
[apparently](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2827999/) a
total piece of crap. This may have increased its popularity: a program
that generates entertainingly wrong results will inevitably produce many
interesting and publishable results. Note to readers: trust, but verify.

There’s a hot-off-the-internet
[paper](http://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/09/19/190066) by
Alexander Platt and Jody Hey claiming that recent sub-Saharan African
gene flow (\~400 years ago) account for 1.2% of the UK gene pool. What
rot. SSA genes are as different from Europeans as people get – easy to
identify. Yet no-one else has seen this. That recent, there would be
lots of linkage disequilibrium – it’s not there. Moreover, only a
historical illiterate could ever have made this claim. There was no
influx of Africans in the 1600s: it never happened. By the 1700s there
were some free blacks in England, especially in London, but they don’t
seem to have done very well. London was a pesthole for everyone (average
life expectancy of 29) but those free blacks did worse – poverty and
pneumonia, I think. Anyhow, if this secret black immigration had really
happened you’d see gradients: high in the home counties, low in the
Outer Isles, etc.

I am trying to think of a good excuse for Alexander Platt and Jody Hey.
So far I can’t. Reader’s suggestions are welcome.

This reminds of the paper [a couple of years
ago](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/29/out-of-africa/) that
assumed that ancient Egypt was black and was only Natufianized by the
Arab conquest. You know, there must be a lot of people attending
university and accumulating vast debts that actually believe the flaming
radioactive crap taught there. Partly this may be because some
universities *look* impressive: I was talking with some people at
Princeton this summer and it was clearly trying to be imposing. Perhaps
if we re-sited those dubious departments, removed them from the poison
ivy halls of academe, students would develop appropriate levels of
skepticism.

[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/fsu-anthropology.jpg?w=640&h=480)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/fsu-anthropology.jpg)

