+++
title = "Let No New Thing Arise"
full_title = "Let No New Thing Arise"
date = "2014-07-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/07/05/let-no-new-thing-arise/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/07/05/let-no-new-thing-arise/).

Let No New Thing Arise

Thinking about it, it seems that disease burden for Europeans got worse
and worse with time. Some have said that the first farmers in the
Middle East wouldn’t had any increase at all in infectious disease over
foragers.  That’s wrong, of course, because just being sedentary
results in an increase in diarrheal diseases, worm burden, etc.
Increased population density also caused trouble. Still, it wasn’t
nearly as bad back then as it would be in later millennia.

I mentioned this a while ago, in the context of warfare: infectious
disease wasn’t a huge problem for the legions. But the increase
affected everyone, not just warriors.

It helps to think about critical community size
([CCS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_community_size)). Consider
a disease like measles, one that doesn’t last long and confers lifelong
immunity. The virus needs fresh, never-infected hosts (we call them
children) all the time, else it will go extinct.  The critical
community size for measles is probably more than half a million – which
means that before agriculture, measles as we know it today couldn’t and
didn’t exist. In fact, it looks as if split off from rinderpest within
the last two thousand years. Mumps was around in Classical times
(Hippocrates gives a good description), but it too has a large CCS and
must be relatively new. Rubella can’t be ancient. Whooping cough has a
smaller CCS, maybe only 100,000, but it too must postdate agriculture.

In Classical Greece, smallpox hadn’t arrived. It may have shown up in
the Antonine plague (165-180 AD).

Some new infectious diseases didn’t last – like the English Sweate. But
many came to stay.

Bubonic plague showed up in Justinian’s reign and killed off half the
population. It didn’t persist then, but it hung around for centuries
after the second outbreak in 1347.

Syphilis arrived in 1494. Typhus most likely also originated in the
Americas. Cholera was old in parts of India, but only arrived in Europe
during the 19th century (Russia in 1817, the rest of Europe in 1827).

Europeans must have been evolving resistance, but nature kept piling on.
In some cases, like smallpox, fairly high virulence was a favored
strategy for the pathogen -and nobody is very good at out-evolving a
microorganism. Medicine was an ineffective pseudoscience, worse than
useless.











