+++
title = "Relaxed selection"
full_title = "Relaxed selection"
date = "2017-07-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/07/06/relaxed-selection/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/07/06/relaxed-selection/).

Relaxed selection

In the days of old many kids didn’t make it to adulthood: say 40% among
hunter-gatherers. To a a degree, this was caused by genetic load. High
mortality purged some of that genetic load, especially to the extent
that selection took the form of truncation selection. This process kept
mutational load in equilibrium.

In the past century or two, this mortality has become much lower – so
this form of selection has become weaker. Mutational load must be
increasing. How fast? We will probably know quite soon, from sequencing
recent and contemporary individuals. We’ll probably have a handle on the
phenotypic impact as well.

In the meantime, we can get a rough idea of the impact of relaxed
selection by looking at pioneers, populations that have expanded rapidly
in the past few centuries. Some of those populations had a much higher
fraction of kids survive than the typical long-term human average: in
New England, after he first few years, something like 75% of kids made
it to adulthood. This went on for a long time, something like a couple
of hundred years – which is why 20,000 Puritan settlers have around
twenty million descendants today. Similar things happened with the
Quebecois. We know that this relaxed selection among pioneer types left
a higher burden of Mendelian disease – not incredibly high, but higher
than in similar groups that didn’t undergo a rapid expansion.

How much did this drop IQ? Can’t have been much.

