+++
title = "The best things in life"
full_title = "The best things in life are cheap – today"
date = "2017-07-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/07/03/the-best-things-in-life-are-cheap-today/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/07/03/the-best-things-in-life-are-cheap-today/).

The best things in life are cheap – today.

The most effective health interventions are mostly cheap and generally
available. Vaccinations, clean water, antibiotics – none are very
expensive. The trend is for expensive treatments (usually aimed at
illness fairly late in life) to also be relatively ineffective, in terms
of benefits. There are some exceptions: drugs against HIV work but are
fairly expensive (around $20-25 k a year), while there are a few cases
where an expensive treatment actually cures a disease, like hepatitis C
($100 k). Those are the on-patent costs, not the marginal costs.

Mostly, death is ultimately caused by aging, and we can’t do much about
it – an inevitable consequence of the evolutionary theory of senescence.

Money is not a panacea: The average lifespan of a billionaire is only
about three years longer than average, and I’d bet that most of that is
due to innate qualities of billionaires rather than special secret
clinics and goat glands.

Then again, the evolutionary theory of senescence is not fundamental in
the same sense that thermodynamics is. In principle you could stop
aging, or reverse it – you can decrease entropy (locally) with enthalpy.
[Bowhead whales](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bowhead_whale).

What if you could buy an extra year of youth for a million bucks (real
cost). Clearly this country ( or any country) can’t afford that for
everyone. Some people could: and I think it would stick in many people’s
craw. Even worse if they do it by harvesting the pineal glands of
children and using them to manufacture a waxy nodule that
[forfends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Killing_Machine) age.

This is something like the days of old, pre-industrial times. Back then,
the expensive, effective life-extender was food in a famine year.

