+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-02-21"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/21/the-ahirbudhnya-on-charvaka-mata/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/21/the-ahirbudhnya-on-charvaka-mata/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## The ahirbudhnya on chArvaka mata and further notes on thesame

In the context of elaboration of the vaibhava of sudarshana viShNu, the
ahirbudhnya has these interesting comments on anya mata-s:

``` wp-block-preformatted
tasyaiva rudrarUpeNa saMhartRtvam sa eva rudrarUpeNa saMharatyakhilaM jagat |

tasyaiva buddharUpatvam buddhAtmanA ca bauddhAnAM sa eva jagati sthitaH || 33-17 ||

tasyaiva digambararUpatvam sa eva zAmbarANAM ca nirAvaraNarUpadhRt |

tasyaiva jinarUpatvam sa eva cArvAkamate jinezvaravapurdharaH || 33-18 ||

tasyaiva yajJapuruSarUpatvam sa eva yAjJikAnAM ca yajJapUruSasaMjJakaH |
mImAMsakaiH sa evAyamupAsyatvena codyate || 33-19 ||
```

sudarshana is the one who in the form of rudra performs saMhAra, he is
buddha for the bauddha-s, for the shAmbara-s he is the digaMbara (?) in
the form of nirAvaraNa (?), for those belonging to the cArvaka mata, he
is the jineshvara of the jaina-s and for those performing yaGYa-s he is
yaGYapuruSha.

As jaina-s are known to oppose the chArvaka-s the ahirbudhnya clubbing
both together is interesting. However there seems to be some evidence of
lokAyata-s/chArvaka mata having rituals of their own which needs cross
verification at a later date. Is it possible that the ahirbudhnya clubs
them together as both the jaina and chArvaka have ritual systems of
their own though they are avaidika? Combining the quote from ahirbudhnya
and below details (if valid) gives us a consistent picture of chArvaka-s
as some sort of ritual performers?

The mention of lokAyata being resorted to for artha sAdhana (financial
gains) and kApAlika being resorted to for kAma sAdhana (for acquiring
men or women for kAma) together in page 53 (see below screen shots) is
amusing (i.e. focus on 2 among the dharma, artha, kAma and the late
entry moxa). This mention is supposedly from the bR^ihaspati sUtra, a
text outlining the views of the chArvAka/lokAyata system even if
considered spurious by some scholars. This is striking because, in
at-least two pA\~ncharAtra saMhita-s, we have the mention of artha
sAdhana by deploying vaiShNava mantra-s immediately followed by
procedures for kAma sAdhana. This becomes even more interesting in light
of a pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava prayoga for kAma sAdhana, which is
performed with the kapAla (skull) of a dead woman. It should also be
noted that the pA\~ncharAtra texts do give multiple rites for kAma
sAdhana and only one of them involves usage of a kapAla. The process
would involve the siddha mantrin to acquire the skull of a dead woman
and inscribe a yantra on the skull with a golden needle. This kapAla is
then consigned to flames for 7 days while performing the japa of
nArAyaNa aShTAkShari. In a related context, the result of a certain
pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava sAdhana is said to be an ointment provided by
a divya strI from a kapAla, among other things.

Extracts from Deviprasad Chatopadhyaya’s work [Lokayata – A study of
Indian
Materialism:](https://archive.org/details/lokayataastudyinancientindianmaterialismdebiprasadchattopadhyaya1992_202003_148_g)

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image-3.png?w=527)

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image-5.png?w=495)

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image-7.png?w=478)

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image-9.png?w=459)

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image-13.png?w=445)

To be continued later…

This entry was posted on February 21, 2021 at 4:06 pm and is filed under
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/),
[Philosophy](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/philosophy/). You
can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/21/the-ahirbudhnya-on-charvaka-mata/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/21/the-ahirbudhnya-on-charvaka-mata/trackback/)
from your own site.

