+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-02-14"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/14/patala-siddhi-patala-sadhana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/14/patala-siddhi-patala-sadhana/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## pAtAla siddhi & pAtAlasAdhana

![[Panel outside the*Daśāvtāra*Temple, Deogarh, Uttar
Pradesh](https://kailasanath.tumblr.com/post/144200821639/%C5%9Be%C5%9Ba-%C5%9Bayana-padman%C4%81bha-%C5%9Bri-vi%E1%B9%A3%E1%B9%87u-lord-vi%E1%B9%A3%E1%B9%87u)](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/image.png?w=575)

Capturing notes from a
[conversation](https://twitter.com/goghritaM/status/1360860162886569984)
with AchArya on the topic:

Q: Is there any specific practice termed as pAtAla rudra sAdhana in the
ati mArga surviving in later sAmpradaya-s?

A: “There are several pAtAleshvara-s even in the Odishan locus: [the 2
which I show can be reasonably
dated](https://somasushma.github.io/shaiva.html). pAtAla-sAdhana is
something which seems to have had deep roots which might have indeed
gone back to the atimArga & beyond. This is suggested by the
uDDAmareshvara-tantra which notably talks of pAtAlasiddhi mantra to be
performed on seeing the shakrachApa (rainbow) & the mantra itself terms
it mAhendrI-siddhi which suggests that I goes back to an earlier age.
matsyendranAtha in both his akulavIra & kaulaj\~nAna-nirNaya talks of
pAtAla-siddhi which was evidently for obtain underground metals, gems
etc. IIRC in the dashakumAracharita of daNDin, the feral shaiva v1
attains such a siddhi. IshAnashiva gives the mantra-s for both
pAtAlarudra (associated with the nAga-s) and pAtAla-nR^isiMha. The
vaiShNava-s to have it as it is mentioned in the jayAkhyasaMhitA of the
pA\~ncharAtrika-s. abhinavagupta clarifies in the tantrasAra that in
addition to the 5 faces corresponding to the 5 brahma-mantra-s,shiva has
an additional downward face which is known as the pAtAla face. In the
tantrAloka he clarifies that shrIkaNTha becomes hATaka and along with
kiMkara-s is stationed as the guardian of pAtAla. pAtAlasiddhi is also
alluded to by the early saiddhAntikAcharya sadyojyotis suggesting its
presence in the earlier mantra tradition, which I suspect were
originally related to the kaubera cult for it is often coupled with the
khadgasiddhi of the vidyAdhara-s.”

pA\~ncharAtrika vaiShNava pAtAla sAdhana-s.

There are two kinds of vaiShNava pAtAla sAdhana-s, with one involving
the hallowed nArAyaNa aShTAkShari and another with the famed pAtAla
nR^isiMha.

The first sAdhana with aShTAkShari: The sAdhaka performs all kriya till
homAntaM as per laid out vidhi and stationing himself near the entrance
of a cave, performs lakSha japa of nArAyaNa aShTAkShari. homa is
performed next with the samidha-s of trees exuding milk, shamI, dUrvA
and tila with ten thousand oblations with each of the dravya-s. The
effect of this it is said, that a kanyA with her parivAra comes out of
the cave and smitten by the sAdhaka takes him to her place filled with
divya bhavana-s and sports with him while providing strange divya
bhoga-s of a superhuman (atimAnuSha) kind.

The second sAdhana would involve arranging a yAgamanTapa on the side of
the pAtAla dvAra complete with dvaja, toraNa and dvara kuMbha-s. Then
the sAdhaka is to inscribe the chakrAbja maNDala, perform dhyAna of
ramApati (nArAyaNa as per one saMhita) and perform the Archana and homa
as mentioned above, along with aShTa lakSha japa of nArAyaNa
aShTAkShari. A second text mentions that the sAdhaka should be
jitendriya and mitAhAri while performing this. This would bring a
nAgakanya out of the cave along with a thousand parichArika-s who are
either equal to her or like her in attributes and take the sAdhaka to
nAgAlaya (nAgaloka) and provide him with various kinds of pleasures. It
is said that the nAgakanya will provide the mantrin with a certain
rasAyana/elixir and due to the mantra mAhatmya grant him various divya
bhoga-s and vaibhava.

The sAdhana with pAtAla nR^isiMha: A mantrin after attaining siddhi of
the pAtAla nR^isiMha mantra by following the laid out procedure, should
go to the opening of a cave/bila and is to perform the 10,000x japa of
the same. It is said that the mantrin will see many vighna-s while
performing this, but is to continue the japa unperturbed. Then he is to
enter the cave and acquire the pAtAla siddhi. If he cannot (enter the
cave) and is an asamartha (incompetent or unable) to physically do this,
this (japa) can be done at the opening of the cave. Doing this is said
to the bring the asura kanya-s out of the cave and give anything that
the mantrin might desire along with the rasAyana and guTika (pills
providing temporary or permanent magical effects), through which he is
rendered as mighty (?) as the deva, asura, yakSha & rakSha-s etc.

On a related note, some of the early pA\~ncharAtra saMhita-s do no speak
of the mantra rAja. When they refer to nR^isiMha mantra-s it is either
the 400 lettered pAtAla nR^isiMha or a different nR^isiMha mantra.

The sAdhana involving the nArAyaNa aShTAkShari is of two kinds: One
involving less (relatively) effort which provides some beneficial
results and an elaborate version for greater results. This does not seem
like any repetition due to error, as there are two vaiShNava saMhita-s
that mention both versions of the pAtAla sAdhana-s involving the
nArAyaNa aShTAkShari, though a third saMhita the viShNu tilaka, mentions
a pAtAla sAdhana which is an amalgam of both but predominantly similar
to the later i.e. the elaborate version.

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/02/vishnu-anantasayana.jpg?w=564)

This entry was posted on February 14, 2021 at 6:42 pm and is filed under
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[pAtAla
siddhi](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/patala-siddhi/),
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/14/patala-siddhi-patala-sadhana/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/02/14/patala-siddhi-patala-sadhana/trackback/)
from your own site.

