+++
title = "Scientists Against Time"
full_title = "Scientists Against Time"
date = "2021-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/04/06/scientists-against-time/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2021/04/06/scientists-against-time/).

Scientists Against Time

Back in WWII, air defense was difficult. You were shooting at high
altitude, fast-moving targets. Missing was the most natural thing in the
world. One out of thousands of anti-aircraft shells hit. So, there was a
need for better methods.

The solution was the proximity shell – a shell with a tiny radar inside
that would make the shell explode when it got \_close\_ to a target.
This was technically challenging: it’s not easy to cram a radar into an
artillery shell, not easy to build one that still works after
experiencing accelerations of thousands of gravities. Moreover, people
needed an answer \_soon\_.

The British had made some progress, but lacked sufficient resources. The
US picked up the project, starting a lab that eventually became APL
(Applied Physics Lab, associated with Johns Hopkins, which still exists
today) . Its leader was Merle Tuve, who understood what the wartime
priorities were:

” I don’t want any damn fool in this laboratory to save money. I only
want him to save time.”

The New York Times, written & edited by orcs, for orcs, is criticizing
Emergent Biosolutions for screwing up covid vaccine production – and
those criticisms may well be valid. But they are also criticizing the
original decision to throw money at Emergent Biosolutions for vaccine
production – and I doubt if that is valid. The right thing to do, which
by some odd chance we actually did, was ( besides getting rid of
procedural obstacles) to try several vaccine approaches, several
manufacturers, and use whatever was shown to work and could be produced
rapidly. We didn’t know which companies would succeed ( Merck didn’t),
so a shotgun approach was the logical way forwards.

The cost of the whole vaccine effort was nothing compared to the other
costs of covid, while an effective vaccine was by far the most likely
way of getting us out of this crappy situation.

