+++
title = "Standards Drift"
full_title = "Standards Drift"
date = "2016-06-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/11/standards-drift/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/06/11/standards-drift/).

Standards Drift

We now know that the fraction of Neanderthal ancestry in coding regions
has been gradually decreasing with time since the origin admixture, and
is now something like half as large as it was originally. There were
some useful Neanderthal alleles that were favored by selection, and
others that deleterious enough to have disappeared completely, but we’re
talking about the general trend.

A couple of papers argue that Neanderthals had a lot of small-effect
genetic load resulting from inefficient purifying selection in a small
population. They conclude that Neanderthals must have been pretty
screwed-up – tens of percent fitness drop – but that can’t really be the
case, since they resisted replacement by modern humans for something
like 60,000 years after AMH first left Africa.

Moreover, it now seems that the Altai Neanderthals picked up some AMH
ancestry roughly 100,000 years ago, possibly from the Qafzeh-Shkul
population – and there too, the fraction of minority ancestry seems to
have decreased in coding regions. So this isn’t caused by low population
size, at least primarily: it’s a kind of incompatibility.

I’m thinking of it as standards drift. In a populations, alleles are
always being selected for compatibility, for working correctly,
conferring high fitness, on a particular average genetic background.
Each allele has a spec it needs to meet. That spec doesn’t necessarily
stay the same over time: obviously changes in environment will make a
difference. Drift should matter too: if a given allele becomes more
common, even by chance, the specs will change for other alleles that
interact with it. But there’s always a spec.

When two populations split, their specs start to drift apart. There’s no
genetic equivalent of that iridium meter bar. Function at the organismal
level doesn’t change so much, but there are many slightly different ways
of achieving that function.

So: we now know that if two hominid populations have been separated for
600,000 years, their alleles are on average no longer wholly
interchangeable. Admixture and adaptive introgression are still
possible, but the alien genome is, in general, slowly rejected.

This means that we can expect the same effect in other cases.
Melanesians should have been slowly purging their Denisovan ancestry in
coding regions – even though the Denisovans apparently had a
significantly higher effective population size than Neanderthals. Since
the AMH/Neanderhal/Denisovan split is almost a trichotomy, Neanderthals
were probably rejecting Denisovan admixture, while Denisovans were
slowly rejecting Neanderthal admixture.

While we’re at it, if there are Pygmies whose genomes are majority
ancient Pygmy, their Bantu component is probably slightly incompatible:
if left to themselves for a hundred thousand years, they’d probably lose
a fair amount of it. Of course they will all be eaten long before that
happens.

This is a subtle effect, one that takes thousands of generations to play
out. I don’t know if anyone has seen it in the lab – wouldn’t think so.

