+++
title = "Building momentum"
full_title = "Building momentum"
date = "2016-07-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/17/building-momentum/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/17/building-momentum/).

Building momentum

Recent work indicates that there were high levels of genetic
differentiation between the early farmers in the Levant, Anatolia, and
western Iran. What this means that is that before the Holocene, they
didn’t mix very much – probably less than one immigrant per generation.
This seems to have been a general tendency in Eurasia – possibly in
Africa as well, but we don’t have as much ancient DNA information out of
sub-Saharan Africa yet.

On the other hand, we also see populations replacing other populations,
over and over – and sometimes that resulted in admixture. Eurasians
picked up a bit of Neanderthal ancestry when they expanded out of
Africa. Altai Neanderthals picked up some AMH ancestry, possibly when
their ancestors expanded back into the Middle East. Melanesians picked
up some Denisovan ancestry.

If population A rolled over population B and occupied their territory,
there was often a few percent of admixture – certainly enough to
transmit key favorable alleles. But as neighbors, very little gene flow.
So when people say that a little gene flow is likely to be the
explanation of that vaguely Andamanese trace in Brazil, I kinda doubt
it: replacement with a little admixture is known to have happened back
in those days, but peaceful amalgamation had to have been rare, in order
for genetic differentiation to remain high.

Of course the causes of this genetic isolationism matter. To some extent
they must have been geographical barriers, particularly around the last
glacial maximum. If such barriers were the only cause, then any
relaxation or breach would have resulted in enough admixture to rapidly
decrease genetic differentiation. On the other hand, isolation probably
bred isolation: populations that had very low gene flow for long periods
of time surely had very divergent languages and customs. And modern
humans can effectively fission into groups that can act, sometime,
almost like different species – low gene flow, even though there are no
fertility barriers. Linguistic fission may go back a long time and help
explain the long-term low effective population size – but we don’t know.

When people started farming, at first they were not biologically
different from their immediate hunter-gatherer ancestors. Eventually
they would be different: better adapted to the new diet, the increased
crowding, the psychological demands of a very different way of life –
but that took at least some time. After they were adapted to farming,
the tendency towards farmers expanding, rather than the idea of farming
being transmitted, would increase: the biological edge shows up. But at
first, before much adaptation, idea transmission might have more
competitive with demography. I throw this out as a possible partial
explanation of the pattern we are seeing: first the idea of farming
spreading through core populations in the Middle East (possibly combined
with independent invention or stimulus diffusion), while a little later
those core populations themselves begin spreading outward. In fact, on
the ball really got rolling, those populations should have been adapting
to expansion itself, just like cane toads.

