+++
title = "Our Dumb World"
full_title = "Our Dumb World"
date = "2016-07-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/09/our-dumb-world/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/09/our-dumb-world/).

Our Dumb World

[![National_IQ_per_country\_-\_estimates_by_Lynn_and_Vanhanen_2006](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2016/07/national_iq_per_country_-_estimates_by_lynn_and_vanhanen_2006.png?w=640&h=296)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2016/07/national_iq_per_country_-_estimates_by_lynn_and_vanhanen_2006.png)

As far as average IQ scores go, this is what the world looks like. But
there are two relevant tests: the Stanford-Binet, and life itself. If a
country scored low on IQ but at the same time led the world in Cavorite
production, or cured cancer, or built spindizzies, we would say “screw
Stanford-Binet”, and we would be right to do so.

Does that happen? Are there countries with low average scores that tear
up the technological track? Mostly not – generally, fairly high average
IQ seems to be a prerequisite for creativity in science and mathematics.
Necessary, although not sufficient: bad choices (Communism), having the
world kick you in the crotch (Mongols), or toxic intellectual fads can
all make smart peoples unproductive.

The exceptions, such as they are, seem to be a result of strong
population substructure. India has a low average IQ, but there are
distinct subpopulations (castes) that apparently have much higher IQ –
although I’d love to see some decent studies on this. With numbers.

A population with a low average has drastically fewer people that exceed
a high threshold – should, anyhow, if the distribution is much like a
gaussian. This means that most of the world with average scores well
below 100 produces very few sharp cookies, and thus I wouldn’t expect
them to do much in the way of scientific and technical innovation. Nor
do [they.](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/03/28/zones-of-thought/)

So when you hear about even a few people with impressive intellectual
accomplishments from a country whose average IQ is not very high, you
suspect population substructure. Which is why I suspect that there is
significant population substructure in Iran. But maybe there’s something
else going on?

Of course classes are an example of substructure: higher socioeconomic
groups usually have higher average scores, and most of that difference
is probably genetic. If recruiting and retaining people into the upper
classes goes up with IQ, then the upper classes will be smarter – some,
anyhow. It’s not inevitable – certainly isn’t true in the UAE.

So as a population evolves from egalitarian tribesmen to a more
hierarchical society, you may see a higher fraction of people with IQ
above high threshold X, X being what you need to make progress on
Diophantine equations, or write the Popol Vuh, or whatever. Even if the
average IQ of the population as a whole does not change. In the same
way, if someone comes in and chases off your upper classes to France, or
simply kills everyone living in a city, that fraction is going to go
down. Decapitation. Moreover, those fewer smart cookies left are
probably less likely to meet and cooperate.

You could improve the situation, raise the average, by selection for IQ.
But that takes a long time, and I know of no case where it was done on
purpose. You could decrease inbreeding, for example by banning cousin
marriage. That only takes one generation. You could make environmental
improvements, iodine supplementation being the best understood. People
assume that there are a lot of other important environmental variables,
but I sure don’t know what they are. In practice the rank ordering of
populations seem to be the same everywhere, which is not what you would
expect if there were strong, malleable environmental influences.

Let me expand a little on that. Diasporas track. The populations that
scored low at home score low in new lands: those that scored high
continue to score high. Chinese that entered Malaysia as illiterate tin
miners end up doing well in a few generations: Japanese that moved to
Brazil to pick coffee are high achievers now.

Is it easy to notice such differences? Well, for ordinary people, it’s
real easy. Herero would ask Henry why Europeans were so smart – he said
he didn’t know. But with the right education, it apparently becomes
impossible to see. Few anthropologists know that such differences exist
and even fewer admit it. I’m sure that most have never even read any
psychometrics – more importantly, they ignore their lying eyes.
Economists generally reject such explanations, which is one reason that
they find most of the Third World impossible to understand. I must give
credit to [Garret
Jones](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/22/hive-mind/), who is
actually aware of this general pattern. Sure, he stepped on the dick of
his own argument there at the end of his book, but he was probably
lying, because he had to. Sociologists? It is to laugh.

Generally, you could say that the major job of social science is making
sure that people do not know this map. Not knowing has its attractions:
practically every headline is a surprise. The world must seem ever fresh
and new to the dis-illuminati – something like being Henry Molaison, who
had his hippocampus removed by a playful neurosurgeon and afterwards
could not create new explicit memories.

So when we tried a new intervention aimed at eliminating the GAP, and it
failed, Molaison was surprised, even if 47 similar programs had already
failed. Neurologically, he was much like a professor of education.

