+++
title = "Even more on Ashkenazi"
full_title = "Even more on Ashkenazi ancestry"
date = "2016-07-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/20/even-more-on-ashkenazi-ancestry/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/20/even-more-on-ashkenazi-ancestry/).

Even more on Ashkenazi ancestry

There’s yet another
[paper](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/07/10/063099) out on
Ashkenazi ancestry. It’s clear that this problem is a bit tricky,
because the ancestral groups are not as different as one would like –
this makes distinguishing the origins of chromosomal segments more
difficult. Drift doesn’t help. So they check out and calibrate various
algorithms with simulated scenarios, which makes sense.

Here they’re looking at finer details. When they analyze the origins of
the European component of Ashkenazi ancestry, they conclude that most is
southern – probably Italian, but that smaller amounts originated from
(probably) Western Europe and (more certainly) Eastern Europe: and in
that temporal order. They conclude that the Italian admixture slightly
predated a late medieval founder event. Different methods came up with
somewhat different estimates for the total amount of European ancestry:
the local ancestry inference (LAI) approach came up with 53% European,
while the GLOBETROTTER analysis came up with an estimate of 67% European
ancestry (after calibration by simulations). In their best guess, they
split the difference and go for 60% European.

To sum up, their model is that a population from the Levant mixed with
Italians, and shortly thereafter moved to the Rhineland (the founding
bottleneck), perhaps mixing to some degree with the local Europeans
there, and certainly mixing some with Slavic types when they moved to
the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.

How do their conclusions differ from those in the last
[report](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/09/09/ashkenazi-ancestry-revisited/)?
Previously they were thinking that the bottleneck was around 1350, a
product of the Black Death and savage persecution – now they’re talking
the original settlement in the Rhineland. Previously they had a somewhat
lower estimate of European ancestry (\~48%, now 60%). I thought these
two conclusions likely a couple of years ago.

The big new point, important if correct, is that the admixture with
Italians is relatively recent – too recent to have happened back in
Roman times. In their model, this main admixture event is 25-55
generations ago, while the founding bottleneck is 25-35 generations ago.
It’s not impossible that the admixture happened *at the same time* as
the founding. This I didn’t expect.

How to improve our understanding? aDNA – dig we must!

