+++
title = "Trust Issues"
full_title = "Trust Issues"
date = "2016-07-31"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/31/trust-issues/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/07/31/trust-issues/).

Trust Issues

A while ago I was
[wondering](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/10/01/who-can-you-trust/)
about who you could trust to work in a modern equivalent of the
Manhattan project. Thinking about it again, one problem is that people,
if for example you consider the typical recent Ivy League graduate to be
a human being, are bound and determined to be stupid about this
question.

Imagine how we would have dealt with Japanese-Americans in 1942 if we
had been informed by modern sensibilities.

Our stated and enforced policy would have been based on the notion that
both Issei and Nisei were perfectly trustworthy, no more likely to aid
the Empire of Japan than the Dutch in Grand Rapids

So we would have drafted them into the armed forces just like anyone
else, and employed them where their skills seemed useful. We would have
had them translating Japanese navy intercepts: we were short on
Japanese-language translators, so why not? There would have been a bunch
of them working with Hypo, down in the basement. Some would have worked
in the Manhattan Project. They would have had jobs in the OSS, in the
FBI. What could possibly have gone wrong?

Well, some of them were in fact disloyal: not most, but a far higher
percentage than in most other ethnic groups in the US. There is nothing
magical about this: it often happens. Were the Anglos that moved into
Texas loyal to Mexico? Were the Sudeten Germans loyal to Czechoslovakia
– was Conrad Henlein just misunderstood? Consider the
[Niihau](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niihau_incident) incident.

If many Japanese Americans had been privy to the breaking of the
Japanese fleet code – plausible, because of the large Japanese
population in Hawaii and the need for people with Japanese language
skills – the American Magic would have gone away. No Midway, not as we
knew it. I figure that we would have lost tens of thousands more KIA in
the Pacific than we did in this timeline. Also, probably hundreds of
thousands of extra casualties in occupied Asia. Japan would have still
have lost, though.

Detailed knowledge of the results from the Manhattan Project wouldn’t
have done the Japanese any good, because they didn’t have the industrial
muscle and sophistication to make anything of it.

I’m sure there wouldn’t have been any problems with Japanese Secret
Service members, any more than Indira Gandhi ever had trouble with her
Sikh bodyguards. Besides, in a democracy, no one is indispensable – I’m
sure that Henry Wallace would have been a good President, for a
gullible, superstitious pinko. While Sam Rayburn was a fine man!

The funniest part would been the many examples of people making excuses
for terrorism and treason. When some young Japanese pilot talked about
how he should perhaps crash his plane into the White House, his
colleagues would have sedulously ignored those ravings, just as our
contemporaries did with Major Nidal Hasan. At least they wouldn’t have
had to constantly make excuses for his incompetence, as they did with
Hasan – Japanese aren’t stupid. After the crash, the new President would
have said that no one really knows what motivated the pilot, although
back in those days, there really was a way of knowing what evil lay in
the hearts of men.

After enough crap, one presumes that the press would have been
instructed not to publish the faces of the miscreants, lest the general
public get the wrong idea.

Our actual response was suboptimal: people who knew the score (J. Edgar
Hoover) thought that putting the Japanese into camps was a mistake.
Watching and infiltrating known pro-Nippon groups, punishing those that
actually committed crimes was perfectly feasible; combined with
reasonable discretion in assigning Japanese to useful but nonclassified
jobs, you would have a policy that was more effective than the one we
actually pursued.

Locking them up (except in Hawaii !), wasn’t the best course, but it was
a million times more sensible than what we would do today. Because in
1942, Americans weren’t crazy: today, they are.

