+++
title = "Me and my Shadow"
full_title = "Me and my Shadow"
date = "2016-08-16"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/16/me-and-my-shadow/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/16/me-and-my-shadow/).

Me and my Shadow

Parabiosis: the idea is connecting the circulatory systems of two
animals: mostly this has been done in mice. Interestingly, if you
connect an old mouse to a young mouse, the young blood seems to
rejuvenate the old mouse, improving its muscles and central nervous
system.

Fairly recently, some people are looking fairly seriously at this in
anti-aging research. But a lifetime ago, people were already thinking
about it, enough so that parabiosis showed up every now and then in the
world of ideas. Something like it exists in Brave New World. An
improved, better-thought-out version plays in a role in Robert
Heinlein’s novel Methuselah’s Children. There we find a group (the
Howard families) that have long lives due to a program of selection
\[which is certainly possible, although slow\]. Normals envy them and
demand the secret – since there is none, the Howard Families are forced
to flee. In their absence, the normals find the secret anyhow – they
find artificial means of replicating the various biochemical mechanisms
that resulted in extended lifespans in the Howard Families. One such
method involved mass production of artificial ‘young” blood via tissue
culture – which method is under active
[development](http://www.crm.ed.ac.uk/news/next-step-research-efforts-culture-red-blood-cells-blood-transfusions)
today.

Peter Thiel is apparently interested in this and is even said to be
taking plasma injections. Although I suspect he just thinks the cape is
cool. Shaving must be hard.

Reminds me a bit of phage therapy: developed a lifetime ago, largely
pushed to the side by antibiotics, but making a comeback. And of course
it too was part of the mental furniture at one time – it’s central to
the plot of Arrowsmith, by Sinclair Lewis.

