+++
title = "Vioxx"
full_title = "Vioxx"
date = "2016-08-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/11/vioxx/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/11/vioxx/).

Vioxx

Vioxx was a big story, underappreciated in my view. Vioxx (rofecoxib)
was a new NSAID (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug) developed by
Merck and approved by the FDA in 1999.

Aspirin interferes with two forms of cyclooygenase, Cox-1 (involved with
protecting the stomach lining) and COX-2 (involved with pain and
inflammation). So you get relief of pain and inflammation, but also
stomach bleeds, in some cases serious. with Vioxx, the goal was
something that only inhibited COX-2.

There was a study comparing Vioxx and naproxen – VIGOR, (Vioxx GI
Outcomes Research). They found an elevated risk of heart attacks in the
VIOXX users – a fourfold increase. This was bad, since heart attacks are
A. not rare, especially in the painkiller population and B. very
dangerous. Merck defended their new drug through creative bullshit: they
argued that naproxen had a protective effect, and that
heart-attack-prone Vioxx users in the study were simply suffering from a
naproxen deficiency. at the time, there was no evidence supporting that.
In order for their arguments to have been valid, naproxen would have had
to had a such a strong protective effect against heart attacks that it
would have one of the most valuable drugs on the market, far more
valuable than Vioxx… As it turns out, naproxen has an anti-clotting
effect similar to aspirin, and probably a mild protective effect, like
aspirin: but not a strong protective effect.

The Vigor study was submitted in February 2001. The New England Journal
of Medicine, a few months later, found that the authors had failed to
mention some strokes and heart attacks near the end of the trial. The
authors used a cutoff for cardiovascular effects (bad news) that was
earlier than the cutoff for gastrointestinal effects (good news). why?
Because they were weasels, of course. There was a lot of money riding on
this drug’s success.

Other people began to notice the increased heart risks – looking at data
from HMOs and such. Merck fought back. There was an MD at Stanford that
was concerned about Vioxx: Merck called up the dean of Stanford Medical
School at home and warned him about possible loss of financial support:
he told them to go fuck themselves.

Vioxx was a bad deal. Although it caused fewer stomach bleeds, it
doubled heart attack rates (meta-analysis by Juni et al, Lancet November
5 2004), which increased heart attacks by about 5 x 10-3 per year, about
30-40% of which are expected to be fatal. So, on the one hand it reduced
one kind of risk by about 1.0 x 10-4 per year while increasing another
kind of risk by about 1.5 x 10-3.  
Fifteen times and what do you get?

With those risk numbers, it is hard to imagine any subpopulation that
would have a net benefit from Vioxx. Old people are more prone to
bleeds, but they’re also more prone to heart attacks.

Now it is true that there were studies that showed greater efficacy: 21
such were reported by Scott S. Reuben, former chief of acute pain at
Baystate medical Center in Springfield Mass. But as it turns out, *he
made them all up*. There’s is no evidence that Merck knew about this,
but it does perhaps say something about the general climate in big
pharma.

Merck knew the gist of this for four years before they pulled the plug
on the drug. They had their their drug reps lie about cardio risks,
threatened researchers and sued journals that talked about the emerging
cardio risks. Few physicians were aware of these risks, even though a
close reading of the journals would have suggested it – because hardly
any physicians read the journals.

Epidemiologists think that Vioxx caused something like 40,000 deaths.
Ron Unz has argued that it likely caused far more than than that – but
his case is without any strength. He says that the crude death rate
increased from 1998 to 1999 – usually it slightly decreases from year to
year – and that it decreased dramatically in 2004, when they pulled
Vioxx.

You don’t want to look at national figures: you want to look at a known
population of users, so that any effect is not drowned by other effects
swirling around in the general population. If you want to know the
effects of height on income, you look at the correlation between
individual height and income, not the relation between income in tall
states and income in states that are on average short. You want to
disaggregate. For example, the crude death rate is strongly affected by
the age structure: if there was a baby boom many years ago, such that
the boomers are now entering prime heart-attack years, that wouldn’t
mean that age-adjusted heart disease was getting worse – it would mean
that the country was, on average, getting older.

The age-adjusted death rate did go up 0.7% from 1998 to 1999: but deaths
due to heart disease actually dropped, as did strokes. COPD, septicemia,
and Alzheimers deaths went up. Something may have been happening, but it
doesn’t look like a Vioxx effect. Anyhow, Vioxx only showed up in the
second half of 1999 in any event.

At the same time, the epidemiologists have strong evidence that Vioxx
really did cause something like 40,000 extra deaths over those five
years – but that’s not enough to generate a clear signal in the overall
mortality rate. For that you need something big, like the Holodomor or
the 1918 flu.

Moreover, although the age-adjusted death rate dropped from 832.7 in
2003 to 816.5 in 2004, a bigger drop than from 2002 to 2003 (845.3 to
832.7), it dropped to 798.8 in 2005 (a bigger drop) and 776.5 in 2006 (a
still bigger drop).

It’s not unlike the Maguffin in The Fugitive: Harrison Ford finds out
that Devlin MacGregor is pushing a dangerous drug, However, the reaction
in the movie was very different from the actual reaction to Vioxx. In
the movie, people were outraged. In real life, not so much. I don’t
think that movie was unrealistic about that – rather, times have
changed.

I’ve seen many libertarian types defend Vioxx. Sebastian Mallaby did so
in the editorial pages of the Washington Post. But then he’s apparently
a marsupial, with low encephalization: he argued that Bush pardoning
Merck would somehow solve all our economic troubles.

In the 70s corporations were the bad guys, whether they were or not.
Today, billionaires are your friend.

