+++
title = "3am interview with Jan"
full_title = "3am interview with Jan Westerhoff"
date = "2018-07-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/07/18/3am-interview-with-jan-westerhoff/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/07/18/3am-interview-with-jan-westerhoff/).

3am interview with Jan Westerhoff

Another [3AM Magazine
interview](https://www.3ammagazine.com/3am/emptiness-and-no-self-nagarjunas-madhyamaka/)
related to Indian philosophy: with Jan Westerhoff at Oxford University.
(Note that according to Richard Marshall, you can expect several more
such interviews in the coming months.) In this interview, Westerhoff
talks about why he thinks Madhyamaka has been so influential, replies to
common objections to its views on emptiness, whether we should think of
them as anticipating Matrix-style thought experiments, and whether their
logic should be construed as paraconsistent.

The interview concludes with some reflection on philosophical
methodology; Westerhoff says

When ancient Indian thinkers composed commentaries on previous works
their aim was often not just to spell out and explain the position of
their authors, but to connect the philosophical concerns of the text
commented on with the concerns of their contemporary audience. I think
this is good model for our own engagements with ancient Indian
philosophical texts. Of course it is essential to build our study of
these texts on a firm philological foundation, including reliable
editions, precise translations, and rich historical contextualizations.
Yet in addition to these we need to be able to point out how the text’s
concerns link up with our own philosophical questions, whether these are
questions in metaphysics, ethics, epistemology, or some other field of
philosophy. And given that our understanding of philosophy in the west
in shaped by the Western philosophical tradition this means relating the
positions of the ancient Indian thinkers to those of Western
philosophers, not in order to set up a competition for priority, or to
determine who has got it right, but use it as a possibility of making
progress with answering the philosophical question at hand.

If we conceive of it in this way we can see how work on historical
philosophical texts (whether they are from ancient India, from ancient
Greece, or from other parts of the world) can be a genuinely creative
enterprise that does not just try to present historical arguments as
exhibits in the Museum of the History of Ideas, but uses ancient texts
for actually doing philosophy.

Unlike [Anand Vaidya’s recent
interview](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/07/12/3am-interview-with-anand-vaidya-and-related-links/),
Westerhoff’s has not set off any further blog conversations that I’ve
seen. However, we can hope that it will be read widely and be yet
another resource for philosophers whose work is not primarily in Indian
philosophy, but who are interested in expanding their teaching and or
research.
