+++
title = "An Apology and"
full_title = "An Apology and Clarification"
date = "2018-07-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/07/28/an-apology-and-clarification/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/07/28/an-apology-and-clarification/).

An Apology and Clarification

Anand Jayprakash Vaidya, Director of the Center for Comparative
Philosophy at San Jose State University, California

Recently, two pieces of mine have come out in publication. First, an
interview of me in 3AM Magazine by Richard Marshall called *Hindu
Syllogisms and Dark Necessities Go Fusion Here*, and a book review of
Jonardon Ganeri’s *Attention, Not Self*in the journal *Mind*. In both
of those pieces I used the phrase “Cross-Cultural and Multi-Disciplinary
Philosophy” to label both what I think the future direction of
philosophy should be and what is important in that direction. This
phrase in fact refers back to a piece I wrote on public philosophy
called “Public Philosophy: Cross-Cultural and Multi-Disciplinary” which
was published in the *Journal of Comparative Philosophy*.

It has come to my attention that I may have made some people working
under the label “cross-cultural philosophy” feel excluded and feel that
their work is less important than the kind of work I put under the label
“cross-cultural and multi-disciplinary.” One reason a person might feel
excluded is that the term “cross-cultural” is more inclusive than the
term “cross-cultural and multi-disciplinary,” since the latter involves
a conjunction, thus picking out a subset of “cross-cultural.”

So, let me begin with **an apology**. It was not my intention to
exclude, and the fact that I did not intend to exclude does not mean
that I did not exclude, and so I wish to apologize to all of those who
felt excluded. I hope that you accept my apology and realize that this
was something I said, and a phrase I used, because I failed to take into
consideration the very thing that I am aiming for, *greater inclusion of
philosophical work*. So, **sorry.**

**** Now to the clarification. **I agree**with Jay Garfield
when he says:

The goal of cross-cultural philosophy is not so much to juxtapose texts
from distinct traditions to notice similarities and differences as it is
to do philosophy, with lots of texts, lots of perspectives, and lots of
hermeneutical traditions—to make the resources of diverse traditions and
their scholars available to one another and to create new dialogues.
(Garfield, *Empty Words*(OUP 2002) pp. viii)

Relatedly, I think that the most important *next step for philosophy*is
to go cross-cultural in the sense defined by Garfield. I absolutely
believe that work in cross-cultural philosophy that does not engage with
non-philosophical disciplines is valuable and of current relevance and
importance. In addition, I think collective agreement on the broad
definition of “cross-cultural philosophy” mentioned above helps the
cause by promoting solidarity. Whatever differences or preferences that
people have after we reach that agreement should be discussed as coming
as the step after the next step. When I spoke of the importance of
“multi-disciplinary” work and mentioned work by Jonardon Ganeri and Evan
Thompson, I forgot to mention that I was thinking and talking about
philosophy of mind, an area in which I work and where I see that one
should aim to engage cross-culturally and multi-disciplinarily, where
the emphasis is on cognitive science and related disciplines. In this
respect the work done by Ganeri and Thompson is fascinating and really
ground breaking.

My combining of the phrases “cross-cultural” and “multi-disciplinary”
comes from a reaction to the relationship between analytic philosophy
and experimental philosophy. In speaking to the debate between these two
camps I was forwarding the idea that cross-cultural philosophy is a
corrective to the debate between these two groups. However, for those
that are working, and have been working in comparative philosophy, and
who are moving toward cross-cultural philosophy, I did not intend to say
that work done in that area needs to engage scientific disciplines if
that is not necessary or relevant to the work being done. Nor did I mean
to say that it is not important.

In fact, the point could be made about all three areas. Experimental
philosophers need not engage analytic philosophy if that is not
necessary or relevant. And analytic philosophers need not engage
experimental philosophy or non-western traditions if they are not
necessary or relevant. However, what I don’t want anyone to do is read
that as an open invitation to assume from the outset that they aren’t
relevant. Rather, my hope is that others will see that if they look hard
enough and try, they often are relevant. And sure, not everyone can be
multi-disciplinary in every piece—I don’t even do that, but surely, we
can acknowledge the reasons why we don’t, while at the same time
agreeing that in some places multi-disciplinarity is relevant and
necessary.

Most importantly, no matter what defense I have given here, **I am
sorry**if I excluded you simply because you do cross-cultural work that
isn’t multi-disciplinary.
