+++
title = "Atma suktaM of"
full_title = "Atma suktaM of vaikhAnasa tradition"
date = "2014-12-11"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/12/11/atma-suktam-of-vaikhanasa-tradition/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/12/11/atma-suktam-of-vaikhanasa-tradition/).

Atma suktaM of vaikhAnasa tradition

A statement from the vaikhAnasa kalpa–sutra to the effect that all Vedic
rites,  
austerities and sacrifices prescribed in the Vedas are only variant form
of worship of Vishnu,  
” ***athatOnushtAnakalpam vyaKhyAsyAma: \| sarvE
vaidikAchArAstapOyagnaSva vishNupUjAvidhErbhEdA: \| iti vaikhAnasa
sUtram \|\| ”***  
The ancient lawgivers knew that in the worship of ***vishnu*** the
***vaikhAnasas*** were only following the lead given by the great sages
of yore like ***vasishTa***, the ascetics like ***sanaka***, and by the
section of the ancient followers of the Vedic tradition who were the
adherents of the cult vishnu.

Although the vaikhAnasa texts align themselves against the tAntrik
tradition, there is at least one particular detail of worship which they
share in common with the latter, and that is the assumed identification
of the devotee with the deity during worship. The tAntrik position
rejects as impossible the communion of the human with the divine, unless
the worshipper identifies himself with the worshipped. The worshipper is
said to pass through three phases: he regards himself as wholly
belonging to the deity, without however a direct encounter with the
deity (‘***tasyaivAham***‘); then, an encounter does occur and the
devotee can confide with the deity: ‘I am thine’ (‘***tavevAham***‘);
and finally the culmination of the encounter results in the feeling that
the worshipper himself is the deity. And thus the deity does not exist
apart from him (‘***tvamevAham***‘). In the vaikhAnasa texts, it is
prescribed for purposes of invocation (***AvAhana***) that after the
worship of the enclosure-deities ***(Avarana-pujA*** ) and the worship
of the door-guardians ( ***dvAra-pAla-puja*** ), the priest should
station himself in front of the idol (behind the screen), and reciting
the ‘***Atma-suktaM***‘, should enter into a state of meditative
absorption, when he will become in fact ***vishnu*** himself. Then
follows the sequence of symbolic and ritual ‘placement’ (***nyAsa***),
after this identity of self with Vishnu is transferred to the main idol.
Derived from this facility with which the priest can identify himself
with the Deity during a worship sequence is the notion that the priest
has an enduring divine presence within him. We read, for instance, in
***BhrigU’s KriyAdhikAra*** that Vishnu has two forms: the Idol and the
Priest. The idol acquires divinity after invocation (***AvAhana***),
while divinity abides always in the priest. He is therefore to be
regarded as a mobile god viz., ***sAkshAt vishnu rupi***.

“***rUpadvayam hareH prOkta bimbamarchaka Eva cha \| bimbam
tvAvAhanAdUrdhvam sadA sannihitOarchaka \|\| archakastu hariH
sAkshAtchhara rUpi na samsayaH \|***  
[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/wpid-img_20141212_001230.jpg?w=700 "IMG_20141212_001230.JPG")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/wpid-img_20141212_001230.jpg)

The Atma-Sukta (SrI vaikhAnasa Mantra Prasna, 5.120.1-12 ) is a
collection of nine verses in the ***trishtubh*** metre. Its employment
is peculiar to the ***vaikhAnasa worship***. It is recited while
invoking the form of Vishnu in his cosmic aspect (***sa-kala***), and it
is meant to enlarge the consciousness of the worshipper to cosmic
dimensions so that his own constitution may accommodate Vishnu’s
‘***sakala***‘ form. It is a procedure by means of which the priest’s
self identifies itself with the highest of selves, viz., ***bishnu***.
The hymn is called ***Atma-Sukta*** not only because it begins with the
words ‘***AtmAtma***‘, but also because it concerns itself with
transforming the individual self into the cosmic spirit. ( We may call
it ***advaitic*** element in qualified non dualism )

\[ Note :-(ग्)ं is sign for vedic anusvAra . \]  
**५.१.१२०. १***  
**आत्मात्मा परमान्तरात्मा मह्य्-अन्तरात्मा यश् चातिरात्मा सतनो \|
ऽन्तरात्मा व्यावेष्टि विश् (ग्)ं सकलं बिभर्ति यो व्यक्त-पुण्यस् स-तुनः
प्रधानः\|\|***

५.१.१२०.२ प्राणः प्रणीतिस् स उदान आदिर् वर-दो वराहो व्यानश् च मे स्यात्
\| तपसाञ् च मूर्तिः कपिलो मुनीन्द्रो यश् चापानो हयशीर्षो नः\|\|

५.१.१२०.३ यत् सर्वम् अश्नात्य् अजरस् समग्र(ग्)ं श्रियम् ऊर्ज-युक्तां स
तु मे समानः\|\|

५.१.१२०.४ बलम् आसुरं यत् सततं निहन्ता ब्रह्मा बुद्धिर् मे गोप ईश्वरः\|\|

५.१.१२०.५ सविता च वीर्यम् इन्दुश् च धातु-रस-भूत-भूता भूतास् स-भूताः\|\|

५.१.१२०.६ द्यौर् मे अस्तु मूर्धोदर-नाभो वा भूमिर् यथाङ्घ्रिर्ववृधे ऽहम्
ईशः\|\|

५.१.१२०.७ अस्थीनि मे स्युर् अथ पर्वताख्या भुजगाश् च केशा दिवि ये
चरन्तः\|\|

५.१.१२०.८ द्वौ नेत्र-रूपौ विथु पृश्च्नि \[?\] मुख्यौ रुधिरञ् च सार(ग्)ं
सकलञ् च तोयम् \|\|

५.१.१२०.९ स्नायवो मे आसन्ना द्यौर् भृगुर् मे हृदयम् अस्तु \| सर्वे अन्ये
मुनयो ऽङ्ग-भूता वेदा मे आस्यं जिह्वा मे सरस्वती \|\|

५.१.१२०.१० दन्ता मरुत उपजिह्वा उपश्रुतिः \|\|

५.१.१२०.११ वृषणौ मित्रा-वरुणाव् उपस्थः प्रजा-पतिर् आन्त्रा मे वेदाश्
श्रुति-स्मृती मेदाधारणे \|\|

५.१.१२०.१२ स्वेदम् मे वर्षं मूत्र कोश(ग्)ं समुद्रं पुरीषं काञ्चनम् \|\|

५.१.१२०.१३ सावित्री गायत्री मर्यादा वेदि-हृत्-पुण्डरीके विमले प्रविष्टस्
\| सकलस् स-लक्ष्मीस् स-विभूतिकाङ्गो यत् सर्वं पुण्यं मय्य् अधिष्ठानम्
अस्तु \|\|

५.१.१२०.१४ सर्वेषां देवानाम् आत्मकस् सर्वेषां \| मुनीनाम् आत्मकस्
तपो-मूर्तिर् इह पुण्य-मूर्तिर् आसन् \|\|  
**

**Translation:-****

That which is the self of the self, the supreme self, the inner self,
the inner self of the earth, and the primordial self, is indeed our
inmost self; It pervades the universe and sustains all things. As if the
merit manifests itself, it is our chief.  
The outward breath (**prAna***) is our guide (**praniti**); the upward
breath (**udAna**) is the primordial and boon-bestowing boar
(**varAha**); the spreading breath (**vyAna**) is the form of
**Kapila**, the sage who is the personification of penance; the downward
breath (**apAna**) is the horse-headed deity, Hayagriva.*

My digestive breath (**samAna**) is that which devours everything, even
goddess of prosperity (**Sri**) with her energy; my strength vanquished
at all times evil forces, and my intellect is verily Brahma, and Isvara
is my protector.  
**Savitri** (the aspect of Sun-god) is my sex energy, the moon is the
watery ingredients in my body; the five basic elements (bhutas: earth,
water, fire, air and akasa) are the constituents of my body; the sky is
my head, the mid-region is my belly; and the spreading earth constitutes
my feet; I am indeed the ruler of all things.  
My bones should verily be called the mountains; my hairs are the
serpents that move about in the heavens; my two eyes are the wide earth
and the high sky; and my blood is the essential watery content of the
universe.  
My sinews are the rivers on the earth, my heart is **Bhrigu** himself
(the **Vaikhanasa Sage**) and my limbs are all the other sages; my mouth
represents the Vedic lore and my tongue is the goddess of speech,
**Sarasvati**; the **windgods** (**maruts**) are my teeth, and my
epiglottis is the revelation of the sacred texts.

My testicles are the twin gods, **Mitra** and Varuna, my sex organ is
the creator, Prajapati; my entrails are the Vedic hymns; my intellect
(**medha**) and retention (**dharana**) are the revealed texts (sruti)
and the texts subsidiary to them (**smriti**); my perspiration is indeed
the rains, and my bladder is the ocean itself; my fecal matter is
gold.  
The hymn in the gayatri metre addressed to the sun-god (Savitri) is the
sacred precincts and the altar; and into the pure lotus of my heart has
entered Vishnu in His cosmic aspect (**sakala**), along with the goddess
of wealth (**srI**), in all His glory; may all that is filled with merit
in me provide for Him a foothold.  
May I contain in myself the essence of all the gods and all the sages,
may I be a personification of austerities (**tapo-murti**) and of all
merit (**punya-murti**)”. The purpose of the ritual of invocation
(AvAhana) of the supreme, transcendental and all-pervading Vishnu (the
etymological meaning of the word Vishnu is ‘pervader’) in the heart of
the devotee or in an idol is to facilitate contemplation of the deity in
one place; even as the fire which spreads all over the forest blazes
forth especially in some places. Invoked by appropriate mantras in the
idol, or meditated intensely and devotedly in the heart, Vishnu makes
his presence felt in the idol or in the heart, and receives the worship
offered (**Kriyadhikaram**).

Vaikhanasa worship is essentially Vishnu-oriented, but Vishnu is
worshipped in his comprehensive and pervasive aspect (in accordance with
the root meaning of the word ‘**vishi vyApatau’**); and when Vishnu is
invoked for worship, his presence includes the presence of all the other
gods as his retinue (**saparivara**). Hence worship of Vishnu means
worship of all the gods  
.

[![image](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/wpid-img_20141212_003002.jpg?w=700 "IMG_20141212_003002.JPG")](https://animeshnagarblog.files.wordpress.com/2014/12/wpid-img_20141212_003002.jpg)

Animesh’s blog

