+++
title = "The Usual Suspects"
full_title = "The Usual Suspects"
date = "2018-04-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/02/the-usual-suspects/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/02/the-usual-suspects/).

The Usual Suspects

David Reich’s book has stirred up a lot of the usual suspects. Most are
non-geneticists, but there are a few geneticists among them. Sorta
kinda. Here’s an interesting example – something by Dan Graur, a
geneticist currently at the University of Houston.

Graur says: “For selection to operate and counteract the effects of
random genetic drift, the effective population size should be large.
Unfortunately, the long-term effective population size for all the
humans in the world is barely 10,000—lower than that of chimpanzee. By
necessity, the effective population size of each “race” separately is
much smaller. So, the chances that 74\*\* loci will experience
significant changes in allele frequencies simultaneously in each of the
four populations is zero. With one locus, a change in human allele
frequency may occur, albeit very rarely, as evidenced by the case of
lactase persistence in North European and the case of the EDAR allele in
East Asians. To imagine that 74 alleles change frequency in concert and
that the 74 alleles have successfully battled genetic drift and
recombination in merely 2,000 generations requires an extremely naïve
and unsophisticated view of the evolutionary process.

Moreover, according to Augustine Kong, whom David Reich quotes,
educational attainment is a deleterious trait that is selected against.
The selection against educational attainment, according to Kung, is
extremely powerful, so much so that differences in allele frequencies
are observable after merely 3-5 generations (100 years). If one believes
these claims, one should explain how come there are so many university
graduates in Iceland. With such huge purifying selection against
education, it’s a miracle that any one in Iceland knows how to read and
write.

Kong A. et al. 2017. Selection against variants in the genome associated
with educational attainment. PNAS 114: E727-E732

Moore DS, Shenk D. 2017. The heritability fallacy. WIREs Cogn Sci,
8:e1400. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1400

Okbay A et al. 2016. Genome-wide association study identifies 74 loci
associated with educational attainment. Nature 533:539–542 ”

The interesting thing about this is that Graur has had prestigious jobs
in areas relating to evolution, while apparently understanding *nothing*
about it. Graur served as associate editor of the journal of Molecular
Biology and Evolution from 1995 to 2011. Since 2009, he serves as
associate editor of the journal Genome Biology and Evolution. From 2009
to 2011 he has held the position of Councillor for the Society for
Molecular Biology and Evolution, won the Humboldt prize in 2011, and was
elected a fellow of AAAS in 2015. In spite of this, *every single
statement* in this short note is incorrect.

Graur says “For selection to operate and counteract the effects of
random genetic drift, the effective population size should be large.”
Well, it would be nice if the effective population size were large, but
that is by no means necessary. German Shepherds were created in the
1890s, by interbreeding several breeds of dogs ( and wolves !), followed
by selection for desired traits. That didn’t require tens or hundreds of
thousands of dogs. Thoroughbreds are the fastest horses in existence:
their effective population size is around 100. Dachshunds are smaller
than they were in the 1970s – but then everybody knows they’re contrary
enough to violate the laws of genetics. Born that way, probably.

I could go on – and on, and on. *Every* example we have of selection on
domesticates is a counterexample to what Grauer is saying here. No
farmer he. Does he think that some ancient geneticist corralled a
million aurochsen in order to breed the domesticated cow?

A large population size is nice, because it generates more favorable
mutations, but that is not necessary. Selection, at least in the short
run, does not require any new mutations at all. Nice, because a large
population size reduces the strength of chance, so the probability of
the change in the trait under selection stalling or reversing in a given
generation is lower – the results of selection become more predictable,
especially in the short run. Next, Grauer talks about the long-term
effective population size (EPS) in humans being around 10,000 – which he
seems to think is too low for selection to work. He’s wrong, but that
number is also the wrong number. He’s talking about the neutral-theory
effective population size, which is a function \[ harmonic mean\] of
long-term population size over the last million years or so – and it’s
the wrong ‘effective population size’ for selection questions. There are
different values of EPS for different questions. The right one is the
“Variance EPS, which tells you the theoretical population size that
yields the same noise in allele frequency change, right now. It
basically measures how little a population is susceptible to drift.” The
correct value of EPS, for different continental branches of humanity,
has been hundreds of thousands to millions for a long time, well before
agriculture was developed.

Graur is making a very basic mistake: he is perfectly happy making an
argument to which there are many counterexamples. They don’t bother him.
Even one counterexample should bother you. As I said, every domesticate
is a counterexample to what he’s saying. We know of many genetically
caused differences between human populations, such as height, skin
color, disease resistance, ability to efficiently utilize certain foods,
tolerate high altitude, low temperatures, high levels of arsenic, etc
etc. By ‘we’ I mean anyone who can read. Some of those genetic
differences are caused by new forms of one or a few genes ( like
sickle-cell), others by small shifts in the frequency of many alleles
that influence the trait.

Graur notes, incredulously, Augustine Kong’s work showing that the
frequencies of variants influencing educational attainment are changing
rapidly – in a way that decreases potential for educational attainment.
We’re getting dumber. He asks how there could be so many university
graduates in Iceland. But this kind of strong selection against
potential for educational attainment – selection against intelligence –
has been predicted for many years by people that understood that A.
intelligence is highly heritable and B. On the whole smarter people,
especially smarter women, have significantly fewer kids than average in
contemporary society. This is almost certainly a new phenomenon, less
than a hundred years old, just as mass higher education and artificial
birth control are new things. Although Kong showed this directly,
through genetic analysis, the idea is hardly new. R.A. Fisher talked
about it, in The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection \[published in
1930\]. Of course Fisher understood polygenic selection pretty well too,
having been the main developer of the theory of quantitative selection.
Demographers in the 1950s talked about it. Cyril Kornbluth understood it
( ‘The Marching Morons’ ): but to be fair, Kornbluth was no ordinary
man.

