+++
title = "“Who We Are #7 Africa"
full_title = "“Who We Are #7 Africa"
date = "2018-04-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/18/who-we-are-7-africa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/18/who-we-are-7-africa/).

“Who We Are: #7 Africa.

The African story is complicated, and getting steadily more so. But some
of the big picture – involving relatively recent events – is fairly
simple.

The biggest African language family is Niger-Kordofanian, which was
probably spoken by most people in west Africa at least 5,000 years ago –
a mark of an early expansion. One subgroup near the border between
Nigeria and Cameroons seems to have had a set of crops that was less
specialized for high-rainfall areas like west Africa – probably
including some cereals like millet, as well as wet-country yams and
bananas. This allowed the Bantus to expand out into dryer areas of
Africa, which at the time were occupied by various hunter-gatherer
groups. You could think of the Bantu as a bit like marcher lords, but at
first more advantaged by their crops than their military technology.
From genomics, it looks as if the Bantu first moved south and only later
expanded into East Africa. They didn’t have iron-working in the
beginning, but picked it up perhaps 500 to 1,000 years later.
Iron-working led to better tools and weapons, which made displacement of
hunter-gatherers even easier.

A few of the hunter-gatherer peoples are still around, but most have
been replaced. The replacement was in some cases near-total, while other
encounters sometimes led to substantial admixture between the Bantu and
the previous hunter-gatherers. For example the Xhosa, a major tribe in
South Africa, have about 25% Bushman ancestry. Look at Mandela. A
similar group, one that only persists as an admixture component, account
for about 20% of the ancestry in Mozambique. On the other hand, there’s
no sign of hunter-gather admixture in some populations, like Malawi.

The remaining hunter-gatherers also have had varying amounts of Bantu
admixture. The Ju/’hoansi, the population that Henry Harpending studied,
have the least (about 10%). Pygmies also have substantial amounts of
Bantu ancestry. Interestingly, the more Bantu ancestry, the taller the
Pygmy (on average).

The Bantu expansion was the largest in Africa, but there were others.
The Nilotic people, tall cattle-herders, expanded into East Africa,
leaving tribes like the Masai and Tutsi.

Farmers from the Middle East settled Egypt and North Africa a long time
ago, which strongly suggest that the Afroasiatic languages
(traditionally known as Hamito-Semitic) originated in the Near East. A
following pulse in the Bronze Age brought a later version of Middle
Eastern genes (with an added eastern component) into Ethiopia and
Somalia, which likely explains the origin of the Cushitic branch.

A fourth branch, the Khoe-Kwadi languages of southern Africa, are spoken
by people also called Hottentots. They appear to be the result of an
admixture between cattle-herders from the north and local hunter-gather
populations (similar to the Bushmen). Those cattle-herders derive from
an ancient West Eurasian population – so you see some Middle Eastern
alleles in the Hottentots, a surprisingly result due to Joe Pickrell.

One thing to remember: although some of the hunter-gatherer groups are
very interesting and tell us things about really deep prehistory –
Bushmen, for example, apparently split off from the rest of the human
race about 300,000 years ago – they make up a very small fraction of
Africa’s population today. There are roughly 50,000 Bushmen, 1,000 Hadza
(descendants of East African hunter-gatherers) and perhaps a million
Pygmies.

These small remnant populations can be informative. It looks as if some
of the hunter-gatherer populations mixed with unknown archaics about
50,000 years ago. Maybe not that surprising, since skeletons with
archaic features have been found (in Africa) that are relatively recent,
as recent as 11,000 years ago. Or consider homo naledi, a very different
population (many skeletons found in a cave in South Africa), something
like humans but with a very small brain, that seems to have lived in
South Africa 200,000 years ago. Or recent analysis that suggests West
Africans carry significant admixture (\~10%) from a pop that split off
after Neanderthals \[ 600 k years\] , but well before the Bushmen.

Another question: how did the Bushmen ( and apparently other
populations) manage to stay so genetically isolated over hundreds of
thousands of years? We’ve recently learned a bit more about their
history, from sequencing Bushmen skeletons found in South Africa –
skeletons that are only a couple of thousand years old, but date from
before the Bantu arrived. Ur-Bushmen – which showed us how different
they were before Bantu admixture.

Reich mentions some work by Peter Ralph and Graham Coop on the multiple
origins of the sickle-cell mutation in different parts of Africa, which
suggests very low rates of gene flow, since otherwise such a favorable
mutation would spread rapidly, without the required wait for multiple
occurrences. Alas, it turns out that HbS really does have a single
origin, probably in West Africa about 7000 years ago – a nearby
recombination hotspot confused the Issue. Which is what some people
expected a long time ago – multiple origins never squared with the fact
that there is no sickle-cell at all in South East Asia or New Guinea,
even though there’s plenty of malaria.. However the point – very low
gene flow – is still valid, since we see several different mutations
that cause lactase persistence in cattle-herding populations in
Northeast Africa. That implies very low gene flow from the parts of
Eurasia that had the common European lactase mutation, as well as low
gene flow within Africa. Or, possibly, it may suggest that these
different mutations have different effects, so that they work better in
some environments than others…

In some ways, on some questions, learning more from genetics has left us
less certain. At this point we really don’t know where anatomically
humans originated. Greater genetic variety in sub-Saharan African has
been traditionally considered a sign that AMH originated there, but it
possible that we originated elsewhere, perhaps in North Africa or the
Middle East, and gained extra genetic variation when we moved into
sub-Saharan Africa and mixed with various archaic groups that already
existed. One consideration is that finding recent archaic admixture in a
population may well be a sign that modern humans didn’t arise in that
region ( like language substrates) – which makes South Africa and West
Africa look less likely. The long-continued existence of homo naledi in
South Africa suggests that modern humans may not have been there for all
that long – if we had co-existed with homo naledi, they probably
wouldn’t lasted long. The oldest known skull that is (probably) AMh was
recently found in Morocco, while modern humans remains, already known
from about 100,000 years ago in Israel, have recently been found in
northern Saudi Arabia.

While work by Nick Patterson suggests that modern humans were formed by
a fusion between two long-isolated populations, a bit less than half a
million years ago.

So: genomics had made recent history Africa pretty clear. Bantu
agriculuralists expanded and replaced hunter-gatherers, farmers and
herders from the Middle East settled North Africa, Egypt and northeaat
Africa, while Nilotic herdsmen expanded south from the Sudan. There are
traces of earlier patterns and peoples, but today, only traces. As for
questions back further in time, such as the origins of modern humans –
we thought we knew, and now we know we don’t. But that’s progress.

