+++
title = "Who We Are #8 India"
full_title = "Who We Are #8 India"
date = "2018-04-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/22/who-we-are-8-india/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/22/who-we-are-8-india/).

Who We Are: #8 India

Genetic analysis indicates that the vast majority of people in India
today are descended from two populations that Reich dubbed Ancient North
Indians (ANI) and Ancient South Indians (ASI). Different populations
have different mixes of ancestry from ANI and ASI, but most are composed
almost entirely of just those two groups – with some exceptions in
eastern India, where you see some people that expanded out of Southeast
Asia and speak Austroasiatic languages related to Vietnamese, and people
with East Asian ancestry speaking Sino-Tibetan languages, living in the
mountains. ASI and ANI were pretty different – about as genetically
different as Europeans and East Asians today. Note: ANI and ASI, as
acronyms, were created in order to obscure certain points that many
Indians don’t want to think about. By the way, in the sense we’re
talking about, biogeographical, ‘India’ includes Pakistan and
Bangladesh.

Let me give a more familiar example: most people in Latin America are,
to a first approximation, descended from a mix of Amerindians and
Spaniards. The mix varies: you can find populations that are 100%
Amerindian, populations that are 60-40 like Mexico, 20-80 like Colombia,
and so on. If you plotted ancestry on a principal components plot, most
people in Latin America would fall somewhere along a line. India is like
this.

On the whole, people from North India have more ANI ancestry, while
people in southern Indian have more ASI ancestry. The proportions
generally range from 80% ANI to 80% ASI. There are actually a few
populations that are close to unmixed ANI
([Kalash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalash_people)) or unmixed ASI
(tribal populations in South India such as Palliyar,
[Ulladan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulladan),
[Malayan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malayan_tribe), and
[Adiyan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adiyan)). Groups that speak
Indo-European languages typically have more ANI, while those speaking
Dravidian have more ASI. Populations (including castes) with higher
social status generally have more ANI ancestry. The Y-chromosome and
mtDNA patterns show that ANI contributed a disproportionate fraction of
male ancestry, while ASI accounts for the great majority of female
ancestry – again, much like Latin America.

Outside India, populations with much ASI ancestry are practically
nonexistent. Sure, you could find a touch of it in Indonesia (
particularly Bali ) and mainland South East Asia (Cambodia) from traders
and missionaries, but that’s about it. Not counting 20th century
movements, of course.

Who the hell are these mysterious ANI and ASI populations? Basically,
they are mixtures of three older, more fundamental populations:

A. hunter-gatherers that had lived in India for a long time ( barring
undocumented prehistoric replacements as have occurred in Europe). The
closest living population ( not that close, but distant cousins) are the
Negrito inhabitants of the Andaman Islands. Ancient Ancestral South
Indian ( AASI )

B. Farmers from Iran – specifically, goat-herders from the Zagros
mountains, sampled from around the 8th millenium B.C. (Iranian
agriculturalist-related)

C. Steppe ancestry related to the Yamnaya

ANI, the ancient north Indians, are about half steppe and half Iranian
agriculturalist-related. ASI, the ancient southern Indians, are about
25% Iranian agriculturalist-related and 75% old Indian hunter-gatherers
(AASI)

Timeline: AASI are there first. ASI forms as Iranian farmers move east &
is probably the basis of the spread of the Dravidian languages \[
[Elamo-Dravidian?](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elamo-Dravidian_languages)\]
. ANI comes last, and carries with it the Indo-European languages.

Question: who made up the Indus civilization? Probably a mix of Iranian
agriculturalists and AASI. Some Indus skeletons have been sequenced, but
the results have not been released, probably because the researchers
involved find them upsetting.

Another odd point: it looks as if there wasn’t much R1a in the region
when you’d think there already would have been. There is a possible
explanation, which also would explain why today it is so very widespread
in this subcontinent: it confers a fitness advantage, like that
Y-chromosome in horses. I call this the Topsy hypothesis.

Back to caste, jatis and all that.

Reich found caste interesting, partly because he grew up in a caste,
Ashkenazi Jews. He feels empathy for all the Romeos and Juliets held
apart by caste over the millennia – was there perhaps a little
red-haired girl in his past?

The situation in Europe is different from India, because there
practically everyone in India is a member of a caste, while in Europe
most people aren’t.

There is an overall classification called varna, which divides all of
society into four ranks : priestly (Brahmins) , warriors (Kshatriyas) ,
middle classes ( Vaishya) , and laborers (Shudra), plus the Untouchables
( Ness ). Varna probably influences the selective pressures that
populations in a particular caste experience. For example it wouldn’t
surprise me if Untouchables have developed specialized adaptations for
dealing with certain pathogens, and of course surviving hot lead.

But those castes are made of thousands – maybe tens of thousands – of
jatis, small endogamous groups. Generally one must marry within the
jati- it is usually impermissible even with another jati of the same
caste. Jatis have sometimes changed caste, but few individuals change
jatis.

How did this very odd system originate? Varna sounds quite a lot like
old patterns in PIE society, if you believe Dumezil. But Jatis are
another story. Some revisionist historians, led by the anthropologist
Nicholas Dirks, have argued that the Brits strengthened the caste
system, which they say was not very important in parts of India. Of
course  
[Megasthenes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megasthenes) was writing
about the Indian caste system two thousand years ago, but who reads?

Reich’s genetic analysis showed that the many jatis were founded by
small groups and have experience near-zero gene flow for two to three
thousand years. Other jatis with larger founding groups would not show
the same tell-tale genetic signature, but most of them could also have
been almost perfectly endogamous. I expect that is true for the great
majority of jatis: the long-term degree of of endogamy was probably not
strongly related to the formation process.

Partitioning the population into tens of thousands of gene-tight cells
is unusual and had to have some interesting ( probably bad) genetic
consequences. For one thing, it would greatly slow the transmission of
new favorable alleles. No Fisher waves in India ! Pre-existing
variation, for example the lactose-tolerance allele brought in by the
Indo-Europeans, could increase in frequency if favored, but new
favorable mutations would be locked-in to the jati they arose in. These
results show Nicholas Dirks and company were utterly wrong, unless they
think that perfidious Albion reached back in time to make India what it
is today. Being a fountain of nonsense is presumably why Dirks makes the
big bucks ( currently on leave, getting $434,000 per annum ).

A lot of people in India are fans of an Out-of-India theory, usually
positing India as the origin of the Indo-European languages, but that
can’t possibly be true, since as I mentioned you simply don’t see much
of those Andaman-like lineages outside of India. Nor does it fit any of
the linguistic evidence. or anything else. So they’re crazy, but who
isn’t?

The Aryan-Invasion-Theory sure looks to be basically correct. As for the
archaeologists saying that there’s not enough evidence of devastation,
Reich points out that they can’t really detect the fall of the western
Roman Empire, which hardly means it didn’t happen. War and migration are
well-known important factors in written history – why not in prehistory?
Because many contemporary archaeologist and historians think that
wishing can make it so. They should be paid accordingly.

