+++
title = "Reich’s journey"
full_title = "Reich’s journey"
date = "2018-04-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/18/reichs-journey/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/04/18/reichs-journey/).

Reich’s journey

David Reich’s professional path must have shaped his perspective on the
social sciences. Look at the record. He starts his professional career
examining the role of genetics in the elevated prostate cancer risk seen
in African-American men. Various social-science fruitcakes oppose him
even looking at the question of ancestry ( African vs European). But
they were wrong: certain African-origin alleles explain the increased
risk. Anthropologists (and human geneticists) were sure (based on
nothing) that modern humans hadn’t interbred with Neanderthals – but of
course that happened. Anthropologists and archaeologists knew that
Gustaf Kossina couldn’t have been right when he said that widespread
material culture corresponded to widespread ethnic groups, and that
migration was the primary explanation for changes in the archaeological
record – but he was right. They knew that the Indo-European languages
just couldn’t have been imposed by fire and sword – but Reich’s work
proved them wrong. Lots of people – the usual suspects plus Hindu
nationalists – were sure that the AIT ( Aryan Invasion Theory) was
wrong, but it looks pretty good today.

Some sociologists believed that caste in India was somehow imposed or
significantly intensified by the British – but it turns out that most
jatis have been almost perfectly endogamous for two thousand years or
more…

It may be that Reich doesn’t take these guys too seriously anymore. Why
should he?

