+++
title = "Class, Caste, and Genes"
full_title = "Class, Caste, and Genes"
date = "2012-01-13"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/01/13/class-caste-and-genes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/01/13/class-caste-and-genes/).

Class, Caste, and Genes

An
[article](http://www.newsobserver.com/2012/01/12/1771519/more-conflict-seen-between-rich.html)
by Sabrina Tavernise appeared in the *New York Times* a few days ago
describing increasing perceptions of class conflict in America, and
there is a lot of recent commentary in the press about
[this](http://www.economicmobility.org/reports_and_research/other?id=0017)
report from the Pew Charitable Trust that claims there is less class
mobility here than in several other northern countries.  It is not very
clear to me what the complaints really are or what alternatives exist.
If there is any substantial heritability of merit, where merit is
whatever leads to class mobility, then mobility ought to turn classes
into hereditary castes surprisingly rapidly.

A start at looking into genetic consequences of meritocracy is to create
the simplest possible model and follow its implications. Consider free
meritocracy in a two class system, meaning that each generation anyone
in the lower class who has greater merit than someone in the upper class
immediately swaps class with them. Mating then occurs at random within
class. There are no fitness differences, no selection at all, everything
is neutral. It is convenient to discuss what happens in terms of IQ
because IQ is familiar and, in northern industrial nations, closely
related to merit. On the other hand we have to keep in mind that our
focus on IQ is like that of the drunk searching for his keys under the
lamppost: we can measure IQ but have no good way to measure honesty nor
time preference nor conscientiousness and so on.

![initial
change](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/01/initalgeneration.png?w=173&h=171 "initalgeneration.png")

This figure shows an initial population with normally distributed merit.
A new merit based class system is imposed such that the two new classes
are of equal size. In this free meritocracy everyone with merit
exceeding the population mean moves into the upper class and everyone
with merit less than the average moves into the lower class. The second
panel of the figure shows the resulting merit distributions by class
before reproduction and the bottom panel shows the distributions after
endogamous reproduction. This model assumes that the reshuffling of
genes during reproduction leads to normal distributions in the next
generation within classes.

The process continues for several generations. By analogy with IQ the
additive heritability of merit is set to 0.6 so there are substantial
random environmental effects. The second figure shows the evolution of
class differences over four generations or about 100 years in human
terms.

![merit distributions over four
generations](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2012/01/fourgenerations.png?w=121&h=189 "fourgenerations.png")

Class mobility after the first generation is 30% while after four
generations it has declined to 10% and continues to decline after that.
The average merit in the two classes is about -1SD in the lower and
+1SD in the upper on the original scale, corresponding to IQs of 85 and
115.

Recall that there are no fitness differences in this model. Still, after
four generations, about 70% of the variance is between classes, which
can be compared to about 35% of the variance among continental human
groups for random genetic markers, i.e. colloquially class differences
are twice neutral race differences. (The familiar among-population
figure of 15% made famous by Lewontin refers to gene differences while
here we are comparing genotype differences of diploids, hence the
difference between 15 and 35.)

A surprise to me from this model was the rapidity with which classes
turn into castes: most of the action is in the first generation or so.
In retrospect this seems so obvious that it is hardly worth saying but
it wasn’t so obvious to me when I started toying with it.

Even though everything here is selectively neutral, I wonder about the
extent to which this free meritocracy mimics selection. Any mutant that
boosts merit in carriers will be concentrated in the upper class and
vice versa. Greg and I discuss in our book how environmental change
initially selects for dinged genes that are “quick fixes” in carriers
but detrimental in homozygotes, citing sickle cell in humans, broken
myostatin in beef cattle, and numerous others. Does this social system
mimic selection?

A correlate of IQ in humans is myopia, one idea being that IQ boosters
relax early developmental constraints on CNS growth resulting in
eyeballs too big for the socket, leading to myopia. I have read
somewhere that myopia is positively related to income in the US. Time to
try to find that literature.

