+++
title = "Three Debts and Five"
full_title = "Three Debts and Five Sacrifices"
date = "2020-09-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/01/three-debts-and-five-sacrifices/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/01/three-debts-and-five-sacrifices/).

Three Debts and Five Sacrifices

My last two posts focused on some of the considerations that the
dharmasūtra authors cite in support of the householder *āśrama*. As I
mentioned, the householder’s payment of the three debts is central to
these considerations. In this post, I consider some of the differences
between the householder’s payment of the three debts and his performance
of the five great sacrifices, with a focus on the *Mānavadharmaśāstra*.

The first three beneficiaries of the five great sacrifices are the same
as those to whom the three debts are paid – namely, the *ṛṣis*,
ancestors, and gods. Some of the sacrifices parallel the actions that
constitute payment of the corresponding debts. By reciting the Vedas,
the householder both pays the debt to *ṛṣis* and performs the sacrifice
for *ṛṣis*. By offering oblations to the gods, the householder both pays
the debt to gods and performs the sacrifice for gods.

This might be taken to imply that the first three of the great
sacrifices reference the same set of obligations as the three debts; the
two lists differ only insofar as the five sacrifices add people and
living beings more generally to the explicit list of
beneficiaries.[\[1\]](#_ftn1) This interpretation might seem further
supported by similarities between the five sacrifices and the early
formulation of four debts in the *Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa* (ŚB 1.7.2.1-6). To
the standard list of three debts that later texts adopt from the
*Taittirīya Saṃhitā* (TS 6.3.10.5), the *Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa* adds the
debt of hospitality to people. This debt seems to correspond to the
fourth sacrifice – the sacrifice of food to people. Olivelle suggests
that the fifth sacrifice – to all living beings – might have been an
extension – and then division – of this fourth debt (Olivelle 1993: 54).
In the *Mahābhārata*, Paṇḍu cites the same four debts (MBh
1.111.12).[\[2\]](#_ftn2)

This interpretation of the two lists of obligations in Manu, however, is
implausible for a number of reasons. First, Manu never equates the five
sacrifices and the three debts. Second, Medhātithi, who otherwise shows
an eagerness to read the five sacrifices into passages that do not
mention them (Me 3.77-78), does not equate or connect the five
sacrifices with the three debts either.

A third reason to think the two lists of obligations are distinct is
that a person might fulfill one set of obligations without fulfilling
the other. Most obviously, a person might pay the three debts without
offering hospitality to guests, and without offering sustenance to
living beings more generally. Additionally, a person might perform the
*śrāddha* ceremony for ancestors – and thereby perform the sacrifice to
ancestors – but not fulfill his debt to ancestors by having a son, or
vice versa.[\[3\]](#_ftn3)

Fourth, Manu claims that the five sacrifices and the three debts serve
to eliminate different forms of demerit. Twice he describes the
performance of the five sacrifices as a means to avoid the demerit that
accrues to a person as a natural result of worldly life. Having ascribed
the five sacrifices to the householder at MDh 3.67, Manu explains that

the householder has five slaughterhouses, the use \[of\] which binds
\[him\]: fireplace, grindstone, broom, mortar bowl, and water bowl. With
the goal of the undoing of all of these, the five great sacrifices were
arranged by the great *ṛṣis* for the householder \[to perform\] daily
(MDh 3.68-69).[\[4\]](#_ftn4)

Here Manu says that the five sacrifices allow the householder to avoid
the negative, personal consequences of the harm that he inevitably
causes as a householder. In warming his home, preparing food, consuming
food and water, and so on, the householder causes a wide range of harms
to living beings. In performing the five sacrifices, he removes any
demerit that he has accrued as a result, and hence, avoids the eventual
suffering that would otherwise result from perpetrating these
harms.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)

A later verse explains that even especially egregious wrongs might be
undone by performing the five sacrifices. “The daily recitation of the
Vedas, the performance of the five great sacrifices according to one’s
ability and patience quickly destroy wrongs, even those that arise from
great wrongs” (MDh 11.246).[\[6\]](#_ftn6) Among the great wrongs are
the murder of a *brāhmaṇa*, and sleeping with the wife of one’s guru,
which normally result in the loss of *varṇa* (MDh 9.235, 11.55).

As Olivelle argues, fulfillment of the three debts also eliminates guilt
(1993: 48-49). This guilt, however, is not a result of past harms. While
Manu never says this explicitly, other seminal texts standardly
attribute the three debts to a person simply in virtue of being
born.[\[7\]](#_ftn7) So while there might be some overlap between the
actions that constitute the performance of the five sacrifices and those
that constitute payment of the three debts, the difference in the
intentions of these obligations is significant. The five sacrifices aim
to remove blame for actions that a person has personally performed in
the past. The three debts, in contrast, aim to remove an innate blame
that is independent of past actions.

Another apparent difference is that a person remains under the
obligation to perform the five sacrifices even after leaving the
householder *āśrama*. Verses 6.4-5, again, state that the forest
dweller, too, performs the five sacrifices. Manu states no such
requirement, however, with regard to the three debts. On the contrary,
it counts the three debts as paid in full by the time the householder
becomes a forest dweller. All of this suggests that the three debts and
the five sacrifices are importantly distinct from one another.

**Works Cited:**

Primary Texts

*Mahābhārata*. V. S. Sukthankar, et. al. (eds). 1927-1959. *Mahābhārata*
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute).

*Mānava Dharmaśāstra*. Patrick Olivelle (ed.). 2005. *Manu’s Code of
Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the* Mānava-Dharmaśāstra
(Oxford: OUP).

*Manubhāṣya*, Medhātithi. Jayantakrishna H. Dave (ed.). 1972-1985.
*Manu-smṛti with Nine Commentaries by Medhātithi, Sarvajñanārāyaṇa,
Kullūka, Rāghavānanda, Nandana, Rāmachandra, Manirāma, Govindarāja and
Bhāruci, volume II* (Adhyāyas 3-4) (Mumbai: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan).

*Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa*. Albrecht Weber (ed.). 1997. *The Śatapatha
Brāhmaṇa in the Mādhyandina-Śākhā, with extracts from the commentaries
of Sāyana, Harisvāmin and Dvivedaganga* (Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit
Series).

*Taittirīya* *Saṃhitā*. Bhaṭṭabhāskaramiśra, et. al. (eds.) 1986.
*Taittirīyasaṃhitā* (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass).

*Vasiṭḥa Dharmasūtra*. Patrick Olivelle (ed.). 2000. *Dharmasūtras: The
Law Codes of Āpastamba, Gautama, Baudhāyana, and Vasiṣṭha* (Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass).

Secondary Material

Davis, Donald R. Jr. 2010. *The Spirit of Hindu Law* (Cambridge: CUP).

Lubin, Timonty. 2018a. “The Vedic Student” in P. Olivelle (ed.) *The
Oxford History of Hinduism: Hindu Law: A New History of Dharmaśāstra*
(Oxford: OUP).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. 2018b. “Daily Duties: *āhnika*” in P. Olivelle
(ed.) *The Oxford History of Hinduism: Hindu Law: A New History of
Dharmaśāstra* (Oxford: OUP).

Madan, T. N. 2003. “The Householder Tradition in Hindu Society” in Gavin
Flood (ed.) *The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism* (Oxford: Blackwell).

Malamoud, Charles 1996. “The Theology of Debt in Brahmanism” in David
White (trans.) *Cooking the World: Ritual and Thought in Ancient India*
(Delhi: OUP).

Olivelle, Patrick. 1993. *The Āśrama System*: The History and
Hermeneutics of a Religious Institution (Oxford: OUP).



**

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) T. N. Madan seems to equate the debts and sacrifices
when he says,

The scope of sacrifice was vast with cosmo-moral significance and
included the three (or five) daily obligations of the householder in
redemption of the “debts” mentioned in vedic literature. These number
three in some texts and five in others: the debts to gods, seers, and
fathers, and additionally to all men and nonhuman creatures (292).

Also see Timothy Lubin (2018b: 185).

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) In two other passages, the *Mahābhārata* cites five
debts (12.281.9-11, 13.37.18). In neither passage, however, do the debts
align precisely with the five sacrifices. The first passage lists gods,
guests, servants, ancestors, and the self. The second lists gods,
*ṛṣis*, ancestors, *brāhmaṇas*, and guests.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) This might be true even if the most basic reason to
have a son is the continuation of the *śrāddha* ceremony after the death
of the father.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) *pañca sūnā gṛhasthasya cullī peṣaṇy upaskaraḥ* /
*kaṇḍanī codakumbhaś ca badhyate yāstu vāhayan* // *tāsāṃ krameṇa
sarvāsāṃ niṣkṛty arthaṃ* *maharṣibhiḥ* / *pañca klṛptā mahāyajñāḥ
pratyahaṃ gṛhamedhinām* //

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Manu outlines a practice that accomplishes the same
goal for the ascetic, and elaborates some of the unintentional harms
caused simply by drinking, walking, and breathing (6.68-72).

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) *vedābhāso ‘nvahaṃ śaktyā mahāyajñakriyā kṣamā* /
*nāśayanty āśu pāpāni mahāpātakajāny api* //

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) The claim from the *Taittirīya Saṃhitā* that “just
being born, a *brāhmaṇa* is born with three debts (*jāyamāno vai
brāhmaṇas tribhir ṛṇavā jāyate brahmacaryeṇarṣibhyo yajñena devebhyaḥ
prajayā pitṛbhya* /)” (6.3.10.5) is repeated at *Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra*
2.11.33, *Vasiṣṭha Dharmasūtra* 11.48, and elsewhere. Donald R. Davis
Jr. (2010: 71) and Timothy Lubin (2018a: 110), following Charles
Malamoud (1996: 100), refer to these debts as “congenital debts” (2018a:
110).
