+++
title = "Right view vs true"
full_title = "Right view vs true statements"
date = "2020-09-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/13/right-view-vs-true-statements/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/13/right-view-vs-true-statements/).

Right view vs. true statements

Paul Fuller’s [*The Notion of Diṭṭhi in Theravāda
Buddhism*](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9780203010433), as its
title might suggest, is a dry, abstract, technical monograph. It may
also be one of the more spiritually beneficial books I have ever read.

I suppose maybe both of these things are appropriate to the book’s
subject matter, the [Pali
Canon](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/). One of the Canon’s
“three baskets”, the *abhidhamma*, is notorious for its level of
technical abstraction –and yet Theravāda tradition has consistently
held it to be of great spiritual benefit. Erik Braun [has
demonstrated](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/B/bo16744419.html)
how the modern Burmese traditions of *vipassanā* meditation, now
enormously popular around the world, have their origins in study of the
*abhidhamma*.

As for Fuller: his book is an exploration of the concept of *diṭṭhi*,
literally “view” or “seeing” (equivalent to the Sanskrit *dṛṣṭi*). It is
quite important to Buddhist tradition in general: *sammādiṭṭhi*, right
view, is the first of the components of the [Noble Eightfold
Path](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noble_Eightfold_Path). English
translations usually render *diṭṭhi* as “view” rather than “seeing”
because it also has a connotation of “belief” or “opinion”. So the Pali
suttas depict the Buddha’s opponents – Jains, Ājīvikas, and so on –as
having *micchādiṭṭhi*, wrong view. And so scholars of Buddhism often
understand *micchādiṭṭhi* to mean holding opinions with incorrect
content, which it does often mean.

But what was powerful to me about Fuller’s account is how it shows that
that is not the *only* thing that *micchādiṭṭhi* can mean. It is wrong
view when one holds a belief whose content is incorrect. But, Fuller
notes, it is *also* wrong view when one holds a belief with *correct*
content, *in the wrong way*. For, he claims, the concept of *diṭṭhi*
“has less to do with truth and falsehood, than with craving and its
cessation.” (7) Fuller points to the [Khemaka
Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/sn/sn22/sn22.089.than.html),
in which the monk Khemaka says:

> With regard to these five clinging-aggregates, there is nothing I
> assume to be self or belonging to self, and yet I am not an arahant.
> With regard to these five clinging-aggregates, ‘I am’ has not been
> overcome, although I don’t assume that ‘I am this.’

[Like David
Burton](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/02/unconscious-illusions/),
Khemaka is not liberated even though he assents to the proposition that
there is no self. Going further, Buddhaghosa in the Aṭṭhasālinī says
that there is a “conceit” (*māna*) “based in view”, which right view
abandons.

The key implication of all this textual analysis: one can be attached
*to truth*, to true ideas, and this attachment can *itself* be a form of
wrong view. (It would be strange to describe this attachment as “wrong
opinion”, which is a reason “opinion” is likely not a good translation
of *diṭṭhi*.)

*That* is Fuller’s really helpful point. He may not have been the first
to make it, but he did a lot to hit it home for me. It resonated in
particular with the background of my own anger. I don’t think the
*content* of my views was *incorrect* when I [found George W. Bush to be
disastrous](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/living-through-the-00s/)
or [thought my friends on the left were being
excessive](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/).
But the content was not the most important thing! I *held* those views
with such anger, such bile, as to make them wrong in the most important
sense: they did not help me see the situation clearly. My own progress,
on what I took to be the best philosophical path, was being *held back
by true statements*.

The number of true statements that one could speak, or think, is
infinite. Whatever true statements we in fact think or speak are
necessarily a subset of this number. And it is quite possible to focus
excessively on those true statements that most outrage us, in a way that
keeps our thoughts in a loop that distracts us from other truths.

The point is not far from [Wilfred Cantwell Smith’s
claim](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/02/truth-and-contradiction-beyond-propositions/)
that “Is his philosophy true?” would once have meant not “Does he hold a
correct set of philosophical beliefs?” but “Is his love of wisdom
genuine?” A true philosophy is like a right view: something less to do
with the truth or falsehood of statements and more to do with ennobling
and liberating insight.

I do think Fuller goes too far in his positions. He tries to claim that
*sammādiṭṭhi* is not a *diṭṭhi*, that right view is not a view. I think
if one is going to try to assert such an obvious paradox, it would help
if one has some textual evidence that actually claims it, and I don’t
think Fuller has much. (Maria Heim and Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad tried to
assert a similar claim, in a way resting on a presumed distinction
between *diṭṭhi* and *dassana*, for which [I do not think they found
evidence](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-2/).)
Fuller wants to claim that classical Theravādins do not have a
correspondence view of truth, and I think this is also going too far:
they regularly insist on the idea of *yathābhūtadassana*, seeing
according to what exists.
([*Not*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/)
“according to what has arisen”.) But, it is crucial that, [as in
Augustine](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/02/truth-and-contradiction-beyond-propositions/),
this correspondence is not primarily a matter of *statements*,
propositions. Rather, it is the *act of seeing* that must correspond to
reality – and one *does not* see according to reality if one’s view is
clouded by attachment and anger, *even if* one is assenting to true
statements.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/09/right-view-vs-true-statements)
