+++
title = "When does karma stop"
full_title = "When does karma stop being karma?"
date = "2020-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/20/when-does-karma-stop-being-karma/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/20/when-does-karma-stop-being-karma/).

When does karma stop being karma?

Evan Thompson has made [his last
statement](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
in [our
correspondence](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/).
Before I make mine, a personal note: our series of responses to date has
become increasingly confrontational in tone, in a way I imagine our
readers have noticed. Thompson and I have spoken about that tone in
private and we agreed that it is not where either of us had hoped or
intended for this conversation to go. I hope to end this series on a
note of gentler and friendlier disagreement, one that invites both of us
and our readers to new avenues of inquiry that the dialogue has opened
up. For one thing, from the beginning, I have appreciated Thompson’s
willingness to take Buddhist thought seriously by acknowledging where he
finds it inadequate; this is a valuable and refreshing contrast to the
kind of kid-glove treatment that it is too often given in religious
studies. I think that this aspect of Thompson’s approach is very helpful
for advancing contemporary discussions of Buddhist thought, and I think
I should have led my [opening review
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-1/)
with my appreciation of his work on that point.

Now to recap the state of our debate. Thompson, in his [June
reply](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
had stood his ground on the claim that karma is fundamentally about why
bad things happen to good people. My ensuing
[July-August](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/of-shopping-carts-and-cherry-picking/)
[round](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/)
[of](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers/)
[posts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-in-society/)
[addressed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/what-would-santideva-do-without-rebirth/)
[in](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/santidevas-passages-on-enemies-and-their-context/)
[detail](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/theodicy-is-not-the-core-of-karma/)
why I think he is wrong about this. While I think it was important to go
into those details, I think I didn’t spend enough time on the
big-picture questions that motivated them, which remain important to
both Thompson and myself. So, while I didn’t think the wordplay in [his
June
title](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
was accurate, I think [the current
one](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
was. That is, I did, to some extent at least, “lose the thread”. I am
happy that the final exchange can now take us back to those larger
questions.

I will attempt to restrain myself from responding to everything in
Thompson’s final reply, so that this dialogue can conclude with that
larger picture in mind. This approach will also allow these reply posts
to be more succinct: just two. (For that reason, I will post them on my
regular weekly schedule.) This first post will situate the karma
discussion in the larger discussion of Buddhist modernism. The second
will deal with what I think is Thompson’s most interesting line of
critique:about whether eudaimonism works on its own terms.

[Thompson’s
book](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300226553/why-i-am-not-buddhist),
recall, is a critique of Buddhist modernism in general. [I argued in
April](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
that that critique did not apply to a modern eudaimonist Buddhism that
naturalizes karma. Thompson [replied that it
does](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
on the ground that naturalized, probabilistic, or this-worldly karma was
“incongruent” with karma’s “traditional meaning and function”. Thompson
puts this latter claim in another, perhaps stronger and simpler, way in
the [final (August)
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/):
what my theory calls karma, he says, is not karma at all. “I’d call this
*shwarma*, not *karma*.”

Before we examine Thompson’s reasoning behind this claim, let’s note a
key implication of it. I appreciate Thompson’s discussion in the [August
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
of Ian Stevenson’s work on rebirth, which engages with Stevenson in more
depth than I’ve been able to so far. There, Thompson comes to a
conclusion that (so far) I share, namely that we do not have good reason
to believe in rebirth. Notice that this conclusion implies that a karma
doctrine which *does* involve rebirth is false, an incorrect description
of reality. Therefore, if non-rebirth karma theories aren’t really karma
(as Thompson claims and I do not), then all karma doctrines that *are*
really karma, are false. That is: for Thompson, karma, *qua* karma, is a
false idea. (As [Thompson’s book
title](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300226553/why-i-am-not-buddhist)
might suggest.)

So why does Thompson say that naturalized karma isn’t karma? In the
August post, Thompson makes an analogy to the evolutionary point that
after enough mutation from one species a new species is formed, distinct
from the old. I agree with Thompson that analogous transformations can
happen in traditions of inquiry and self-cultivation, where at some
point something becomes something other than it was. While I accept the
analogy, I do not think it settles the point. Thompson knows far more
about evolutionary theory than I do and I’m happy to be corrected if I’m
wrong about this, but it is my understanding that the question of when a
new species has emerged is far from easy to settle. [Even a quick
Wikipedia search notes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Species) that “If
species were fixed and clearly distinct from one another, there would be
no problem, but evolutionary processes cause species to change
continually, and to grade into one another.” In evolution it is often
not a simple matter to declare that a new species has or has not been
formed from the old, and I think the same is the case about a new
concept forming from the old.

This scientific question is an application of a more basic metaphysical
question: given that things are changing all the time, at what point can
it be said that a thing has ceased to be the thing it once was and has
instead become a different thing entirely? This was a question of great
concern to classical Greeks like Plato. Their answers revolved around
concepts like *eidos* (form) and *ousia* (essence): what is the
underlying property that makes a thing what it is, despite its
transformations? Such that when the thing no longer has that property,
it has become a different thing? Indian Buddhist philosophers were often
not comfortable with such concepts of essence, identifying them with the
*svabhāva* that they thought an illusion. I do not generally share their
discomfort, and it seems clear that Thompson does not either, for the
language of essence is what he has effectively used by speaking multiple
times of *the core* of the concept of karma. ([For
example](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
“I assert that the problem of accounting for why bad things happen to
good people lies at the core of the formation of the concept of karma.”)

I note all these questions to situate what I think is the real question
between us: at *what point* is a revised concept of karma no longer
karma but something else? When has it become “*shwarma*, not *karma*“?
Jains and other pre-Buddhist thinkers said karmic fruition resulted from
the act itself (as the word *karma*, literally “action”, itself implies)
– irrespective of mental states attached to the act. The Buddha of the
early *sutta*s instead identified karma with *intention*; Jains and
others understandably balked at this psychologizing innovation. These
are two very different concepts of karma, but Thompson allows that they
are both still concepts of karma. When the Buddha makes his drastic and
dramatic innovation, Thompson does not say that *that* is enough of a
departure from the original to be “*shwarma*, not *karma*.” (Shwarma,
incidentally, is
[delicious](https://www.mamaslebanesekitchen.com/meats/beef-shawarma-recipe/).)

Thompson distinguishes between the Buddha’s innovations and mine in this
way because he believes that the core of karma is “accounting for why
bad things happen to good people”, or “the problem of why there is evil
and an unequal distribution of happiness and suffering in the world”. If
this problem is indeed at the core of karma, then an innovation that
includes it remains karma, and one that does not, does not. I wrote the
detailed discussions in my previous replies with the intent to show that
this problem is not the core of Buddhist karma and never was, at the
pre-Buddhist formation of the doctrine or anywhere else. I believe that
I established that point in those posts and that it stands well enough
after Thompson’s final reply, so I won’t go back to it here.

Rather, I want to keep the focus on the bigger picture, by ending with a
conditional statement that I think Thompson could accept: *if*
explaining why bad things happen to good people is not the core of the
Buddhist karma doctrine, as I have argued, *then* my theory of
eudaimonistic karma is indeed karma –a modification of traditional
Buddhist karma theory, not something entirely new and different. Readers
may look at the previous posts and judge for themselves whether that is
in fact the case.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/09/when-does-karma-stop-being-karma?)
