+++
title = "Is the eudaimonist"
full_title = "Is the eudaimonist proposition true?"
date = "2020-09-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/27/is-the-eudaimonist-proposition-true/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/09/27/is-the-eudaimonist-proposition-true/).

Is the eudaimonist proposition true?

[Evan Thompson’s
critique](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
of [my eudaimonistic and probabilistic approach to
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/)
has two prongs: that it is not really karma, and that it doesn’t work on
its own terms. I addressed the first criticism [last time](link). Now
I’d like to turn to the second, which I personally find to be the more
interesting and important of the two.

Let us start with the word “probabilistic”, which I use in a
non-technical way. My eudaimonism is a probabilistic claim (as opposed
to a deterministic claim) in the same sense that “brushing your teeth
will prevent cavities” or “running into the middle of a busy street will
get you run over by a car” are probabilistic claims. That is, we assert
that these causal correlations are likely, not certain. In the case of
the busy street, I’m not sure we have a detailed statistical model of
*how* likely you are to get run over by a car, but I don’t think we need
one. Everyday observation is sufficient to determine that. In the case
of virtue and happiness, I’ve mentioned a couple of ways that Śāntideva
says one leads to the other, in this life; there is a lot more to say
about it, and I intend to say it in [my
book](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/a-book-on-how-virtue-helps-us-flourish/)
–not with a statistical model, but again I don’t think that’s
necessary. This is what I mean by “probabilistic”. I’m not wedded to
that specific word: so far “probabilistic” has seemed the most
appropriate word to express the concept in question and I haven’t been
convinced that it isn’t, but I wouldn’t mind expressing the concept just
described with a different term if a better one is available.

If I read Thompson’s objections on that point correctly, though, I don’t
think they are about a statistical model or its absence. Rather, his
bigger concern is this: “Normative concepts operate in the logical space
of reasons—the logical space of being able to justify what you say in
relation to norms and values. The concept of probability, however, is a
descriptive one that operates in the logical space of causes.” This is a
Sellarsian way of making a sharp fact-value distinction, and I don’t
think that such a sharp distinction is tenable. Without the kind of
connection between facts and values that eudaimonism provides, I think
that moral claims are left without any rational foothold – any reason
for us to follow them. A Kant is powerless against a Nietzsche, but an
Aristotle (or a Śāntideva) is not. For when normative claims are held to
operate in an entirely separate space from the world of cause and effect
(as they are in Kant), one has *good reason* to ignore those normative
claims and do whatever one was going to do anyway; the normative claims
are left as an empty “you just ought”, unable to motivate. In my view,
this is a problem that eudaimonism does a great deal to solve. It gives
us reason to be good, starting from the motivational set we already
have.

Now Thompson also says “the proposition that good and bad actions are
more likely to produce experienced good results, and bad actions are
more likely to produce bad experienced results isn’t obviously true as a
general empirical proposition about the world. Maybe it’s true, and
maybe it’s false.” *That* criticism – that eudaimonism might not be
factually *true* – is an extremely important one, and I [have
acknowledged](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/)
that the arguments I have made so far against it are insufficient on
their own. That’s part of the reason I’m [writing a
book](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/a-book-on-how-virtue-helps-us-flourish/),
and it’s my intent that this proposition will stand or fall on the
book’s case –some of which, I’m sure, will be developed in this space
over the next couple years. There is plenty to return to in the future,
which is itself a sign of the productiveness of this discussion.

I do need to say at least a little about it now, though, in order to
clarify what I’m claiming. First, Thompson treats the claim that good
actions bring about good results as separate from the claim that they
generate pleasant mental states. I don’t. I think that mental states,
characterized above all by less suffering, are among the most important
of the good results –for Śāntideva and for myself. (Thanks to this
conversation, though, I am realizing that “pleasant” is not a wide or
powerful enough term for them.)

That leads me into the second point, where Thompson asks why a
eudaimonistic claim would be true, if it were indeed so:

> Is it true because of some inherent causal power on the part of good
> and bad intentions, as traditional Buddhists believe? (Mādhyamikas are
> an exception, because they deny that anything has inherent causal
> powers.) Or is it true because of social and political structures that
> regulate human behaviour? If the latter factors carry more of the
> causal weight, then eudaimonistic karma loses causal relevance in
> proportion.

A major intent of my dissertation on Śāntideva was to understand him on
his own terms. How exactly *does* karma work, for him –*including* in
our future lives? To scientifically minded people like Thompson and
myself, the supernatural causality involved in rebirth is weird enough
that it’s tempting to write it off as mysterious unexplainable wooj:
it’s *some* inherent causal power, and we can’t really say anything
about *which* such power. But we do not need to write the supernatural
causality off in this way entirely, for Śāntideva provides us with at
least some sense of how he thinks karmic rebirth works. Charles
Goodman’s chapter in [Jake Davis’s *A Mirror is for
Reflection*](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/a-mirror-is-for-reflection-9780190499761?lang=en&cc=us)
shows us how even Śāntideva’s passages about rebirth in the hells are
often written in such a way that the suffering caused to the agent in
hell mirrors the suffering caused to the agent in worldly life. (As is
the case in many readings of Dante’s Inferno.) A man who engages in
sexual misconduct will continue being reborn in a hell where he is
devoured by women made of iron and fire, *because* his lust continues to
drive him toward them. One who murders will be reborn in a hell
encircled by enemies, alone and friendless. Goodman points out that
similar fates likely await murderers in this life, in ways that go well
beyond the punishments meted out by social and political institutions:

> Quite obviously, once you start murdering people, the number of
> friends who will stand up for you and help you diminishes rapidly,
> while the number of enemies you have (starting with the SWAT team)
> increases just as rapidly. Even more significant, the murderer comes
> to perceive the world as a hostile and threatening place, full of
> enemies. No one can be trusted; anyone could stab you in the back at
> any time. This world, in this life, becomes a harsh realm of conflict,
> full of fire and demons. The murderer comes to perceive the Earth as a
> hell. (Goodman 134)

Goodman’s point here – an extrapolation from Śāntideva’s writing on
rebirth – is a start (and I recognize it’s just a start) to answering
Thompson’s important objection about a hypothetical person who enjoys
tormenting young animals (or children) because of the pleasant mental
states that the act gives in the moment. As with tobacco or cocaine, the
pleasures offered by such experiences do not come in isolation; they are
part of a larger package of harmful mental states, as well as social
consequences not limited to institutions.

Furthermore, the Dalai Lama, in the [passage I quoted
earlier](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/),
makes it explicit that the causal process involved in rebirth *is* a
function of mental habits and dispositions, the same ones that are at
the heart of eudaimonism. That is, the habits that have led us to
internal bads in this life manifest in the world at the time of death
and rebirth, leading us to external bads in the next life. Once we
understand the causal power that guides rebirth in the works of
Śāntideva and the Dalai Lama, we see how it is closely connected to the
causality of habit and psychology that (we eudaimonists claim) underlies
eudaimonism in this life.

So – the big question – does such a view hold up in this life? Again I
think the truth of eudaimonism stands in part on the claim that a great
deal of human flourishing is constituted by the internal goods,
including good mental states, that virtue brings –rather than the kind
of external goods that social and political structures can provide. If
our focus is *primarily* on the latter, then yes, eudaimonism is likely
hard to sustain. (I think Thompson and I may be mostly in agreement on
that point.) The Stoics and Epicureans manage to be determinist
eudaimonists without believing in rebirth, specifically because they
take external goods to be valueless. I do not take their strong ethical
stance, though I do think that their stance is very close – closer than
mine –to that of traditional Indian Buddhists. (On this point I
[disagree
deeply](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/naturalizing-santidevas-eudaimonism/)
with Goodman: Śāntideva, just like the Stoics and Epicureans, views
virtue as the truly valuable thing, with external goods and bads being a
side benefit at best. That’s why he, [like most classical Indian
Buddhists](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/),
views political participation as fruitless.) I do, however, think that
the traditional Buddhists, Stoics and Epicureans have realized a crucial
truth: external goods are [much *less* important to our
well-being](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/a-book-on-how-virtue-helps-us-flourish/)
than human beings in most ages generally tend to think they are. To live
a good life we need to turn our focus to the internal causes of our
suffering, and the virtue that helps heal it. It is in that respect that
I believe a this-worldly eudaimonism to be both plausible and Buddhist.

Again, there is much more to be said. But I will leave the discussion
there, for now at any rate. It has been tremendously thought-provoking,
as well as enjoyable, for me. I hope that it has also been so for
Thompson, and for our readership. My thanks to Thompson again.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/09/is-the-eudaimonist-proposition-true?)
