+++
title = "Polycentrism The"
full_title = "Polycentrism The clandeity case"
date = "2017-12-16"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2017/12/16/polycentrism-the-clan-deity-case/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2017/12/16/polycentrism-the-clan-deity-case/).

Polycentrism: The clan-deity case



There transpired an interesting discussion about the polycentric nature
of polytheist fields. Be not scared by these words which seem as if they
arise from Field Theory of mathematics, nurtured by the valiant Galois
(which one would doubtless find beautiful if only one had the time). I
summarize it simply below for context. Then I will get to the main point
of this post – a remarkable illustration of it from my experience.

# Polycentrism : A summary for context

-   **Polycentrism**: “Many worshipers may worship a single God and
    regard the other Gods in the field as somehow dependent upon or
    aspects of their chosen deity.”
    \[[EB](https://storify.com/EPButler/polytheisms-as-religions)\]
    -   Example: Egyptian Isis cult
        –[SP17](https://twitter.com/Rjrasva/status/620209859540062208/photo/1).
-   **Polycentric social field**: Mutual acknowledgement of certain
    multiple Gods (whatever the center) and intimate entanglement
    between their lores and cults defines a polycentric social field.
    -   Examples:
        -   Acknowledgement of multiple deities who can each be treated
            as the center is clear in the vedic lore.
            \[[MT](http://indiafacts.org/polycentrism-many-one-problem-roots-yoga/#.VF0zlBFGjUZ)\]
        -   “Of a dramatist-philosopher-logician from 10th century,
            jayanta bhaTTa whose work serves as a prototype for the
            religion/counter-religion distinction and also alludes to
            the ‘tacit recognition’ we speak of…”

For slightly more details see notes
[here](https://sites.google.com/site/hinduvichaarah/svamatam/0-2-devah-deities#TOC-Polycentrism).

# The clan deity illustration

As family and friends know, despite being born a shrIvaiShNava, I have
(mostly attempting to tread the path of the revered mAnasatarangiNIkAra)
come to be quite reactionarily polytheistic (ie one with deliberately NO
central target of devotion). I therefore have been doing my routine
propitiations of hanumAn, garuDa, kaliga-mardana, chinnamastA,
hayagrIva, vinAyaka and narasimha with equal zeal (while still reserving
the first salutes for viShNu out of respect for my vaiShNava ancestors).
Indeed, I found the ekAntin path of – say dasyavevRka – quite
unappealing, if not ridiculous.

Now comes the strange part. Many hindu clans have a “clan deity”
(kuladevatA, hAt-perumAL etc..); and so does mine. Because of my
do-gooder proclivity, I happened to reconnect with my clan deity (a form
of viShNu) – who lives in a relatively obscure but locally notable
temple in the Tumkur district of the karNATa-s. After various incidental
activities such as enquiring about the sthalapurANa, correcting the
commentary of the hymn dedicated to him (which irritated me as a
connoisseur of sanskrit poetry and lore), talking to the archaka,
procuring a major ritual manual for him in a convenient form etc.. – I
felt the urge to again start saying that very stotra hymn (dedicated to
the deity in question) I used to hear every morning from nearly every
relative I happened to be living with – mother, father, grandparents
etc..

And I noted – how it felt special – different. A connection to not only
a deity, but also to a ***very particular individuation of the deity at
a specific shrine***. It’s the feeling one might get when rallying
around the flag of one’s dhArmika state. The kind for which you might
punch, shoot and kill without thinking. Upon reflection, I did this
double-take: **I may not be able say with a straight face that viShNu is
supreme over all other deities; but I can say that no deity comes
anywhere close in stature to the specific viShNu who is the lord of
champakApurI hamlet.** A paradox! – easily resolved by adding the words
“as far as I am concerned; your center may be different”. What a strange
and unexpected illustration of polycentrism – within even the same
devatA due to him residing in multiple shrines!

I still don’t quite get the ekAntin-s though, since they have 108+
shrines, not 1.

