+++
title = "Cell Line Infections,"
full_title = "Cell Line Infections, or, my dog has no bones"
date = "2015-04-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/09/cell-line-infections-or-my-dog-has-no-bones/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/04/09/cell-line-infections-or-my-dog-has-no-bones/).

Cell Line Infections, or, my dog has no bones



\[ I wrote this back in 2002\]

Host cell lines are an entirely new class of disease-causing organism.
They are strange and unusually disgusting, and if you read this you may
end up showering in Lysol for the next few weeks. Consider yourself
warned.

A host cell line is a microorganism that was until fairly recently a
part of some higher organism – roughly speaking, a contagious cancer. We
know of one good example, transmissible venereal tumor, also known as
canine venereal sarcoma or Sticker’s sarcoma, a contagious neoplasm of
dogs. It is not contagious in the same sense as liver or cervical
cancer, which are (usually) consequences of viral infections. In those
cases, it is the virus that is infectious; here it is the cancer itself.
Viable cells become engrafted onto mucous membranes and grow in the new
host animal. Transmission is usually sexual, but licking or inhaling
sometimes causes oral or nasal tumors. Chromosomal and genetic studies
indicate that all cases of TVT share a common origin – all share a
particular pattern of chromosomal rearrangement and carry characteristic
insertions.  
TVT is a real disease that affects a significant number of dogs in the
tropics and subtropics. It is not always fatal; in most cases,
especially in adult dogs, it regresses after a few months. This kind of
spontaneous remission is very rare in conventional forms of cancer.  
TVT is also very, very strange. In fact it is astonishing. It sounds
logical enough, and one can see how it might happen. Cancer cells are
probably selected for low immunological visibility, and cancer cells
that originated on one dog’s mucous membrane might occasionally be
transmitted by contact, escape notice by the other dog’s immune system,
and grow. Once this happens, natural selection would gradually optimize
transmission.  
But although the process is not so mysterious, the implications are
vast. First, we have here the most abrupt evolutionary transition known,
a jump from mammal to one-celled organism in a single step. For this
transmissible tumor, also called canine venereal sarcoma, is in every
sense an independent infectious organism, just as much so as Salmonella
typhi or Plasmodium falciparum. It reproduces and metabolizes. Although
descended from dogs, it is genetically different from dogs, with a
different chromosome number (57 rather than 78), due to extensive
chromosomal rearrangements. Since it cannot, as far as we know, exchange
genetic material with dogs, it is a new species.

Although its phenotype differs considerably from dogs (no brain, no
bones, no eyes, no fur, asexual) classification by descent clearly
implies that it is a canid and mammal – certainly the most unusual
mammal ever discovered. And classification by descent is the right way
to go. If you try to classify animals by similarity of surface
appearance, you’ll get into trouble. Recent molecular work shows that
elephant shrews, elephants, manatees and aardvarks descend from a common
African ancestor. An elephant shrew looks a lot like a shrew or rat, but
it is more closely related to an elephant. In the same way, the organism
causing canine venereal sarcoma is more closely related to a wolf than a
fox is, even though you need a microscope to examine it.  
Are there other cell line infections? There is at least one, a
contagious leukemia in hamsters. HeLa, a long established experimental
human cell line, comes pretty close. It originated as a cervical
adenocarcinoma in Henrietta Lacks in 1951, and is wildly successful in
the limited niche of tissue culture. It has repeatedly outcompeted and
replaced other cell lines via cryptic contamination, ruining a great
deal of research in the process. At one point, most of the supposedly
different human cell lines used were actually HeLa. Leigh Van Valen and
Virginia Maiorana have pointed out that HeLa should logically be
considered a separate species. and they’re completely correct. I think
that TVT, as the cause of a common natural disease, is even more
interesting, since its existence in nature suggests that there may be
many such cell-line species. The existence of a whole new category of
disease organism, of the same level of generality as bacteria or viruses
or protozoa, would be of the first importance.  
Why do I think that there are probably many other host cell line
infections? First, TVT exists in dogs, and dogs are really not all that
unusual, except for their close association with humans. That close
association probably does not make dogs especially susceptible to this
kind of infection, but it greatly increases our chance of noticing it.
We know much more about the diseases of domesticated animals than we do
about diseases of wild species. The transmission modes for TVT are not
particularly unusual and should work in many species. For all we know,
many species have one or more cell line infections.

Infectious cell lines may not be very noticeable – it seems possible
that they might pass for host cells. Certainly people have not been
looking for such things. In addition, diseases caused by infectious cell
lines would not have to look or act anything like cancer. TVT itself
hints at this; even if you think of TVT as a cancer, forgetting its
infectiousness, it’s pretty unusual, mainly because of that high rate of
spontaneous remission.

The right way to understand this is by considering the evolutionary
pressures on an infectious cell line, which are very different from
those that shape ordinary, non-transmissible cancers. In conventional
cancers, the cells that grow the fastest win out – if you call being the
first to kill the host winning. The amount of possible evolutionary
change in a nontransmissible cancer is limited, since all such change
must occur within one host’s lifetime.  
Infectious organisms, including transmissible cell lines, often do best
by adopting more moderate strategies. ‘Grow like mad’ is often not the
best approach; it is likely to harm or kill the host, reducing
opportunities for future transmission. Infectious organisms usually
adopt strategies that involve slower-than-maximal reproduction, allowing
extended host survival. Infectious organisms that depend on host
mobility for transmission, rather than some vector, are especially
likely to allow prolonged host survival. Thus we see that some
infectious diseases (like the rhinoviruses that cause the common cold)
are mild and never kill the host, some persist indefinitely while doing
little harm to the host (Herpes I), others, like HIV, kill quite slowly.
Diseases caused by long-established cell line infections might look like
any of these, but would probably not kill quickly. Diseases caused by
long-established cell lines should look more like other transmissible
diseases (tuberculosis, say) than cancer.  
We can make some predictions about the likely characteristics of cell
line infections. First, infectious cell lines would grow fairly slowly.
Viruses and bacteria have doubling times as low as 20 minutes, but cells
of higher organisms take considerably longer. They would probably not be
very hardy. Some bacteria and viruses can survive for long periods in
the exterior environment – anthrax spores can remain viable for decades
– but it is hard to see how an infectious cell line could do the same,
unless it has existed for a long time and diverged very far from its
ancestral cancer.  
Even though infectious cell lines would probably not be very durable,
there are still a number of possible transmission routes. From the
example of TVT, we already know that sexual and oral transmission are
both possible. From what we know of venereal disease, sexual
transmission usually implies vertical transmission as well. Respiratory
transmission is probably possible, since aerosols can transmit HeLa. If
the host cell line has existed for a long time, long enough for
substantial adaptation, we might see vectorborne transmission by
arthropods. Aquatic organisms, especially filter feeders like clams,
might manage to transmit cell line infections short distances through
water (and *there is a contagious leukemia of clams that looks very
suspicious*).  
Cell line infections would probably not be susceptible to antibiotics;
since antibiotics take advantages of the differences between host and
parasite, things like the bacterial cell wall or the bacterial ribosome.
Here those differences would be very small, and it would be difficult to
find chemotherapeutic agents that hit the host cell line infections lots
harder than the host. This could be an important epidemiological clue.  
Cell line infections may be capable of very complex manipulations, since
they start out with the ability to make every hormone and signal
chemical. In other words, they start out knowing how to push your
buttons. They might be able to trick the immune system or change your
behavior in ways that maximize transmission.  
If cell line infections are reasonably common, it might be that
immunological rejection of foreign tissue, which so complicates organ
transplants, is a necessary function rather than a side-effect.

The most important practical point is that those few people who are
actually looking for causes of diseases should consider this
possibility. There are diseases that look as if they might be infectious
where no causative organisms has ever been found – diseases like
sarcoidosis. They might be caused by some disease that started out as
your second cousin Frank. It might be older than that – we might find
surviving Neanderthal cell line diseases.

Gregory Cochran

P.S. There are some other organisms and diseases that have some
similarities to cell line infections. A number of parasitic organisms
have lost so many nonessential functions that it is almost impossible to
tell what they once were by any methods other than molecular biology.
For example, the organism that causes ‘whirling disease’ in trout is a
degenerate jellyfish. And there are known examples in humans where cells
from someone else can exist for long periods and, at least occasionally,
cause trouble. Many women who have had sons will have a few XY
leukocytes, even decades later. We routinely irradiate blood
transfusions, because when we didn’t, in rare cases totipotent leukocyte
cell lines (usually from close relatives, immunologically similar)
proliferated in the transfusee and killed him.

  

\[ 2015\] We now know of another example,
[DFTD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devil_facial_tumour_disease), (Devil
facial tumour disease), that afflicts Tasmanian devils, threatening them
with extinction. And there’s a paper just out in Science confirming that
contagious clam leukemia is also a cell line infection. Told you so.

