+++
title = "Ashkenazi Ancestry"
full_title = "Ashkenazi Ancestry"
date = "2014-06-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/06/24/ashkenazi-ancestry/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/06/24/ashkenazi-ancestry/).

Ashkenazi Ancestry

I’m looking at abstracts on Ashkenazi genetics from ASHG 2013 and SMBE
2014 – by the same group, with Shai Carmi as the lead author. They did
128 whole genomes, 50x deep.

They concluded Ashkenazi Jews were about 50% Middle Eastern and 50%
European. In the 2013 abstract, they were pretty specific: they
estimated the European ancestry fraction at 55% , plus or minus 2%. ( In
our book, we had a crude estimate of about 40% European ancestry.) They
estimated the split between Europeans and Middle Easterners at about
9000 BC: which sounds about the right date for the entry of the
Sardinian-like farmers. From other data (mtDNA) , and from the fact
that you see almost zero WHG or ANE in Ashkenazi autosomal genes, one
can conclude that the European admixture was mostly Italian, with some
southern French. Very little German or Slavic – by that time serious
endogamy had set in..

By looking at IBD segments, they conclude that there was indeed a
bottleneck in Ashkenazi ancestry, \~350 individuals, followed by a rapid
expansion. IBD analysis should pin this down quite accurately. They
estimate that this was about 800 years ago, but I would bet money that
it was a little earlier – more like 1100 years ago. In other words, the
founding bottleneck, the time when the ancestors of the Ashkenazi Jews
moved from Italy into the Rhineland, not a later persecution
bottleneck. I don’t think the population ever dropped that low in the
persecutions. I say this because of what the history looks like to me,
and because of certain things that suggest that our models of
recombination may be a bit off. 350 isn’t a terribly tight bottleneck,
as long as it doesn’t last long – and it’s hard to see how any
bottleneck could generate several unusually deleterious recessives that
concentrate in a few metabolic paths. Or make you smart.

Many people looking at Jewish population history have boggled at the
idea of a small group expanding to a few million in a thousand years or
so, and have come up with various scenarios other than Italy ->
Rhineland -> Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth model, such as Koestler’s
Khazar theory or Wexler’s idea that the Ashkenazi Jews came from the
East. Koestler and Wexler are both wrong, by the way – the genetic
evidence is quite clear.

There was never anything particularly particularly improbable about the
Ashkenazi population expansion. Moderate prosperity, which the
Ashkenazim had for most of their sojourn in Europe, easily allows a
family to average 3 surviving kids. Given that rate of growth, a
population increases by a factor of more than one million in 35
generations. Ask the French Canadians, or the Puritans, or the Boers.

But since anyone who can’t understand this by now never will, I look
forward to the first revisionist history of the Amish. Do you *really*
believe that \~200 Mennonites landing in Pennsylvania in the 1700s could
number a quarter of a million by 2010? Doesn’t there have to be a
deeper, more subtle explanation? Where do *you* think Martin Bormann
ended up, huh?



