+++
title = "The Experts"
full_title = "The Experts"
date = "2014-10-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/20/the-experts/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/20/the-experts/).

The Experts

It seems to me that not all people called experts actually are. In
fact, there are whole fields in which none of the experts are experts.
But let’s try to define terms.

You might say that an expert is someone who knows more about a subject
than some random dude off the street. That could mean that the man in
street typically had false ideas \[worse than a coin toss\] about the
subject, while the expert admits that he knows nothing, but let’s aim
higher. We’ll define expertise as something that not everyone has, that
gives you at least some predictive value (possibly a lot), and sometimes
the ability to control outcomes. Such real expertise can be proven
experimentally. Generally, that kind of expertise can be acquired (the
wisdom of the Occident), but it may be that not every one is talented
enough to be very good at it.

Then again, by a different but occasionally useful definition, an
‘expert’ is someone that society considers an expert, whether he
actually has any predictive power or not. We denote that social
position by quotes.

Sometime no-one has any any predictive ability: some stuff, nobody
understands. There’s a good chance that we will still have some some
socially-approved ‘experts’ on that subject.

You can have a situation in which expertise exists in some field exists
– there is a knowledge set that can confer predictive value, and at
least some people have that knowledge – while the people generally
considered experts by society (‘experts’) are useless, or worse than
useless. You can even have situations in which virtually *everyone* –
except for the ‘experts’ – has expertise on a subject. You can have
negative time trends: things go from a situation in which virtually
everyone knows certain facts to one in which the overwhelming majority
of people – including the ‘experts’ know things that just aren’t so.

There are plenty of examples. At the high point of Freudian
psychoanalysis in the US, I figure that a puppy had a significantly
positive effect on your mental health, while the typical psychiatrist of
the time did not. We (the US) listened to psychologists telling us how
to deal with combat fatigue: the Nazis and Soviets didn’t, and had far
less trouble with it than we did.

Fidel Castro, a jerk, was better at preventive epidemiology (with AIDS)
than the people running the CDC.

In the 1840s, highly educated doctors knew that diseases were not spread
by contagion, but old ladies in the Faeroe Islands (along with many
other people) knew that some were.

In 2003, the ‘experts’ ( politicians, journalists, pundits, spies) knew
that Saddam had a nuclear program, but the small number of people that
actually knew anything about nuclear weapons development and something
about Iraq (at the World Almanac level, say) knew that wasn’t so.

The educationists know that heredity isn’t a factor in student
achievement, and they dominate policy – but they’re wrong. Some
behavioral geneticists and psychometricians know better.

In many universities, people were and are taught that really are no
cognitive or behavioral differences between the sexes – in part because
of ‘experts’ like John Money. . Anyone with children tends to learn
better.

Along these lines, I’ve read Tetlock’s book, Expert Political Judgment.
A funny, funny, book. I will have more to say on that later.

