+++
title = "Disaster in the South"
full_title = "Disaster in the South Pacific"
date = "2014-10-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/03/disaster-in-the-south-pacific/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/03/disaster-in-the-south-pacific/).

Disaster in the South Pacific

The 1918 influenza pandemic hit every country on Earth – well, almost
every country. It missed American Samoa entirely, which is interesting.
It’s even more interesting when you notice that it hit the neighboring
islands of West Samoa harder than anywhere else.

Worldwide, the Spanish Flu killed 3-5% of the population – lower in
most developed countries, which had better supportive therapy. Medicos
had no useful vaccines or antiviral agents: in fact they mistakenly
thought it was caused by a bacterium. Doctors were useless, but nurses
were not.

In the South Pacific, the flu was spread by the SS Talune, which
regularly visited Tonga, Fiji, American Samoa, and West Samoa. Crewmen
had picked up the flu in New Zealand and spread it to those ports,
excepting American Samoa.

The islands of Western Samoa were administered by New Zealand, which had
recently seized them from Germany. The administrator (Colonel Robert
Logan) had little administrative experience (former sheep farmer) – he
felt that he needed approval from Wellington for any action and he
received no instructions. Medical officers also waited for instructions
– none came. In addition, plantation interests were important, and they
opposed any quarantine, which was also the case in Fiji. So, no
quarantine. Thing went very badly: so many were sick (\~90% of the
population) that few were left to care for them. Since food was mostly
in gardens, rather in cupboards, people starved while weak. Europeans
were less vulnerable, and those that could helped, but there were
relatively few in Western Samoa. 20-25% of the population died,
concentrated among young adults, the highest death rate in the world.

American Samoa was physically quite close to Western Samoa, less than
100km. There were close cultural ties: people intermarried and often
sailed back and forth. But the governmental structure was different.
There were no copra plantations in American Samoa, so you didn’t have
any powerful business interests lobbying for suicide. The US Navy ran
the colony. John Martin Poyer, an officer that had retired from active
duty due to illness, was brought back to active duty in 1915 to serve as
Governor of American Samoa.

Both American Samoa and West Samoa had advance warning of the flu’s
danger: they both had wireless sets and occasional mail.

Washington didn’t micro-manage American Samoa, not being all that
interested. A policy of benign neglect was interpreted by Poyer as an
opportunity to ***act*** on his best judgment***,*** in the finest
traditions of the US Navy. He imposed quarantine. That was harder that
it sounds, because of the frequent family visits between West Samoa and
American Samoa – but Poyer also had the support of the local chiefs,
who understood how serious imported epidemics could be. The people of
American Samoa self-blockaded, on top of official quarantine: they sent
out canoes to stop any and all visitors. They never had a single case.

Of course there was a disaster. Some people will think that it occurred
in West Samoa. Others will think that the real disaster was in American
Samoa.

