+++
title = "Ust’Ishim & the Old Race"
full_title = "Ust’Ishim & the Old Race"
date = "2014-10-23"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/23/ust-ishim-the-old-race/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/23/ust-ishim-the-old-race/).

Ust’-Ishim & the Old Race

There’s a new report out in Nature, on the DNA results from a 45,000 AMH
skeleton found in Western Siberia. It’s the oldest radiocarbon-dated
modern human outside Africa and the Middle East.

The Neanderthal admixture is there, about the same amount as today, but
in larger blocks than in people today. Less shuffled, so we now have a
better estimate on the admixture date: 50-60,000 years ago. The
skeleton confirms the new lower estimate of the human mutation rate,
about 1.2 x 10-8 per generation.  He’s equally related to Andaman
islanders, Amerindians, Han Chinese, that Mal’ta Siberian ANE boy, and
Old European hunter-gatherers (La Brana), but somewhat more distant from
modern Europeans (French and Sardinians), because of this basal Eurasian
component from the Middle East (found in the EEF, the original farmers
of Europe). These Basal Eurasians would have had to split from the AMH
population that did the main expansion out of Africa before they left,
so the split must have been well over 60,000 years ago. That doesn’t
tell us exactly when the Basal Eurasians *left* Africa, however. Could
have been as long ago as the [Shkul and
Qafzeh](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skhul_and_Qafzeh_hominids) skulls,
roughly 100,000 years ago, could actually have been far more recent.

We know that there *was* an expansion of modern humans into the Middle
East \~100,000 years ago – so the simplest explanation is that the Basal
Eurasians are descended from that early expansion. Otherwise we have to
posit *three* different expansions of modern humans out of Africa, one
of which failed after a while. If they left that early, looks as if the
Basal Eurasians didn’t sufficient moxie to displace archaic humans over
most of Eurasia (while the later dispersal did) . On the other hand,
they do seem to have invented agriculture.

Finding a decent-quality ancient sample that is a good representative of
those Basal Eurasians, as the Mal’ta boy is of the ancient Siberians,
would sure help clarify things.

Chris Stringer is quoted as saying that the study offers compelling
evidence that living non-Africans descend from a group that left Africa
about 60,000 years ago – but in fact it strengthens the case that there
were in actuality at least two different successful expansions of
anatomically modern humans out of Africa.

