+++
title = "The Advent of Cholera"
full_title = "The Advent of Cholera"
date = "2014-10-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/17/the-advent-of-cholera/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/17/the-advent-of-cholera/).

The Advent of Cholera

Most of this is stolen from William MacNeill’s Plagues and Peoples.

Cholera seems to have existed in the Ganges delta for a long time, but
it only spread to the rest of the world fairly recently. An unusually
severe epidemic broke out in 1817: it spread by ship to Sri Lanka,
Indonesia, Southeast Asia, China, and Japan between 1820 and 1822. A
British expeditionary force brought it southern Arabia in 1821, and from
there is filtered down the east coast of Africa.  It moved up into the
Persian Gulf, reaching Iraq and Iran, then Syria, Anatolia, and the
Caspian.

In 1826 a new epidemic moved even further, spread through Europe and
North America.

It had been some time since the last outbreaks of bubonic plague, and
most of the techniques for limiting its spread had lapsed. Some places
still remembered: Marseilles, for example, had experienced a late
outbreak of plague in 1721 and annually commemorated it.

Two main factors interfered with an effective policy response to cholera
(not counting ever-present human stupidity and obstinacy): bad science
and 19th century liberalism.

Scientists at the time had convinced themselves that the germ theory of
disease was just wrong. Yellow fever’s decimation of the French force
in Haiti made it important, and when yellow fever hit Barcelona in 1822,
French scientists were all over it. They concluded that there was no
possibility of contact between yellow fever victims in Barcelona, and
ruled out contagion. Mosquito transmission didn’t occur to them.

Worse yet, they generalized their error: they concluded that contagion
was *never* the answer, and accepted
[miasmas](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miasma_theory) as the cause, a
theory which is too stupid to be interesting. Sheesh, they taught the
kids in medical school that *measles* wasn’t catching – while ordinary
people knew perfectly well that it was. You know, esoteric,
non-intuitive truths have a certain appeal – once initiated, you’re no
longer one of the rubes. Of course, the simplest and most common way of
producing an esoteric truth is to just make it up.

On the other hand, 19th century liberals (somewhat like modern
libertarians, but way less crazy) knew that trade and individual freedom
were always good things, *by definition*, so they also opposed
quarantines – worse than wrong, old-fashioned ! And more common in
southern, Catholic, Europe: enough said! So, between wrong science and
classical liberalism, medical reformers spent many years trying to
eliminate the reactionary quarantine rules that still existed in
Mediterranean ports.

The intellectual tide turned: first heros like [John
Snow](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Snow_%28physician%29), and
[Peter Panum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Ludvig_Panum), later
titans like Pasteur and Koch. Contagionism made a comeback. I am not an
expert on that history, but I think that the classical liberals didn’t
argue that it would have been better for people to die than survive due
to state-imposed public-health methods.

