+++
title = "The Coming Plague"
full_title = "The Coming Plague"
date = "2014-10-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/11/the-coming-plague/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/11/the-coming-plague/).

The Coming Plague

Laurie Garret has an
[article](http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/five-myths-about-ebola/2014/10/10/6daf70de-4ffe-11e4-babe-e91da079cb8a_story.html)
out in the Washington Post. She say that there’s no point in trying to
block the spread of Ebola by travel bans.

The problem is, she’s full of crap. Look, there are two possible
scenarios. In both of them, r, the number of new cases generated by
each case, is greater than 1 in parts of West Africa – which is why you
get exponential growth, why you have an epidemic. If r \< 1.0, the
series converges – a case generates a few extra cases before dying out.

Everything we know so far suggests that even though it is greater than
1.0, r in West Africa is not all that big (maybe around 2), mostly
because of unfortunate local burial customs and incompetent medical
personnel.

It seems highly likely that r in US conditions is well under 1.0 which
means you can’t get an epidemic. However, r is probably not zero. It
doesn’t mean that you can’t get a few cases per imported case, from
immediate contact and hospital mistakes. As an example, suppose that on
average each case imported to the US generated a total of two other
cases before dying out (counting secondary, tertiary, etc infections).
Then, on average, the number of US citizens infected would be twice the
number of infected visitors.

Now suppose that a travel ban blocked 80% of sick people trying to fly
here from Liberia. We’d have 80% fewer cases in US citizens: and that
would be a good thing. Really it would. Does Laurie Garret understand
this? Obviously not. She is a senior fellow for global health at the
Council on Foreign Relations, but she is incompetent. Totally useless,
like virtually everyone else in public life.

We hear people from the CDC saying that any travel restrictions would
backfire, but that’s nonsense too. One might wonder why they say such
goofy things: I would guess that a major reason is that they were taught
in school that quarantines are useless (and worse yet, old-fashioned),
just as many biologists were taught that
[parasites](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/09/13/their-lying-eyes/)
are really harmless – have to be, because evolution!

In the other scenario, r \> 1.0 in US conditions as well, or at least is
greater than 1.0 in some subsets of the US population. This is very
unlikely- even more unlikely considering we can adjust our behavior to
make transmission less likely. But suppose it so, for the sake of
argument. Then you would want – *need* – to stop *all* travelers from
the risky regions, because even one infected guy would pose a huge
risk. Some say that blocking that spread would be impossible. They’re
wrong: it is possible\*, although it wouldn’t happen, because we’re too
crazy. In fact, in that scenario, we’d be justified in shooting down
every plane that \_might\_ carry an infected passenger. This scenario
is the one that fits Garrett’s remarks, but if she really believed it,
she would be frantically buying canned goods and finding a cave in the
Rockies to hide her family in.

\*the Atlantic is pretty wide.

