+++
title = "Śāntideva vs Singer"
full_title = "Śāntideva vs Singer"
date = "2017-11-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/11/26/santideva-vs-singer/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/11/26/santideva-vs-singer/).

Śāntideva vs. Singer

I’ve been fortunate in the past year and a half to meet [Charles
Goodman](https://binghamton.edu/philosophy/people/faculty-goodman.html)
at three different conferences, and to have long and stimulating
discussions with him. Since our researches have both focused on
Śāntideva’s ethics, we can critique each other’s ideas at a highly
detailed level – one that has often involved whipping out a physical
copy of Charles’s [excellent new translation of the Śikṣā
Samuccaya](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-training-anthology-of-santideva-9780199391349?cc=us&lang=en&)
to confirm our points.

Probably our central point of disagreement: Charles is known for
presenting a consequentialist interpretation of Buddhist ethics, and
especially of Śāntideva; in his talk at the
[IABS](http://www.iabs2017-uoft.ca/), referred to Śāntideva as “the
world’s first utilitarian”. Since I discovered Buddhism in part as [an
*alternative*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/)
to an [unsatisfying
utilitarianism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-a-break-with-utilitarianism/),
this has not sat particularly well with me.

This week I will look at the point in terms of Charles’s generally very
good Śikṣā translation. I have a generally positive review of it
forthcoming at
[JAOS](https://www.americanorientalsociety.org/publications/journal-of-the-american-oriental-society-jaos/).
That review focuses on the translation proper; I have more difficulties
with Charles’s introduction, which I want to examine here.

The portion of the introduction that I find problematic is the section
on ethical theory, which articulates an interpretation of Śāntideva that
I think is unsupported by the text. Charles claims that “Of all the
philosophical ideas that appear in the *Training Anthology*, *none* is
more central to the message of the text than that each of us is
rationally required to regard the welfare of anyone else as being just
as important as our own welfare.” (xxxviii, emphasis added) While it is
undeniable that this idea appears at a prominent place in the text (the
first of the *kārikā* verses), I think Charles greatly overstates its
centrality. Far more of the text is given over to the question of what
*constitutes* welfare for oneself or another, and how that welfare can
be attained. Most of the advice provided by the Śikṣā would be quite
applicable to a practitioner of the *śrāvakayāna* who seeks only her own
nirvana.

Charles rightly notes past scholars’ observation that the structure of
the text is provided by the fourth *kārikā*. This verse says
*ātmabhāvasya bhogānāṃ tryadhvavṛtteḥ śubhasya ca \| utsargaḥ
sarvasatvebhyas tadrakṣāśuddhivardhanam*: “the giving up \[*utsarga*\]
to all beings of one’s person, possessions and well-being \[*śubha*\] in
the past, present, and future, and their protection, purification and
enhancement.” But in this context it is surely significant that only
chapter 1 of the text addresses the actual giving, the others all having
to do with protection, purification and enhancement. For this reason,
[Barbra
Clayton](https://www.amazon.com/Moral-Theory-Santidevas-Siksasamuccaya-Cultivating/dp/0415599350)
doesn’t even note the role of giving in the text’s structure – although
[Richard
Mahoney](http://indica-et-buddhica.org/repositorium/santideva/siksasamuccaya-progresse-bodhisattva),
whom Charles doesn’t cite, did. It is also relevant that the term used
for “giving” is not *dāna* but *utsarga*, which has much more of a
connotation of giving *up*: the emphasis is not on others having the
thing given up, but on your own *not* having it.

Already we are seeing ways in which Śāntideva’s view differs at its
heart from the entire anglophone utilitarian tradition. For Śāntideva
could never agree with utilitarianism’s focus on maximizing a happiness
understood primarily as pleasure. The highly problematic and misleading
nature of this comparison is particularly highlighted in this passage:

> Some prominent writers in the utilitarian tradition, such as Unger and
> Singer, hold that we are morally required to contribute almost all of
> our income, wealth, and time to the relief of the suffering of the
> global poor. Śāntideva seems to teach a similar view, repeatedly
> citing sūtras that advise practitioners to give away all their
> possessions to the poor or to the religious community, to cultivate a
> state of few desires, to live by begging, and to travel to the
> wilderness to practice for the benefit of others. (xli)

But one cannot imagine [Peter
Singer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/01/of-drowning-children-near-and-far-i/)
ever urging – as Śāntideva does – that possessions be given to a
“religious community” of voluntary renunciants, when they could instead
be given to the poor. Nor could Singer advocate that one “live by
begging”: for him, one should be earning a large amount of money so that
one can provide as large a quantity as possible to the poor.

But to give to the poor is not the point for Śāntideva. I developed this
point at some length in my
[JBE](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/) article [“The
compassionate gift of vice”](https://open.bu.edu/handle/2144/18054). One
gives to the poor when called for, yes, but one also gives to the rich.
Even when the poor are mentioned as the target of a gift, the rationale
provided is either one’s own spiritual development or generating a
goodwill that makes them more receptive to hearing the dharma – not any
benefit that the gift itself provides. Someone who lived as Singer
advocated would not, on Śāntideva’s view, be doing properly altruistic
work, since the gifts given would be ultimately fruitless, not getting
people out of suffering and perhaps even trapping them further. (In
Bodhicaryāvatāra V.9, Śāntideva explicitly asks: “If the perfection of
generosity consisted of making the world non-poor, why is the world of
the previous buddhas still poor?”)

As an aside that I think Charles would agree with, a comparison with
Singer is with what Singer *advocates*, not what he does. Singer himself
admits [not living up to his own
philosophy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/08/of-demands-and-obligations/),
as compared to the many Buddhist monks who do give away all of the
possessions from their lay lives. It seems that Singer’s path is
considerably less viable, even on its own terms, than Śāntideva’s path
is on its terms.

[\[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.\]](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/11/santideva-vs-singer/)
