+++
title = "God and the reality of"
full_title = "God and the reality of the world (on Alex Watson’s contribution to a workshop in Hawai’i)"
date = "2017-11-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/11/13/god-and-the-reality-of-the-world-on-alex-watsons-contribution-to-a-workshop-in-hawaii/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/11/13/god-and-the-reality-of-the-world-on-alex-watsons-contribution-to-a-workshop-in-hawaii/).

God and the reality of the world (on Alex Watson’s contribution to a workshop in Hawai’i)

Do we need God to make sense of the world’s reality? Michael Dummett,
who was surely not known for his religious fanatism came to this
conclusion. God is, for this well-known philosopher, the objective
perspective from which the world can be known as it is (i.e.,
“objectively”, independently of how each single subjective mind might
imagine it). In this sense, God could also be said to be needed in order
to avoid the idea of a world as noúmenon, i.e., a thing in itself, real
but unattainable and therefore never grasped as it really is.

One might object that there is no intrinsic reason whence the world
needs to be known or whence the world needs to make sense for us.\*  
In contrast to that, Dummett’s thesis is based on the premiss that it is
impossible to conceive the universe as never having been observed. If
something exists, it needs to be knowable, and if it is knowable, it is
known by someone. And since no one could observe all aspects of the
universe, one necessarily needs an omniscient being as its observer.
Dummett sees this premiss as needed in order to safeguard
subject-independent direct realism. If there were only partial
observers, how could we be sure that there is an intersubjectively
available universe, which we all perceive in the same way?

However, as it has been argued by Alex Watson, this premiss is not
necessarily shared by Indian realists.  
Alex Watson asked if there is anything akin to Dummett’s ‘theism-realism
connection’ in play in Nyāya/Vaiśeṣika. He first pointed out that the
only reason Dummett needs God to preserve the reality of the external
world is that the latter is placed in jeopardy by Dummett’s strongly
idealistic premises. Dummett, for example, claims that it’s
unintelligible to conceive of the world as never having been observed.
Because Dummett believes such claims, the only way he sees of preserving
the mind-independence of the world is God. The world
‘as-it-is-in-itself’ can then be made sense of as the way it is observed
by the mind of God.

Alex asked how *might* there be something similar in Nyāya/Vaiśeṣika? He
answered that someone might claim (1) that Nyāya/Vaiśeṣika too has an
idealistic premiss, namely that whatever exists is knowable, and (2)
that realism is preserved by means of an omniscient Īśvara’s
all-comprending, single (*abhinna*) and eternal knowledge (*jñāna*).

But he argued against the plausibility of this claim on the following
grounds. (1) Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika are not really committed to an
*idealistic* premiss. They do not claim that for something to exist it
must be *known*, but just that it must be *knowable*. He sees this more
as optimism concerning knowledge than as placing an idealistic limit on
what exists. (2) The claim of the knowability (*jñeyatva*) of the world
is not accompanied in Nyāya or Vaiśeṣika by worry that in that case
without God we lapse into idealism. (3) God in Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika does
not play the role of preserving realism. Vaiśeṣika was realist before it
was theistic. Even after God has been introduced into the two systems,
we do not find God being mentioned in relation to the thesis that all
existents are knowable. And, finally, for Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika the
world-as-it-is-in-itself is not knowable by God alone, but also by
humans. For Dummett God has to be brought in precisely because neither
humans nor any other species are capable of knowing the
world-as-it-is-in-itself.

(Alex concluded by remarking that an example of a Dummett-like
omniscience-realism connection *is* found in the 6th century Jaina
philosopher Samantabhadra.)

My [contribution](http://elisafreschi.com/2017/03/31/god-and-realism/),
by contrast, focussed on another problem connected with the idea of God
as support for the world’s reality, namely the conception of God it
requires.

NOTE: The post has been updated thanks to Alex Watson’s thoughtful
comments. All shortcomings remain mine only.

\*Yes, it would be hard to imagine that the world as it is is not
knowable for us. But being “hard to believe” is not enough to rule out a
view, unless you have a fundamental premiss saying that you prefer what
looks reasonable (i.e. harmonises with your background belief). The
“reasonability” premiss would rule out all gnostic or Matrix-like
world-views in which (normal) people see the world in a way which is
innerly consistent, but is ultimately unreal. However, there is no
intrinsic reason to choose the reasonibility premiss over alternative
solutions.

The first two parts of my marginal notes on the workshop on Omniscience,
Realism and God/no-God have been published
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2017/03/22/omniscience-and-realism/) and
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2017/03/31/god-and-realism/).
