+++
title = "Wealth, Time Preference,"
full_title = "Wealth, Time Preference, Seed Corn, and the Collyer Brothers"
date = "2013-09-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/09/04/wealth-time-preference-seed-corn/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/09/04/wealth-time-preference-seed-corn/).

Wealth, Time Preference, Seed Corn, and the Collyer Brothers

[![220px-Collyer1a](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/09/220px-collyer1a.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/09/220px-collyer1a.jpg)

Individuals vary a lot in wealth, and so do populations. Many factors
influence wealth – income, the payoff for saving, historical experience,
etc – but people likely vary in their innate propensity to save. This
may be partly due to differences in time preference, but that assumes
that people save for rational reasons, and that may not be the whole
story. It could be that people, at least some people, just feel like
saving, and would do so even if it were economically irrational. And
other people may not feel that way, and don’t save much even when saving
has a big payoff.

It looks as if saving has had a bigger payoff in recent millennia than
it typically did in the distant past. I’m not say that as an iron law,
more as a tendency. There may have been ways of saving food for hard
times (winter, mainly) quite a while ago, at least in cold climates… at
least you’d think so. On the other hand, there is almost no sign that
Neanderthals had any means of preserving food.

It is at least true that a number of new ways of saving have been
developed since the end of the Ice Age.

Farming must have favored low time preference. At minimum, people have
to wait a few months for the payoff from their efforts in almost any
kind of farming. Some crops, like olives, have high productivity but
take several years to mature.

Grain crops can be stored, and seed must be saved for the next growing
season. In some societies, private property was reasonably secure, so
people could save wealth in the form of land or other assets.

In these new situations, where saving had higher payoffs, individuals
that had a greater innate propensity to save ought to have had higher
fitness. Having lower time preference, acting more like *homo
economicus ,* may have been favored, but surely a simple hoarding
tendency, more like a squirrel burying nuts for the winter, would have
been favored as well. Maybe there was selection for being more of a
squirrel…

Of course there is a distribution of such traits, ranging from a little
to a lot. In a population with a greater mean amount of
tendency-to-save, some would do so to a ridiculous extent. Hoarders.
They may not be equally common in every population.

If I had to guess, I would say that extreme hoarders ought to be rarer
among populations that had a shallow experience of agriculture and/or no
winter.  I have long wished that someone would discover a cave once
occupied by the Neanderthal version of the [Collyer
brothers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collyer_brothers), but this line
of thought suggests that alas, that may never be.

