+++
title = "Why focussing on the"
full_title = "Why focussing on the textual basis of the Seśvaramīmāṃsā by Vedānta Deśika An easy introduction for lay readers"
date = "2015-12-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/12/14/why-focussing-on-the-textual-basis-of-the-sesvaramima%e1%b9%83sa-by-vedanta-desika-an-easy-introduction-for-lay-readers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/12/14/why-focussing-on-the-textual-basis-of-the-sesvaramima%e1%b9%83sa-by-vedanta-desika-an-easy-introduction-for-lay-readers/).

Why focussing on the textual basis of the Seśvaramīmāṃsā by Vedānta Deśika: An easy introduction for lay readers

In the first [post](http://wp.me/p3YaBu-xO) of this series, I discussed
the importance of studying Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta through the work of
Veṅkaṭanātha. This post focusses on the importance of a specific work by
Veṅkaṭanātha, namely his *Seśvaramīmāṃsā* (henceforth SM).

Until now, the SM has neither been critically edited, nor translated or
studied. Even more interestingly, the SM presents itself as a commentary
on the *Pūrvamīmāṃsāsūtra*, the foundational text of the Pūrva Mīmāṃsā
school which consists of eight books, each including four or eight
chapters, but the published portion of the SM covers only on the first
two chapters of the first book.  
The SM has been published four times, in 1902, 1940, 1971 and 1981. The
most recent of these editions is only a reproduction of a previous time
and can thus be altogether ignored. As for the others, none of them
includes a foreword, an introduction nor a critical apparatus, so that a
reader has no idea at all about the manuscript basis they rely upon. It
is not even clear whether the occasional divergences between the three
editions are due to additional manuscripts consulted by the latter two
or, more probably, only to emendations *ope ingenii* by the editors of
the 1940 and the 1971 editions.

Within my current research project (FWF V 400), I planned to focus on a
study of Veṅkaṭanātha’s synthesis as reflected in his SM, but for this
sake I needed to verify the reliability of the published text. I thus
identified several manuscripts of the SM and started collating them. In
doing it, I have two main goals:

1.  the elaboration of the first critical edition of the SM
2.  the answer to the conundrum of the real extant covered by the SM

As for the first goal, possibly each text deserves a critical edition
and this is even more true in the case of intrinsically relevant texts,
of badly edited and of (partially or completely) unpublished texts. The
SM fits all these criteria, since for the published portion we have no
indication proving its reliability (it could have been prepared on the
basis of a single unreliable manuscript and have been corrected by the
various editors according to their own expectations of what the text
should say). Moreover, the editors themselves acknowledged to be at
times helpless by adding alternative possible readings in round or
square brackets or by signalling a *crux* with question marks. The
frequence of such *crux* increases in the second chapter of the SM,
where there may be even more than one question mark per line, so that
the text becomes at times not understandable. All these reasons make a
new and critical edition of the SM a desideratum of primary importance
for the study of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta.

(this post is meant to be a general introduction to the topic,
accessible to non-initiated readers. Should you find something in it not
understandable, please let me know with a comment below.) (cross-posted
on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
