+++
title = "Why studying"
full_title = "Why studying Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta through Veṅkaṭanātha An introduction for lay readers"
date = "2015-12-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/12/08/why-studying-mima%e1%b9%83sa-within-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/12/08/why-studying-mima%e1%b9%83sa-within-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta/).

Why studying Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta through Veṅkaṭanātha: An introduction for lay readers

The Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta is a philosophical and theological school
active chiefly in South India, from the last centuries of the first
millennium until today and holding that the Ultimate is a personal God
who is the only existing entity and of whom everything else (from matter
to human and other living beings) is a characteristic. As its name
already says, Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta sees itself as a Vedānta school,
i.e., as a school recognising the Vedāntasūtras (also called
Brahmasūtras) as one of its foundational texts.

The beginning of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta as an independent school are
usually connected to Rāmānuja (traditional dates 1017–1137), both in
India and in Western scholarship (e.g., in the work of the eminent
Viśiṣtādvaita Vedānta scholar and former director of the
[IKGA](http://www.ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Hauptseite) institute Gerhard
[Oberhammer](http://www.ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mitarbeiter/Ehemalige_Direktoren)).
Rāmānuja was indeed the first one to write a new commentary on the
Brahmasūtra, thus robustly collocating his school within Vedānta. Again
both Indian and Western scholars agree also on the pivotal role of
Veṅkaṭanātha (also known with the honorific title of Vedānta Deśika
‘teacher of Vedānta’, traditional dates 1269–1370). My research (see,
e.g., Freschi’s Veṅkaṭanātha/Vedānta Deśika, forthcoming on IEPh)
suggests that this role is even more important than it has been
recognised so far. Veṅkaṭanātha’s systematising efforts have not just
re-shaped Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta but, have in fact, *shaped* it into the
school we are familiar with now. It was Veṅkaṭanātha, for instance, to
include the heritage of the Tamil saint poets, the Āḻvārs, within
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, and to recognise as authentic the works on
devotion attributed to Rāmānuja. It is indeed true that traces of each
of these tendencies can be detected also before Veṅkaṭanātha, but the
very idea of looking for such faint traces testifies of how the concept
of what should belong to Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta has been influenced by
Veṅkaṭanātha’s own philosophical synthesis. In other words, it is
because of this synthesis, that both devotees and scholars agree about
the importance of devotion, of the Āḷvārs’ sentimental expression of a
self-oblivious love for God, of Pāñcarātra ritualism, of the Pūrva
Mīmāṃsā hermeneutical tools etc., within Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta.

Thus, any appreciation of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta must focus on the impact
of Veṅkaṭanātha, since it is only through such an analysis that one will
be able to recognise innovations and continuities in “Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta” before and after him.

Veṅkaṭanātha was a very prolific author, to whom more than one hundred
works in three different languages have been attributed (no reason for
scepticism concerning this attribution is known to me). As for his
philosophical works, Srinivasa Chari has started some decades ago a
series of monographs dedicated to a paraphrase and analysis of many of
them. More recently, a monograph on Veṅkaṭanātha’s concept of time by
another researcher working at the IKGA, namely Marcus Schmücker, will
soon be released. Nothing at all, by contrast, has been dedicated to
Veṅkaṭanātha’s confrontation and eventual absorption of the much more
ancient and influential school of Pūrva Mīmāṃsā within Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta, although the link to Pūrva Mīmāṃsā can be read (see Freschi’s
*Śrī Vaiṣṇavism: The making of a theology*) as the key factor
distinguishing Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta from the other concurrent school
within Vedānta, namely Advaita Vedānta. Against Advaita Vedānta,
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta and Pūrva Mīmāṃsā share key tenets, such as the
belief in personal souls, in the relevance of following Vedic
prescriptions even once one has surrendered to God, etc.

(this post is meant to be a general introduction to the topic,
accessible to non-initiated readers. Should you find something in it not
understandable, please let me know with a comment below.)

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
