+++
title = "La Raza"
full_title = "La Raza"
date = "2018-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/01/la-raza/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/01/la-raza/).

La Raza

Suppose you have a well-mixed population with some set of traits that
have some kind of social importance or interest. Or for that matter,
suppose their traits *are* utterly boring: that’s unusual and would be
interesting. You have to put a name to that population: race is a
perfectly good word. How different from some other population do they
have to be in order to be called a race? Different enough that someone
gives a shit.

What kind of origins make a legitimate race? The answer is, any kind of
origin. It doesn’t matter how they got here, it matters what they are.
I’ve been reading a tome in which the author says that many of the
groups we think of as races are fairly recent formations (a few thousand
years ago). Europeans are a mix of three groups ( hunter-gatherers,
Anatolian early farmers, and Indo-Europeans off the steppe) that were
originally about as genetically distant from each other as Germans and
Chinese today. He seems to think that somehow invalidates thinking of
Europeans today as a race. Or maybe he’s just blowing smoke. Anyhow, it
doesn’t matter at all. Europeans would be what they are, act as they do,
be as different and as similar to each other as they are, if they’d been
manufactured ( to the right spec) in a test tube 6022 years ago. The
same is true for everyone else: Amerindians are mostly a mix of Sibermen
and Chinesians (quite a long time ago), but although that is
interesting, it hardly means that “Amerindian” isn’t a real category.

