+++
title = "Who We Are #2 Purity"
full_title = "Who We Are #2 Purity of Essence"
date = "2018-03-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/29/who-we-are-2-purity-of-essence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/29/who-we-are-2-purity-of-essence/).

Who We Are: #2 Purity of Essence

I’ve talked about this a bit
[before](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/01/la-raza/), but this
point comes up repeatedly in Reich’s book, and it needs to be made
clear.

Again and again he says that races aren’t ‘pure’ – and he’s right.
They’re the product of various mixtures of earlier populations, some
such mixtures going back as 50,000 years \[and farther\] (when some
peoples picked up genes from Neanderthals and Denisovans) to more recent
examples like the formation of northern Europeans – a mixture of the
Mesolithic hunter-gatherers, Anatolian farmers, and fresh-off-the steppe
Yamnaya pastoralists. That plus continuing natural selection, that
gradually made northern Europeans paler and more lactose tolerant. And
turned their brown eyes blue.

10,000 years ago, there was no population, even early risers, that
looked like and was genetically very similar to the modern Dutch.

Operationally, how is that different from a situation in which Europeans
had been living in the same place for eons? Answer: there isn’t any
difference.

If that formation process had happened 100 years ago, there would be
differences. Suppose you mixed Chinese and Slovaks, 50-50, back in 1900.
You’d see some individuals today that look almost entirely Chinese,
others that looked almost entirely Slovak. There would be a lot of
within-group variation. But with more time, say a thousand years, the
new group would become well-mixed – almost every individual would be
close to 50-50. For almost every individual, close to half of the
alleles affecting a highly polygenic trait like height would originate
in the old Chinese population, close to half from the old Slovak
population. Everyone would be drawing cards from the same deck.

Is 5,000 years long enough for thorough shuffling? Sure. So what’s the
different between having been formed 5000 years ago and formation a
million years ago? – there isn’t any.

Why does Reich think that ancient purity, or the lack of it, makes any
practical difference? I don’t know. Maybe he thinks it’s emotionally
important to other people. But if members of a group only 1200 years old
are on average better at chess – they’re better at chess. Degree of
antiquity doesn’t matter. if they’re well-mixed, they have a new flavor
of their own.

Also, Reich says “Mixture is fundamental to who we are, and we need to
embrace it, not deny that it occurred. ” Obviously denying admixture is
silly – why would anyone deny reality? Other than every social scientist
in the United States, that is. Every facet of reality should be
acknowledged (it improves your odds) – but that in no way says that we
should necessarily *embrace* it. I mean, death by malaria played a big
role in shaping humanity – should we be Morris-dancing in honor of our
Lord Anopheles?

Mixture can be a good thing \[Kristin Kreuk\], but it can also be a bad
thing..

The arrival of the Yamnaya almost certainly resulted in lots of dead EEF
men (the previously common Y lineages are almost gone today) and the
kidnapping and rape of the younger, prettier EEF women. If one of those
men on the losing side didn’t quite see the big picture (eventually
resulting in you and me) and did his level best to stop ‘mixture’ in its
bloody tracks, I for one can understand his point of view. How was he
better from the invaders? ” Because we live here.”

Reich says this, and things like this, apparently because he’s trying to
curry favor with current-year liberalism, whose most fervent tenet is
that Europe just has to import as many dumb, hostile people as possible.
Rather weird – you don’t normally think of endorsing a bloody
Völkerwanderung as a way of proving you’re really PC at heart – but it’s
[year
2018](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B001L12PLE/ref=as_li_qf_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B001L12PLE&linkId=e92e67a6c447cb37da8d60cf7414e106)!

Maybe he actually believes this too, but I don’t see a lot of Somalis
working in his lab. “Belief” – it’s complicated.

