+++
title = "Is karma about why bad"
full_title = "Is karma about why bad things happen to good people?"
date = "2020-05-24"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/24/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/24/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/).

Is karma about why bad things happen to good people?

Continuing
[my](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/on-the-challenging-aspects-of-tradition/)
[reply](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/on-being-buddhist-and-distinctively-buddhist/)
[to](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/)
Evan Thompson, I will focus next on karma, because the reinterpretation
of karma is central to my own eudaimonist Buddhism, and therefore it
forms a focal point in [Thompson’s
critique](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/).
Karma is Thompson’s example of how I and other Buddhist modernists
“recast Buddhist concepts in a way that makes them incongruent with
their traditional meanings and functions.” Why? Thompson asserts that
eudaimonism is not the core idea of karma, “if ‘core’ means what lies at
the heart of the concept’s formation. On the contrary, the core problem,
which drove the formation of the concept, is to explain why bad things
happen to good people.”

I disagree entirely with this assertion.

Before I explain why, I think it’s helpful to first recall a basic point
about the concept itself to avoid confusion. “Karma” as it is used in
English, including in this conversation, means something a little
different from the Sanskrit/Pali terms *karma/kamma*, which simply mean
“action”. When we are referring to “karma” in English, we are really
talking about *karmavipāka* or *karmaphala* (the “ripening” or “fruit”
of action), or alternately about the paired concepts of[*puṇya/puñña*
for “good karma” and *pāpa* for “bad
karma”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/translating-pu%e1%b9%87ya-and-papa/),
which identify the process by which the seed of action comes to ripen as
a fruit.

So, what is the core of the idea of (English) karma, aka Sanskrit
*karmavipāka*? Thompson appears to think that the “core” of an idea is
constituted by the reasons that that idea first historically appeared,
what “drove the formation” of the concept. I do not. As a philosopher, I
am not primarily concerned with the philological question of origins. In
my view, the philosophical core of Buddhist *karmavipāka* or
*puṇya/pāpa* is the way that the concept functions in classical Buddhist
ethical and other philosophical texts. I will turn to that functioning
in an upcoming post. But first I do want to examine in more detail
Thompson’s claim about questions that drove the concept’s formation.

For even if we are looking to the history of the formation of the
concept of *karmavipāka*, as Thompson recommends, it is still simply not
the case that the core problem which drove this concept “is to explain
why bad things happen to good people.” To support that claim, Thompson
links to Gananath Obeyesekere’s [*Imagining
Karma*](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520232433/imagining-karma). But
Obeyesekere makes no such claim in that book! Obeyesekere’s argument in
*Imagining Karma* is that concepts of “non-ethicized” rebirth predate
those of *karmavipāka*; that is, the nature of rebirth originally (in
the Vedas) had no connection to good or bad actions. We first start
seeing the ethicized *karmavipāka* in the [Bṛhadāranyaka
Upaniṣad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brihadaranyaka_Upanishad), where
the sage Yājñavalkya says “A man turns into something good by good
action and into something bad by bad action.” But the question this is
in response to is: “when a man has died… what then happens to that
person?” (BaU 3.2.12-13, quoted on Obeyesekere 4) Here when the
formation of the concept of *karmavipāka* is being driven, it is *that*
question, the nature of the afterlife, which is being answered. By
contrast, in this and other related passages in the early Upaniṣads, the
question “why do bad things happen to good people?”, or anything
analogous to it, is not asked.

I don’t think it should be a surprise that early Indian texts generally
do not ask the question of why bad things happen to good people.
Thompson points out the analogy of that question to theodicy in the
Abrahamic traditions. But there is a reason theodicy is *called*
theodicy: the question arises as a deep problem for those traditions
*because* they posit an omnipotent omnibenevolent god. It seems obvious
that such a being would be both able and willing to prevent the terrible
sufferings that befall good people in the world, yet the [manifest
suffering of the
world](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/12/could-we-please-stop-talking-about-the-problem-of-evil/)
also makes it seem obvious that he is not actually doing so. I think
that this problem is damning for these traditions, and it is a core
reason I [do not believe in their
God](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/09/are-there-non-omnipotent-gods/)
or anything like him. In Indic traditions, on the other hand, no such
being is posited, and so the question of theodicy is far less urgent.
(Other questions pose considerably bigger problems for them– like, if
there’s no self, who gets *karmavipāka*?) It so happens that if people
in Indic traditions *want* an answer to the question of why bad things
happen to good people, they can have one, but [they don’t *need*
one](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/karma-answering-a-question-not-worth-asking/).
And so it should not be any surprise that such a question was not what
historically drove the formation of concepts of ethicized rebirth and
ethicized karma. Now Thompson is absolutely right to point out that
eudaimonists do face an analogous problem to theodicy, and I will be
addressing that point later this week –but for now the point is simply
that no such problem ever drove the formation of the concept of karma.

All of this is the case centuries before Buddhism comes on the scene. By
the time that it does, the ethicized doctrine of good and bad karma,
tied to rebirth, has already long been operating, in both Upaniṣadic and
Jain traditions and probably more. In the Indian context, karma is not a
distinctively Buddhist doctrine. The Buddha takes the karma doctrine up,
but it is what he *does* with it that is distinctively Buddhist – and
that is to psychologize it! What appears in early Buddhist texts and
does not appear in Jain or Upaniṣadic traditions is the identification
of karma with *cetanā*, intention (as in the [Nibbedhika
Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an06/an06.063.than.html)
and elsewhere). For the Buddha of the *sutta*s, *kamma*, action, is no
longer just a matter of a physical action and its effects, but of a
mental state associated with it. That is why Jain monks wear masks and
sweep brooms to avoid killing microbes (*nigoḍa*), and Buddhists do not:
the killing of microbes is *unintentional*, and therefore Jains view it
as karmically bad and Buddhists do not. The intentionality of karma, or
lack thereof, is a theme that repeatedly shows up at the heart of
Jain-Buddhist philosophical debates. So what the Buddha adds to
preexisting discussions of karma –which had never been driven by
theodicy-like questions –is exactly the psychological dimension.

There *are* some Buddhist texts that invoke *puṇya/pāpa* to explain a
person’s fate. Obeyesekere refers to passages in the Majjhima Nikāya and
in the Milindapañhā that ask “what is the cause and condition why human
beings are seen to be inferior and superior?” (in the sense of
short-lived and long-lived, ugly and beautiful, rich and poor, etc.) And
the Buddha replies that the reason is their action (*kamma*). But not
only do these passages come centuries later than the concept’s formation
(and therefore do not drive it), they do not even ask “why do bad things
happen to good people?” They are simply asking for an explanation of the
fact that some people are better off than others; the goodness or
badness of the people is part of the answer, not the question.

As noted, however, I don’t think the question of what drove the initial
formation of the karma concept is the most helpful one to ask. In my
view, that does not indicate what is at the concept’s core. Rather, its
philosophical core has to do with its function in Buddhist philosophical
texts. And so I stand by [my original
claim](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/),
“that the core idea of karma is also the core idea of eudaimonism: that
an agent’s good actions and good states of character typically improve
that agent’s well-being (flourishing, eudaimonia).” I will defend that
claim next time.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4795)
