+++
title = "How to define valid"
full_title = "How to define valid cognition (against Buddhists) if you are Śālikanātha?"
date = "2020-05-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/10/how-to-define-valid-cognition-against-buddhists-if-you-are-salikanatha/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/10/how-to-define-valid-cognition-against-buddhists-if-you-are-salikanatha/).

How to define valid cognition (against Buddhists) if you are Śālikanātha?

The beginning of Śālikanātha’s *Pramāṇapārāyaṇa* is dedicated to a
discussion of how to define pramāṇa ‘instrument of valid cognition’. As
it was custom since Dignāga’s innovation in the philosophical style,
Śālikanātha quotes and refutes several positions.

The first ones are various Buddhist positions. Dharmakīrti’s definition
connects the criterion of avisaṃvāditva literally ‘being
non-controversial’ but more likely ‘being non-erroneous’ to that of
arthakriyā ‘causal efficacy’. Śālikanātha refutes it on the ground of
the fact that this does not exclude smṛti ‘memory’, which can also be
avisaṃvādin. At this point, various Buddhist voices try to fix this
possible flaw in the definition. It is not clear to me how many of them
are historically attested and how many are concocted by Śālikanātha as
logically possible responses. Some of them claim that smṛti is excluded
because it is conceptual (vikalpa), but this is a dangerous move, since
Śālikanātha can immediately reply that, based on that, also inference
should be refuted, since also inference is conceptual.

A further possibility is to say that smṛti is not pramāṇa because it
lacks arthakriyā. But is this really the case? One might say that the
object of smṛti is always something past and that it therefore cannot
lead you to attain any present object. However, this is also true, in
some sense, for anumāna (remember that in the case of anumāna you
usually infer the cause from its effect and that inferring the effect
from the cause is not a valid anumāna). One might correct the previous
point by suggesting that in anumāna the inferential reason is connected
to the probandum, which can therefore be said to be attained. However,
this, again, holds true also for smṛti, since also in the case of smṛti
there is a connection with the object, via mnestic traces (saṃskāra).
Why should this be so different from the case of anumāna?

The sequence of voices makes it difficult for one to identify the main
speaker and the various uttarapakṣin, but the main thread remains clear,
namely:

-   Dharmakīrti’s definition is too broad, since it does not exclude
    smṛti
-   Other Buddhist attempts to exclude smṛti are futile, since they
    would end up excluding also anumāna

So, how can smṛti be excluded? Only through the Mīmāṃsā definition of
pramāṇa, namely *aprāptaprāpaka* ‘causing one to understand something
which was not known before’.

(Cross-posted on my personal blog)
