+++
title = "Endorsing and rejecting"
full_title = "Endorsing and rejecting the views of the modern West"
date = "2020-05-03"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/03/endorsing-and-rejecting-the-views-of-the-modern-west/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/03/endorsing-and-rejecting-the-views-of-the-modern-west/).

Endorsing and rejecting the views of the modern West

Friend of this blog [Seth Zuihō
Segall](https://www.existentialbuddhist.com/author/sethsegall/) has a
new book out entitled [Buddhism and Human
Flourishing](https://www.palgrave.com/gp/book/9783030370268), which he
kindly sent me a pre-print review copy of. There is much to like in the
book and I am very sympathetic to it. Indeed, my first worry about the
book was that I would be *too* sympathetic. For the basic idea of the
book –a modern Buddhist ethics understood in roughly Aristotelian terms
– is quite close to the book I have been starting to work on writing
myself. Did Segall scoop me?

Having read the book, I think this is not the case: my take on Buddhist
ethics does turn out to be significantly different from his. To an
outsider this will no doubt look like the narcissism of small
differences, but that is probably in the nature of scholarly
disagreement. We are indeed both Aristotelian Buddhists who deemphasize
rebirth –a kinship I already pointed to in my [review of Evan
Thompson’s
book](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/).
And we both take a constructive perspective, arguing *for* this
Aristotelian Buddhism – in contrast to Damien Keown, say, who aims to
[identify
similarities](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/)
between Buddhism and Aristotle but does not endorse this position. Keown
rightly points to the need for the study of Buddhist ethics to move
beyond mere descriptive ethics, but he only moves to meta-ethics and not
to normative ethics, thus still putting his work in [ethics
studies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/ethics-vs-ethics-studies/)
rather than of ethics proper. Segall and I, by contrast, are explicitly
normative about our modern Aristotelian Buddhism. So we are on the same
page in many respects. I’m also delighted to see him cite Love of All
Wisdom twice in the book (though, interestingly to me, neither citation
is about either Buddhism or Aristotle).

All of that said, I have some significant differences with Segall’s
approach. Core to this: I think Segall is too ready to take the views
and attitudes current in the modern West as given by default. I think it
is important to engage more critically with those views and attitudes
–both to endorse them and to reject them.

On the side of endorsing modern Western views: Segall and I are in
agreement in leaving rebirth out of our conception of Buddhism. But in
my view, he puts the point much too weakly: “Please note that my
argument is not that rebirth is untrue, but only that most Westerners
don’t find it compelling due to their preexisting prior beliefs.” (7) I
don’t think this is enough. On normative questions, there could be a
case made that different ways of life are appropriate to the different
values and customs of different societies. I don’t think such a case can
be made about whether people’s mental states transmigrate after death
into a new birth. Either we get reborn or we don’t! One way or another,
rebirth or its absence applies to everyone: I have never heard *anybody*
make the claim that Tibetans get reborn but Canadians don’t.

So I don’t think it is appropriate to say, “If someone else finds the
traditional model more compelling, more consistent with his or her
understanding of the world, and more inspiring for practice, then the
traditional model might be the best model for that person.” (69-70)
Either human beings are reborn according to the traditional model or we
aren’t. From the psychological evidence I have seen so far, it appears
that we aren’t; the case for rebirth looks [a lot like
creationism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/),
adhering to a major traditional doctrine that scientific evidence
rejects. I don’t think we should say that “the traditional model” of
creationism is better than evolution for people who find *that* “more
consistent with their understanding of the world”. Those creationists
are wrong, and should be regarded like anti-vaxxers, flat earthers, and
others who hold demonstrably false beliefs. If we indeed aren’t reborn,
the traditional model needs rethinking –or if it turns out we *are*,
then Segall’s and my model of the psyche needs even more rethinking. One
way or another, rebirth is no more culturally relative than the
existence of the pancreas.

On the flip side, the side of rejecting Western views: Segall says his
model “restricts itself to the kinds of claims that modern Westerners
can potentially endorse without reservation.” (172) If we modern
Westerners have reservations about endorsing anything, it seems, then it
has to go.

And I think there is a big problem with such an approach. If your
Buddhism restricts itself to only those things that “modern Westerners
can potentially endorse without reservation”, then it becomes reasonable
to ask (as [David
Chapman](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/09/does-it-matter-what-we-call-buddhist/)
and [Evan
Thompson](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
effectively both do, in different ways) why we should even bother with
Buddhism at all –what difference it makes to *be* a Buddhist, as
opposed to “(say) a non-Buddhist college-educated left-leaning
Californian.”

I think Buddhism does offer a number of important ideas that will give
modern Westerners *lots* of reservations, such as the [rejection of
righteous
anger](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/),
the [dangers of political
participation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/),
the [detached attitude to time and material
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/).
And I think it is *important* that modern Westerners have reservations
about these ideas, for I think the reservations themselves indicate that
the texts have something to teach us – that we may have something to
learn from them that we didn’t already know. The most valuable lessons a
tradition has to teach us are the ones that we first have reservations
about, that first look [implausible and
unappealing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/).
Once we have investigated those ideas further, we may continue to find
many of them unappealing, but we may *also* find some of them more
plausible than they did at first glance, and it is in that respect that
the tradition can genuinely change us for the better. If we restrict
ourselves to the uncontroversial views that we can potentially endorse
without reservation, we close ourselves off to that kind of learning,
and I think that is a tragic loss.

So Segall makes some reference to the kinds of conflicts that [my
dissertation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/other-writings/) explored,
between a classical Buddhist view typified by Śāntideva and a modern
Western one typified by Martha Nussbaum. His method effectively assumes
Nussbaum’s position and dispenses with Śāntideva’s: “As practicing
Buddhists, most of us want to become the best human beings we can
possibly be. We don’t want to lose our humanity in the process.” (161)
But Śāntideva’s point, on some level, is that we’re *wrong* not to want
to lose our humanity in key senses (of partiality to particular
relationships, in the case that Segall is discussing). Our wants are
part of the problem. I do disagree with Śāntideva, and agree with Segall
and Nussbaum, on this point – for reasons that happen to put me [closer
to a classical Chinese philosopher than to a modern Western
one](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/01/of-drowning-children-near-and-far-ii/).
The important thing, though, is that we modern Westerners *provide*
reasons for our disagreement with a classical thinker –while we try to
[understand that thinker’s reasons for disagreeing with
us](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/looking-for-coherent-authorship/).
We must not just assume the rightness of the modern Western view.

There are many questions, like rebirth, where I think a typical modern
Western view is right, and a view like Śāntideva’s wrong. But having
read Śāntideva in detail, I have also found questions on which I think
the moderns are wrong and he is right. A crucial part of a
cross-cultural philosopher’s work is to aim to identify which is which.
That work is [not easy to
do](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/09/how-can-traditions-be-commensurable/),
but that doesn’t make it any less important. Now there are also many
questions on which ancients and moderns can find relatively easy
agreement, and I think Segall does a wonderful job of finding those. But
we need to push into the disagreements as well. That way we can do the
crucial work of allowing modern Western views to *change*.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/endorsing-and-rejecting-the-views-of-the-modern-west/)
