+++
title = "Bad things, good people,"
full_title = "Bad things, good people, and eudaimonism"
date = "2020-05-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/28/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/28/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/).

Bad things, good people, and eudaimonism

I showed in my previous two posts how the core of Buddhist karma
doctrine is [*not* a
response](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/)
to the question “Why do bad things happen to good people?”, but rather
an articulation of the idea that [good actions improve our well-being
and
vice-versa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/),
congruent with contemporary eudaimonism.

Contemporary eudaimonic karma does, however, still face a major problem,
one that has already come up a number of times. Thompson is right to
focus attention on the apparent fact that bad things happen to good
people –*not* because that fact supposedly drove the formation of karma
theory ([it
didn’t](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/),
as far as I can tell), but because it poses a major problem for
eudaimonism itself. As Thompson correctly says, “the proposition that an
agent’s being good typically improves that agent’s well-being is not
obviously true as a general descriptive proposition about the world.” An
ethicized concept of rebirth can answer this question relatively easily,
in a way that produces a straightforwardly consistent eudaimonism.
Without rebirth, that problem is indeed harder to answer.

This problem – the problem that virtuous agents often do *not* seem
better off – is one that every eudaimonist needs to address, whether
Buddhist or otherwise. It was a problem for Aristotle himself, and it is
a problem that Dale Wright and I have both [addressed
before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
in our discussions of eudaimonic karma.

There is one relatively straightforward way to solve the problem, which
Aristotle’s Stoic and Epicurean foes took up, and that is to *reject*
the claim that external goods –things we can’t control, like material
wealth and relationships –are components of eudaimonia. If we take
their approach, then the supposedly bad things that happen to good
people turn out not to be so bad after all. That is a non-obvious
position, and one with its own problems, but it consistently solves the
problem as posed. Importantly, it is also [a position that Śāntideva
takes](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/naturalizing-santidevas-eudaimonism/).
Human flourishing consists above all in mental freedom from suffering
(like Epicurus’s *ataraxia*), whether one’s own or others’, and to one
who has this freedom, nothing truly bad can happen.

I myself do not take that approach, though, and few other modern
Buddhist eudaimonists do either. Unlike Śāntideva and the Epicureans, I
do think that external goods play a role in human flourishing, for
[reasons previously
discussed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/).
I think those goods are probably *less* important to flourishing than
most Westerners take them as being, and I am significantly influenced in
that view by thinkers like Śāntideva. I think [Dale Wright makes a
similar
point](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
when he urges viewing karma primarily but not exclusively in terms of
internal goods. Still, allowing *any* role for external goods does
complicate eudaimonism (and thus naturalized karma) significantly, since
we agree that virtuous people’s lives can be genuinely hurt by things
that may have nothing to do with their virtue.

Eudaimonists who value external goods, I think, have to admit that the
virtue-flourishing connection – and thus the working of karma, when we
speak in those terms – is *probabilistic* rather than deterministic.
That is why I initially [made sure to
specify](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
that being good *typically* improves well-being – and we can do more to
specify the working of the “typically”. Virtues (beneficial
dispositions) positively impact well-being in a variety of ways. Virtues
like mindfulness and patient endurance have a very close connection with
internal goods like peace and happiness. (I would argue the same is true
for kindness, which I think is intrinsically rewarding.) More than that,
virtues like self-discipline and courage directly help one achieve
external goods, often though not always. Wright notes that
other-regarding virtues like justice and honesty can help us attain
external goods the same because of other people’s involvement: “People
who characteristically treat others with kindness and just consideration
are often treated kindly themselves, although not always. Those who are
frequently mean spirited and selfish are often treated with distain.”
The internal good of a *clear conscience* is also of [great
importance](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/can-justice-make-you-happy/)
to a flourishing or even happy life. All of these points add up to a
summary of eudaimonism in which, as Neera Badhwar puts it, “the more
virtuous are more *eudaimon* than the less virtuous under *the same
circumstances*, and in *a wider variety of circumstances*.”
([*Well-Being*](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/well-being-9780195323276?cc=us&lang=en&)
207, emphases in original)

The above on its own is hardly an airtight defence of eudaimonism, of
course –it is one paragraph. But it is important in the present context
since Thompson says that “eudaimonizing the concept of karma without
facing up to this problem—the problem of evil—seems facile.” We *are*
recognizing that problem and facing up to it – and we have been doing so
at least since Wright’s original article, now sixteen years old.

So, I submit, the eudaimonic approach to karma is quite congruent with
the traditional meaning and function of *karmavipāka*, which has to do
with good actions making lives better and vice versa (in this world and
another) by means of habits and dispositions. It does face a problem of
its own (a problem faced by all eudaimonists) which needs to be
addressed – but we are addressing it. Whether we are doing an adequate
job of addressing it is its own important question, but I think that
question is separate from the question of the congruency between
traditional and naturalized conceptions of karma.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4803)
