+++
title = "Naturalizing Buddhism"
full_title = "Naturalizing Buddhism and other traditions"
date = "2020-05-31"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/31/naturalizing-buddhism-and-other-traditions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/31/naturalizing-buddhism-and-other-traditions/).

Naturalizing Buddhism and other traditions

In the
[previous](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/)
[three](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/)
[posts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism)
I aimed to show, contra [Evan Thompson’s
response](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
that the philosophical core of the karma doctrine does not have to do
with [explaining why bad things happen to good
people](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/),
but rather with [how good and bad actions produce good and bad results
for the
agent](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/).
As such, eudaimonic karma is not “incongruent with its traditional
meaning and function.” (I also agreed that the fact of bad things
happening to good people *is* a problem for naturalized eudaimonic
karma, but discussed [attempts to resolve that
problem](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/).)

Now let us turn back to the wider argumentative context in which the
karma discussion is set. At this point our disagreements may prove
smaller than they seem. Thompson, it turns out, does not deny that

> given a certain conception of well-being, cultivating mental
> intentions in accordance with that conception increases the likelihood
> of experiencing that kind of well-being. What I deny is that the
> conception of well-being can be derived from science or justified by
> descriptive (non-normative) psychological propositions about how
> things are (as, for example, Sam Harris tries to do).

On this, I think, we are more or less in agreement. In his [video
dialogue with Robert
Wright](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=heSq98tNTlM&feature=share&fbclid=IwAR0-cWdkSdY5TolL2WBZ5fhLEhjY5Ghw6hw_H9R3r7QG11iyCHpCC9Tg3yQ)
(around 55:30), Thompson says he understands naturalism to be a
“viewpoint that gives final authority to science on how things are”.
Naturalism in that sense is close to [what I call
scientism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/03/does-p-z-myers-love-his-wife/),
which I reject, along more generally with a strong
[empiricism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/not-all-facts-are-empirical/).
There are plenty of things, [especially in the domain of
value](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/why-evolution-doesnt-explain-value/),
which are beyond science’s jurisdiction to resolve, though the claims of
science typically remain *relevant* to them (one could say science is an
expert witness but not the judge). The nature of well-being is one of
these –including the key question of whether well-being properly
includes goals other than *dukkhanirodha*, a question [I do not attempt
to settle on scientific
grounds](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/).

So we are agreed that there are things beyond science’s authority. I do
not think that *rebirth* is one of these things, however. Rebirth is a
descriptive theory about how human and animal lives function, and
observations that disconfirm that theory need to be taken seriously. I
am happy to accept claims that are transcendental, in Thompson’s Kantian
sense of “normative meaning that lies outside the conceptual framework
of” natural science. Many of the most important claims we can make are
*non*-scientific. What I do not accept are claims that are
[*un*scientific](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/from-supernatural-to-unscientific/):
claims for causal processes that are implausible given the findings of
natural-scientific research, of which I take rebirth – like creationism
– to be one. That is the sense in which I consider myself a naturalist.
Theists who accept the conclusions of natural science need to find ways
of reconciling their theism with the theory of evolution by natural
selection, and I think Buddhists similarly need to find ways of
reconciling karma with a view of mind that does not treat it as
detachable from the body. I think the theory of eudaimonic karma that I
have outlined does this well.

The comparison to theists brings us to the idea that Thompson describes
as the object of his principal objection. That is “Buddhist
exceptionalism”: “the mistaken belief that Buddhism is superior to other
religions in being inherently rational and empirical.” I agree there are
some modernist Buddhists who hold that position, and it is fair for
Thompson to point out that Ken McLeod appears to be one of them.
However, I don’t think that this Buddhist exceptionalism is necessary
for the kind of modernist Buddhism I have been articulating, for I don’t
think I myself am a “Buddhist exceptionalist” in this sense. Do I think
Buddhism superior to, say, Christianity? Yes, because I think that the
ideas I take to be core to Buddhism are truer than those that I take to
be core to Christianity – just as Thompson takes embodied cognitive
science to be superior to evolutionary psychology because *its* core
ideas are the truer of the two (*Why I Am* pp. 70-2). But I don’t think
Thompson sees embodied cognitive science as superior to evolutionary
psychology “in being inherently rational and empirical”, and I don’t
think that is Buddhism’s advantage over Christianity either.

Especially, I do not think Buddhism is particularly more open to my kind
of naturalizing than Christianity is. The existentialist theologian
[Rudolf Bultmann](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rudolf_Bultmann) was
already naturalizing (or “demythologizing”) Christianity long before
anybody was talking about eudaimonist Buddhism or evolutionary
psychology. And the Abrahamic traditions have long been fitted to
eudaimonism: a specifically Aristotelian Buddhism is a new idea, going
back no more than a few decades, whereas a specifically Aristotelian
Islam has existed for over a millennium, Aristotelian Judaism and
Christianity for almost as long. I acknowledge all this. If I think
Buddhism is “somehow more suited” to a naturalized eudaimonist project
than those traditions, it is at most as a matter of degree, not as an
exception. So I don’t think I’m a “Buddhist exceptionalist” in
Thompson’s terms, and I think one can pursue the kind of naturalized
modernist Buddhism I have been articulating without being one.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4809)
