+++
title = "On the challenging"
full_title = "On the challenging aspects of tradition"
date = "2020-05-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/17/on-the-challenging-aspects-of-tradition/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/17/on-the-challenging-aspects-of-tradition/).

On the challenging aspects of tradition

Evan Thompson has made a [wonderfully detailed
response](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
to my earlier
[two](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-1/)
[posts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
that critique his stimulating [Why I Am Not A
Buddhist](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300226553/why-i-am-not-buddhist).
It is a dialogue I am excited to continue. First a logistical note: I
have a great deal to say in response, but I generally think that blog
posts work better as relatively self-contained but relatively short
pieces, so I’m going to space out my own long reply over eight posts.
(All this is perhaps in keeping with [Simon Critchley’s
claim](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/the-philosophers-leisure/)
that the philosopher is one who takes time.) In order to stop the
discussion from dragging on for *too* long, I will post these posts at a
much more frequent interval than I usually do – three times a week, on
Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursdays.

To begin, I thank Thompson for his [careful and thoughtful
response]((http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/).
Its title –“Clarifying Why I Am Not A Buddhist” –is extremely apt. It
shows me that there are points where I misunderstood the book’s claims,
and I think the clarifications in his response make for a more fruitful
debate. Above all: the book frames its critique of “neural Buddhism” in
ways that did not seem to me to apply to the eudaimonic Buddhism that I
hold. (Mike Slott of the Secular Buddhist Network appears to have [got
the same initial
impression](https://secularbuddhistnetwork.org/a-review-of-evan-thompsons-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist/?fbclid=IwAR00mQ4Yemw4GfjCoMeWU9KoDT8E9yGipHdsoAtYRYaIZCbPFVi0CIJSCyc)
I did.) Thompson’s response makes it much clearer that he does indeed
intend his critique to apply to me, and to fellow eudaimonist Buddhists
like Dale Wright, Seth Segall, Ken McLeod, and possibly Slott. As a
result, I think we are now much better able to dive into the real issues
at hand, which I take to be crucial ones for my own philosophical
project.

I framed my original two posts in a relatively general way that takes on
the project proclaimed in the book’s title, looking at Buddhism as a
whole, and Thompson replies to nearly all of the points I made in them.
Many of these replies are well taken; I have many quibbles with them as
well, but I think a lot of these quibbles are relatively unimportant. I
will not attempt to address all of the points he makes; that would cause
this discussion to proliferate endlessly. (Even without doing so, this
post is the first of *eight.*) Rather, I want to focus in more depth on
what I think is the core issue between us: Thompson’s rejection of the
eudaimonist form of modernist Buddhism. There is more than enough to say
about that issue alone. That means I will take up Thompson’s responses
to my [second original
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/12/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-2/)
and mostly leave alone the responses to my [first
one](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/03/29/why-is-evan-thompson-not-a-buddhist-1/).)

I want to start with a part of Thompson’s approach that I am in deep
sympathy with. Thompson’s injunction that we strive not to “miss (and
miss out on) the radical and challenging aspects of the Buddhist
tradition” is one [quite dear to my
heart](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/).
I think it’s important that we face with open eyes those aspects of
traditions that are far from us and make us uncomfortable, as I noted in
my [preceding discussion of Seth Segall’s
book](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4768); I had taken that to be a
significant difference between Segall’s approach to eudaimonic Buddhism
and mine. When we dismiss out of hand those aspects of a tradition that
seem far from a modern sensibility, we run the risk of learning so
little from the tradition that we might as well not have bothered. Thus
I am deeply opposed to [Chris Fraser’s approach to the
Zhuangzi](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/)
that says the Zhuangzi’s radical worldview “calls not for refutation so
much as simply diagnosis of the psychological assumptions and
ethical-religious beliefs on which it rests—beliefs that are no longer a
live alternative for most of us today.” Maybe the Zhuangzi’s different
ethical-religious beliefs *should* be a live alternative for us today.
One way or another, it is important to wrestle with these views –to
“grapple” with the “challenge that these propositions pose to our usual
ways of thinking and being”, as Thompson says.

This is one of the reasons I’ve spent so much time [challenging engaged
Buddhism](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/);
among educated liberal anglophones who assume that political engagement
is among our highest duty, I think engaged Buddhism does even more to
make Buddhism “comfortable, not challenging” than eudaimonism does. The
idea that maybe the highest human good is not about changing the world
[changed my
life](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/),
and people whom I introduce it to still often find it unnerving.
Buddhism made a giant difference in my life *because* it was so far from
Western “common sense”. And I think it important to let those sorts of
challenges make a difference for us.

Having said all that, one must still take a constructive position on a
tradition one is learning from or identifies with, and this may well
involve rejecting doctrines that previous members of the tradition have
taken to be important. This is something that Buddhists have done
throughout the centuries, from Nāgārjuna saying the Five Aggregates are
ultimately unreal, to the Chan founder
[Linji](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linji_Yixuan) saying “If you meet
the Buddha, kill him”:proclamations that previous generations of
Buddhists would have taken as throwing out their tradition’s core. I
don’t think “conversion” is ever a wholesale phenomenon; when one newly
joins a tradition, one carries over one’s preexisting ideas and must
take them into dialogue with the new ones. To simply drop every
preexisting idea that conflicts with one’s new tradition is, I think, an
act of intellectual dishonesty that does not serve the new tradition
well. So while one should not casually dismiss doctrines at odds with a
modern sensibility (as I think Fraser does), one should nevertheless
submit those doctrines to reflection – to grappling – and be willing to
acknowledge those points at which that reflection indicates those
doctrines are in fact false. I do not think, however, that to do so
necessarily means moving outside the tradition.

In my case, I see myself as making two, connected, major departures from
premodern Buddhism: one being the acknowledgement of worthy goals in
life other than *dukkhanirodha*, [beyond the removal of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/),
and the second being the rejection of rebirth (and therefore the
reinterpretation of karma). I take both of these to be correct, and
therefore good and beneficial modifications to the tradition –while
still remaining open to the earlier tradition that would push me against
them. In both cases I agree with Thompson that it is important to
grapple with the challenges traditional Buddhism poses to our
conventional ways of understanding, and in the next several posts I will
explore the details of that grappling. I think the first of these
modifications is in many ways a bigger and more difficult one, so I will
start with it in the next two posts; after that I will turn to karma and
rebirth, the modification that has formed the core of our debate so far.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4777)
