+++
title = "Grappling with"
full_title = "Grappling with impermanence"
date = "2020-05-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/21/grappling-with-impermanence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/21/grappling-with-impermanence/).

Grappling with impermanence

[The Buddhist propositions that Evan Thompson
articulates](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/?p=4296) go deep. They
proclaim three flaws of all the things around us, in ways that (Buddhist
tradition has typically claimed)make them unworthy of our seeking. On
such a view, the only thing truly worthy of our seeking is
*dukkhanirodha*, the cessation of suffering, through a nirvana
identified with “unconditioned peace”. The ethical implication is that
the finest human life is that of a monk, who devotes his or her entire
life to the pursuit of *dukkhanirodha*. It is granted that most people
won’t pursue such a life, but that is because they are too weak to do
so; their lives will be worse for their seeking external goods, like
familial relationships and material possessions.

Aśvaghoṣa dramatizes these points in the Buddhacarita, his famous story
of the Buddha’s journey to monkhood. After a contented life of luxury
the Buddha-to-be sees an old man, a sick man and a dead man, he realizes
that that is the fate of everyone and everything, and can take no more
pleasure in the objects (*viṣaya*s) of the world: “I do not despise
objects. I know them to be at the heart of human affairs. / But seeing
the world to be impermanent, my mind does not delight in them.” (BC
IV.85) It is specifically the impermanence of things that leads the
Buddha to become a monk and reject them.

I reject Aśvaghoṣa’s view. Why? I will first note [my agreement with Jan
Westerhoff]((http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/)
that such a worldview is far more difficult to accept when one rejects
rebirth. If all the things of the world are to be rejected as dukkha,
*and* we are not reborn after death, then our best option is suicide –
or perhaps murder, if we are altruistic Mahāyānists. Such a conclusion
is at the very least *prima facie* wrong. Westerhoff thinks Buddhists
should therefore cling to whatever tenuous justifications they might
find for rebirth, a strategy [I don’t find
viable]((http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/)).
My preferred alternative is to [reject the other
premise](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/):
the things of the world are *not* to be rejected.

But my alternative, I think, requires further justification beyond the
rejection of rebirth. For even if it could be shown that humans *were*
reborn after death, I would *still* reject the worldview that says we
should aim to leave the cycle of rebirth and reject the things of the
world. And I think there is justification for saying this.

It is characteristic of classical Buddhist philosophy to [infer from
metaphysics to
ethics](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/).
I think the propositions at issue here contain an implicit “and
therefore”. The things of the world are impermanent, non-self, and
unsatisfactory (*dukkha*) in at least the sense that we will lose them
–*and therefore* we should reject them, aim to transcend them for an
unconditional peace. But does that really follow? The commenter Thill
[pointed out long
ago](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/supernatural-and-political-death/comment-page-1/#comment-4031)
that we don’t cease to enjoy a song because it has an ending. Amber
Carpenter notes a similar objection in chapter 3 of her [Indian Buddhist
Philosophy](https://www.amazon.com/Indian-Buddhist-Philosophy-Ancient-Philosophies/dp/184465298X).
She calls the objection Nietzschean, referring to *Twilight of the
Idols* where Nietzsche endorses “saying Yes to life even in its
strangest and hardest problems; the will to life rejoicing over its own
inexhaustibility” – as opposed, Carpenter adds, to “rejecting some or
all of it on account of its unpleasantness, painfulness,
unsatisfactoriness or suffering.” (Carpenter 49-50)

I am largely in sympathy with the view of that Nietzschean objection.
Buddhists like Aśvaghoṣa are right to caution us that things (including
relationships) are impermanent, that we will lose them, and that we
increase our suffering if we act as if this is not the case. Yet I do
not think that these cautions imply the full conclusion that we should
reject all these things. I also agree with Martha Nussbaum’s claim that
the values we normally place on goods like relationships have such depth
and power that Buddhist or Stoic objectors have “the burden of showing
why and for the sake of what these beliefs are to be given up”. The
burden of proof, that is, is on the Buddhist objector: if their
objection is not compelling enough to reject our involvement with
conditioned and compounded things – and I think it is not –then we
should not reject that involvement. This isn’t *missing* the radically
challenging aspects of Buddhism; it is reflecting on those aspects,
grappling with them, and deeming them a less appropriate guide to life.

Does that mean that I am rejecting the heart of Buddhism? I don’t think
so. It is for this reason that I have [drawn
inspiration](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/)
from the less philosophical Buddhism of the
[Mahāvaṃsa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/)
and lived Asian Buddhist practice, the kind of Buddhism that Melford
Spiro calls
[kammatic](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/):
most practising or self-proclaimed Buddhists throughout history, it
turns out, have *not* in practice treated the things of the world as
unworthy. I think it is appropriate to profess a contemporary Buddhism
that says they were not wrong in this.

The “kammatic” term, in turn, implies a Buddhism that is focused on
karma rather than nirvana. That brings us back to the topic of karma,
which I will take up in next week’s posts.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/?p=4787)
