+++
title = "New postdoctoral"
full_title = "New postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Toronto"
date = "2018-05-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/07/new-postdoctoral-fellowship-at-the-university-of-toronto/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/07/new-postdoctoral-fellowship-at-the-university-of-toronto/).

New postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Toronto

Posted at large by Ajay Rao

The Centre for South Asian Civilizations at the University of Toronto
invites applications for a postdoctoral fellow in South Asian Studies.
The appointment will begin on 01 September 2018. The post is for a
period of 2 years with the possibility of extension after successful
review.

Candidates working in any field of South Asian Studies are encouraged to
apply. The successful applicant will have demonstrated expertise in one
or more research languages and be able to work with primary source
archives.

The Centre for South Asian Civilizations is housed at the University of
Toronto Mississauga and is dedicated tointerdisciplinary and critical
engagement with the languages, cultures, religions, and histories of
South Asia.While the primary responsibility of the postdoctoral fellow
is research, the fellow will also be involved in Centre for South Asian
Civilizations programming and will help foster intellectual community at
the University of Toronto Mississauga. The position also includes the
teaching of one 12-week course per academic year. The salary will be
$42,000, which includes the teaching stipend.

Applicants must have successfully defended their doctoral theses by the
commencement of the post, and no earlier than 2015. Applicants cannot
hold a tenure-track or continuing faculty position at a college or
university. Applicants may be citizens of any country, and graduates
from any university. Successful international applicants must meet all
Canadian immigration requirements.

The application deadline is June 11, 2018. Shortlisted candidates will
be interviewed via Skype. Decisions will be made by July 2018.

For general inquiries, please contact<csac@utoronto.ca>

All qualified applicants are encouraged to apply by sending their
dossier (consisting of cover letter, CV, writing sample, 1-page research
statement, and 1-page statement on teaching and community engagement at
a public university) with a specification in the subject line of ‘CSAC
PostDoc’ to <csac@utoronto.ca>Arrangements should also be made for two
letters of reference to be submitted separately to this email address.

The University of Toronto is strongly committed to diversity within its
community and especially welcomes applications from visible minority
group members, women, Aboriginal persons, persons with disabilities,
members of sexual minority groups, and others who may contribute to the
further diversification of ideas.


