+++
title = "Studying Indian"
full_title = "Studying Indian Philosophy in India Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham"
date = "2018-05-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/02/studying-indian-philosophy-in-india-amrita-vishwa-vidyapeetham/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/02/studying-indian-philosophy-in-india-amrita-vishwa-vidyapeetham/).

Studying Indian Philosophy in India: Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham

I received the following message from Prof. Manjushree Hegde, of the
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham Univerisity:

I write to you on behalf of Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham. I’d like to
inform you that we offer a Masters program in (Indian and Western)
Philosophy from Amrita Darshanam.  
The core and elective courses of the program is structured to acquaint
the student with Indian and Western philosophical thought — through four
semesters, the student will methodically be introduced to Indian and
European metaphysics, and logic and epistemology. Electives include a
variety of topics like philosophy of tantra, advaita vedānta,
aesthetics, South Indian philosophers (Tamil and Malayalam), etc. A
detailed course plan can be found here:
<https://www.amrita.edu/admissions/ma-philosophy-2018/curriculum>

Professors of repute include Veda Vāridhi Dr. P. Ramanujan, Dr. A.
Ramaswamy Iyengar, and Dr. M. Ramakrishnan. Also, we regularly organize
workshops and seminars to expose students to good scholarship — we
recently conducted a workshop on Indian mathematics by Prof. K.
Ramasubramanian, on the philosophy of language (Brahmakāṇḍa of
Vākyapadīya) by Prof. Ashok Aklujkar, on Śabara-bhāṣya by Mani Dravida
Sastry, etc.

One can read more at the website of the University or in the poster
below (click to enlarge and increase readability).

[![MA Philosophy
2018_IPB_Flyer_V2](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/05/MA-Philosophy-2018_IPB_Flyer_V2-300x174.png)](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2018/05/MA-Philosophy-2018_IPB_Flyer_V2.png)
