+++
title = "Buddhaghosa on seeing"
full_title = "Buddhaghosa on seeing things as they are (3)"
date = "2018-05-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/).

Buddhaghosa on seeing things as they are (3)

My
[continuing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1)
[dispute](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-2)
with Maria Heim and Chakravarthi Ram-Prasad, over the ideas of
Buddhaghosa, now returns to [where it
began](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/#comment-206692):
the distinction between ultimate (*paramattha*) and conventional
(*sammuti* or *vohāra*).

Heim and Ram-Prasad admit that for some Buddhist traditions these terms
refer to different truths or levels of truth. (When Śāntideva employs
the ultimate/conventional distinction, for example, he describes them
explicitly as *satyadvaya*, two truths.) But Heim and Ram-Prasad claim
that for Buddhaghosa it is not so. Buddhaghosa, they note, uses the
terms *paramattha* and *sammuti/vohāra* to describe not truth or reality
(*sacca*) but modes of teaching (*kathā*) or language (*bhāsa*). I think
it is a good point that Buddhaghosa (different in this way from so many
Sanskrit Buddhist thinkers) does not use *paramattha* to modify *sacca*.
However, I think he does use the term to refer not merely to modes of
skillful teaching but to reality, to existence. We have [already
encountered](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1)
a passage at Visuddhimagga XVIII.28, referring back to the
[Milindapañhā’s chariot
analogy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/01/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/),
which Heim and Ram-Prasad themselves render as: “an ‘examination’ shows
that ultimately there is no chariot.” (15) “Ultimately” is their
translation of *paramatthato*, and the sentence – in the translation and
in the original – is referring to *existence*. The final word of the
Pali sentence, *natthi*, is the standard way to say “there is no”, “does
not exist”. This sentence is saying that the chariot does not *exist*
upon examination, and does not exist *paramatthato*. The “ultimately”
has to do with existence, not merely teaching or language.

Moreover, the ultimate genuinely is ultimate – or at least, higher and
better. In the sentence just quoted, Heim and Ram-Prasad may have
slipped up from their intentions when they used the very common and
standard translation “ultimately” for *paramatthato*, for elsewhere they
render *paramatthato* more weakly as “further”. That weaker translation
is called for by their later interpretation of *paramattha*: “One does
indeed proceed from conventional to further \[*paramattha*\] meaning
(rather than the other way around); but that does not make the
conventional erroneous or less true.” (33)

Doesn’t it, though? Heim and Ram-Prasad immediately proceed to note that
Buddhaghosa says “seeing correctly is the seeing of one who sees in this
way, that from the standpoint of further sense, there is only name and
form.” (34) In Pali this is: *Paramatthato pana nāmarūpamattameva
atthīti. Evaṃ passato hi dassanaṃ yathābhūtadassanaṃ nāma hoti* (Vism
XVIII.28). Here, “seeing correctly”, more literally rendered “seeing
according to the existent” (*yathābhūtadassana*), is exactly the seeing
of one who sees how things are *paramatthato*. I don’t think you’re
going to find any passage where Buddhaghosa identifies “seeing
correctly” with anything at the conventional level, the level that is
not *paramattha*. If someone can find me such a passage, where
*yathābhūtadassana* is indeed identified with the correct seeing of
something conventional *sammuti* or *vohāra* (and that “correct seeing”
has to do not merely with recognizing the fact that they *are* merely
conventional), I’d be willing to change my view on this. But I doubt
that that is likely to happen, because as far as I can tell, the whole
*point* of making a paramattha/vohāra distinction in the first place is
that the ultimate *is truer*, and the conventional therefore less true.
If it weren’t, you wouldn’t *need* to speak at the ultimate level at
all; you could just use the conventional, and you probably should, since
it has the advantage of being far more pedagogically effective. But you
do need the ultimate despite its pedagogical difficulties, because to
see existents as they are, *yathābhūtadassana*, just *is* to see them
*paramatthato*, in the ultimate way. To see them according to convention
is to have some lesser kind of seeing, one that is not fully correct,
not *yathābhūtam*. Buddhaghosa and other Pali authors typically attach
*matta* (“mere” or “only”) to the “conventional” words *sammuti* and
*vohāra*, as they do not to *paramattha*; plenty of things are “mere
convention” but nothing is “merely ultimate”.

Consider further what this claim of Buddhaghosa’s implies about that
correct seeing, “the seeing of one who sees in this way”. The first
sentence or clause in the Pali ends with *iti*, the word that serves as
a quotation mark of sorts, indicating that it is to be taken as a
proposition referred to in the second part. Heim and Ram-Prasad are
right to render the *evam* in this way: “one who sees in this way,
*that* from the standpoint of further sense, there is only name and
form.” In this context at least, correct seeing has propositional
content: one sees *that* the world is ultimately a certain way, a way
that can be expressed in a sentence. And here too, that sentence’s key
verb is a verb of existence, *atthi*: one who sees correctly
(*yathābhūta*) sees that ultimately *there is* only name and form. This
is an ontological claim. It is hard to see how anyone could see it as
*not* an ontological claim. The very definition of ontology is the study
of being, of *what is*. And one who sees correctly – one who sees
according to the existent – sees *what ultimately exists* (namely,
name-and-form only).

Let us now return to the larger picture. What does all this close and
technical reading – in this post and the
[previous](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-1)
[two](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/04/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-2)
– imply? Each time, we have looked closely at the same passages Heim and
Ram-Prasad examine in their article. We have seen all three times that
in these very passages Buddhaghosa is concerned not merely with
phenomenology – how things appear – but with ontology, how things
*actually are*. The reduction of a person or a chariot into aggregates
or name-and-form has to do not merely with one’s inner meditative
experience, but with the fact that the person or the chariot actually is
made of the reduced elements. Seeing correctly is not a matter of
eliminating views, but of having a view that corresponds to things as
they are (*yathābhūtadassana*). And it is by taking that reductionist
view, of things as they are, that one sees things in the higher,
ultimate, way and not in the lesser way of mere convention. To be
liberated from suffering, in Buddhaghosa’s view just as in Śāntideva’s,
one must see things as they are; one must perceive reality correctly.
One must, that is, be concerned with ontology and metaphysics.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/05/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3)
