+++
title = "Making the case for"
full_title = "Making the case for nonWestern philosophy"
date = "2018-05-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/27/making-the-case-for-non-western-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/27/making-the-case-for-non-western-philosophy/).

Making the case for non-Western philosophy

If you are the sort of person who reads comparative philosophy blogs,
you probably remember the widely read [New York Times
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html?_r=0)
that Jay Garfield and Bryan Van Norden wrote two years ago, calling for
the study of non-Western philosophies in philosophy departments. I
agreed with their overall point, surprising nobody that I can imagine,
but had [strong
reservations](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/why-philosophy-departments-have-focused-on-the-west/)
about their underlying reasoning, then as now: in urging the study of
non-Western thought they said nothing about anything valuable it
actually would have to teach us, treating geographical diversity as
sufficient.

Van Norden has now expanded the article’s point into a book, [*Taking
Back
Philosophy*](https://cup.columbia.edu/book/taking-back-philosophy/9780231184373).
(He invited Garfield to join in writing the book, but Garfield was too
busy with other projects.) Columbia University Press sent me a free copy
of the book in the hope I would review it on Love of All Wisdom and/or
the Indian Philosophy Blog; I mention that as a disclaimer of sorts,
though there were no specifications on the content of the review. I
offer my thoughts here.

I don’t think I am the target audience for *Taking Back Philosophy*, and
I probably wasn’t for the article either. I am, after all, not someone
who needs to be convinced of the value of studying non-Western thought.
Nor do I have any power to change the way any given philosophy
department does things. I am delighted to see people making a case for
that study to others. It matters to me, though, how one makes that case.
I was worried that the article could have easily left a reader wondering
why anyone should bother studying philosophy at all.

The book is significantly better than the article in this and other
respects. Unlike the article, *Taking Back Philosophy* recognizes that
we live in an anti-philosophical and anti-intellectual age where
philosophy, Western and Asian, needs defending. It refers, quite
appropriately, to the [awful US Republican
debate](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/07/the-trouble-with-democracy/)
where three different politicians took it upon themselves to take pot
shots at philosophy (Donald Trump himself, perhaps surprisingly, not
being one of them). The fourth chapter defends philosophy against such
thuggish detractors on the kind of pragmatic terms that would make sense
in their world: philosophy graduates make more money than welders,
employers value critical thinking, and so on. Against such people,
perhaps that is the best case one can hope to make. But it is [not a
very good
one](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/10/on-the-economic-value-of-the-humanities/).
If that standard case for the liberal arts is all philosophy can bring
us, then we may as well dump philosophy teaching in favour of courses in
critical thinking and writing, as many lower-tier universities now in
fact do.

Fortunately, the book rises above this point in its second and fifth
chapters – the latter making the case for philosophy as such, the former
going into detail about the contributions of Chinese (and to a much
lesser extent Indian Buddhist) thought. The fifth rightly notes that
philosophy is unfortunately rare among humanistic disciplines these days
in its willingness to take a “hermeneutic of faith” – to listen to the
great thinkers of the past and take seriously the idea that they might
be right – as opposed to the “hermeneutic of suspicion” associated
(rightly or wrongly) with Marx, Freud and Nietzsche, which views
previous thought as oppressive dead weight. (The terms are [Paul
Ricoeur’s](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300021899/freud-and-philosophy)).

So Van Norden shows how philosophical ideas provided a powerful support
to some major heroic figures, like [James
Stockdale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Stockdale), who endured
his seven years as a prisoner of war by recalling the advice of the
Stoic [Epictetus](https://www.iep.utm.edu/epictetu/) on maintaining our
integrity in the face of our fate. Stockdale’s story is powerful and
important, and two things about it are significant. He could only have
derived this benefit by taking a hermeneutics of faith; and not just any
philosophy would have helped in his situation. You couldn’t just swap
out Epictetus and replace him with Hume or Hegel, and expect that the
benefit would be the same. You probably *could* have swapped in
Śāntideva, whose rejection of external goods has [strong affinities to
the Stoics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/), or
a number of other Buddhist thinkers. The point, though, is that it was
the *content* of the philosophy – what is said and why it was said –
that got Stockdale through his travails and could have got others
through theirs.

The second chapter, in many ways, is the heart of the book, because it
addresses the ideas in Asian traditions and how they actually can speak
to questions that Western philosophers – surely the book’s main target
audience – recognize as important. So we see how the
[Milindapañhā](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/)
and the Chinese Buddhist Fazang both are able to respond to problems of
personal identity in ways more satisfactory than Descartes (and Van
Norden is better aware than many of [how
different](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/)
the Milindapañhā and Fazang are from each other). We see how Mencius’s
theory of human motivation can answer questions about the justification
of politics in a way Thomas Hobbes’s cannot, and how later Confucians
can answer some Aristotelian questions about practice and weakness of
will.

All of this makes the book’s case for studying non-Western philosophy a
real and powerful case, as the article’s case was unfortunately not. The
article too often felt like it was unintentionally damning non-Western
philosophy with faint praise. It is significant that the book’s
substantive non-Western philosophical interest is overwhelmingly on
Chinese texts (even Japan appears relatively rarely here). But I think
that is a *strength*, because it means that Van Norden is actually able
to make a persuasive case that it be studied. The article was weakened
by telling everybody they should study [Lame
Deer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Fire_Lame_Deer) and [Kwasi
Wiredu](https://www.iep.utm.edu/wiredu/) – *not* because of anything
particularly unworthy about Lame Deer or Kwasi Wiredu, but because not a
word was mentioned about what in them *was* worthy of study. Those of us
who have not studied a text do not yet know how worthy it is; we need to
be convinced of that, whether the work in question is by Lame Deer or
Mencius or Bertrand Russell. The problem is much like the one Plato
stated in the [Meno](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meno) – that we don’t
know what we don’t know. We have to start where we are, and for most of
us “where we are” is at least partially Western (even when we are [not
ourselves in or from the
West](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/06/the-west-within-the-rest/)).
We also can and should recognize that the West hasn’t had all the
answers – but many of us need pointers about where other answers might
be found. *Taking Back Philosophy* gives better pointers than most.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/05/making-the-case-for-non-western-philosophy‎)
