+++
title = "The birth defects of"
full_title = "The birth defects of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu and related matters"
date = "2021-11-14"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/11/14/the-birth-defects-of-dh%e1%b9%9btara%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adra-and-pa%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8du-and-related-matters/"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/11/14/the-birth-defects-of-dh%e1%b9%9btara%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adra-and-pa%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8du-and-related-matters/).

The birth defects of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu and related matters

This note has its origin in a conversation with Sharada. We originally
intended to incorporate the core of it into one of our usual fantastical
stories. However, following a second conversation with her, we decided
that it might be best to present it as a note of its own.

Vyāsa Pāraśarya was the author of our national epic, the Bhārata, in
more than one way: he first sired the protagonists, and then he recorded
their history as it played out. The queen Satyavatī had extracted a
promise from her husband Śantanu that her son and not his older son
Bhīṣma would take the throne of Hastināpura. However, to her bad luck,
both her sons via Śantanu, Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya, died shortly
after ascending the throne — an eponymous gandharva slew Citrāṅgada at
Kurukṣetra and Vicitravīrya contracted tuberculosis and perished before
fathering any children. He left behind his widows Ambikā and Ambālikā.
Distraught, Satyavatī first asked her stepson Bhīṣma to father children
on the widows; however, he refused to break the vow of celibacy he had
taken for Śantanu to marry her. Before her marriage to Śantanu,
Satyavatī was a boat-woman from a fisher clan who ferried people across
the Yamunā. In course of her duties, she once had to ferry the great
brāhmaṇa, Parāśara of the Vasiṣṭha clan. He was smitten by her beauty
and started wooing her with sweet words during the boat ride. She was
caught in the dilemma of her father’s wrath if she went with him and the
brāhmaṇa’s curse if she refused. However, the boon he offered convinced
Satyavatī to consort with him. He enveloped the region in a mist with
his magical powers, and they engaged in coitus. As a result, they had a
son, the illustrious Vyāsa Pāraśarya, the editor of the Veda-s and the
composer of the Bhārata. Thereafter, Parāśara restored her virginity and
gave her the boon by which a pleasant perfume replaced her fishy odor.
Vyāsa went with his father, and Satyavatī continued as a boat-woman
until her marriage to the king Śantanu. Now in this hour of need, she
summoned her first son Vyāsa and asked him to sire children on her
widowed daughters-in-law. Vyāsa agreed but stated that the Kausalya
princesses should undergo an year of preparatory rites before engaging
in coitus with him. However, fearing the dangers of a kingless state,
Satyavatī pressed her son to inseminate them immediately.

Evidently, from his being a yogin performing tapas, Vyāsa was in an
uncouth state with yellowish-brown dreadlocks, unshaven face and body
odor. Thus, when he had intercourse with Ambikā, she closed her eyes not
to see his grim visage. As a result of this “impression” of hers, Vyāsa
told Satyavatī that Ambikā’s son would be duly born blind despite having
the strength of 10000 elephants. Satyavatī beseeched Vyāsa to father
another child, as a blind child could not be a king. This time he had
intercourse with Ambālikā, who, looking at his dreadful appearance,
turned pale. Accordingly, she gave birth to a hypopigmented child.
Satyavatī then asked Vyāsa to bed Ambikā again. But remembering his
terrifying appearance, she instead sent her slave whom she had decked
with her own ornaments. The slave engaged in comfortable coitus with
Vyāsa, and he manumitted her and said that she would have a brilliant
son who would be the most intelligent of the men of the age. Thus were
born the blind Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the blanched Pāṇḍu and the wise Vidura.
Pāṇḍu’s troubles did not end with the absence of pigment. After his
marriage, while living a sylvan life with his wives, he shot a brāhmaṇa
and his wife while they were having intercourse in the form of deer. The
brāhmaṇa duly cursed Pāṇḍu that he would too die as soon as he has sex
with one of his wives and that wife too will meet her end with him. This
is the platform story for the unfolding of the Bhārata, with the birth
of Pāṇḍu-s through the intercession of the gods.

One may ask what is hidden behind the mythologem of the birth defects of
Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu? If one were to take a strongly historical
position, one could argue that they probably were afflicted by a genetic
defect. They could have had something like a variably expressive version
of Waardenburg’s syndrome or the Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, which are
associated with both blindness and hypopigmentation. However, the
language of myth has many layers. Beyond the historical layer, the
Bhārata clearly conceals divine archetypes. These are best seen in the
case of the Pāṇḍu-s but as the final parvan mentions, it applies more
broadly to the other characters. We suspect that the background of
Āditya-s was implied to be present in Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu, with Vidura
representing the joint Mitrāvaruṇā manifesting as dharma. This suggests
that the blind Dhṛtarāṣṭra perhaps represents Bhaga (a continuation of
the ancient Indo-European blind deity motif also seen in the Germanic
Höðr) and the white Pāṇḍu combining the pale solar aspect of Vivasvān
and still-born Mārtāṇḍa, which comes forth in greater Germania as the
opposite of the blind Höðr, the white Baldr.

Finally, this mythologem also preserves a peculiar “para-medical” motif,
namely the “maternal impression”. While not seen as a real thing in
modern biology, there is a widespread belief that experiential
impressions on the mother during pregnancy might translate into birth
defects or birthmarks in her child. At some point, when we were
re-reading the Bhārata, we realized that the legend of Dhṛtarāṣṭra and
Pāṇḍu was embedding within it this prevalent pre-modern belief in
maternal impression. Briefly, this view holds that ghastly sights of
amputations or deformities seen by the mother in real life, or in a
dream, or bodily transformations of the mother (like Ambikā’s closing of
her eyes or Ambālikā’s blanching) from fear or dohada (dauhṛda)-s
(satisfied or unsatisfied pregnancy cravings) might on occasion transmit
congruent or similar defects/marks to the developing fetus. We did not
pay much attention to it, but noted a parallel to the dohada of the
mother of the great Chāhamāna hero Hammīradeva reported in the
Hammīra-mahākāvya: she had a craving to have a bath in the blood of
marūnmatta-s when pregnant with him and that is said to have conferred
on him the fury that he manifested when manfully facing the monstrous
Army of Islam.

However, beyond that, we mostly set aside these mythic motifs until we
had a discussion with a late German professor in graduate school. He
brought to our notice a peculiar story reliably narrated by the great
Russo-German biologist Karl Ernst von Baer, a pioneer in the
evolutionary theory and embryology. Von Baer’s sister saw a fire when
looking out while she was about 6-7 months pregnant and thought that her
house in the distance was burning. She became obsessed with that fire
and kept seeing a vision of it constantly before her eyes until she gave
birth to a daughter in due course. Interestingly, her daughter had a red
birthmark on her forehead that took the shape of a flame that lasted
until she was 7 years of age. I was bemused by this case of “maternal
impression” close to our age, that too presented by a pioneer in
embryology, whose own work should have suggested that this is unlikely.
The late German professor mentioned to us that it is possible that it
had some connection to von Baer’s peculiar ideas of a “teleological”
force that influenced his version of the evolutionary theory.

Our conversation with Sharada brought to our attention the presence of
contemporary belief in “maternal impression” relating to birth
deformities and also reminded us of one of the morbid tales that our
late grandmother and her relatives liked talking about, which involved
such a motif. The possibility of a cross-cultural and temporal presence
of this idea made us explore it a bit more. This led us to the work of
the famous Canadian physician Ian Stevenson, who is well known for
investigating strange things like ghosts, reincarnation, and the like.
He had performed a detailed comparison of the published cases of such
“maternal impressions” and uncovered some strange cases himself. One
such notable case that he details is from Lankā, where a certain Siṁhala
rowdy was killed by his adversaries, who chopped off both his hands. It
was said that the rowdy’s mother then invoked Viṣṇu and Skanda to bring
such a fate upon the child of his killer and repeatedly cursed the
killer’s wife that she would have a deformed child. Subsequently, the
assailant’s wife gave birth to a son lacking arms – a birth defect
closely paralleling the amputations the rowdy was subject to. The
deformed child died within an year or two of birth. Stevenson stressed
that the deformities, of which he produced a photograph, were unusual
and that there was no history of genetic defects in the family as far as
his extensive investigations could tell.

In a detailed study, Stevenson gathered at least 50 cases that he
considered reliable (they corresponded to rare defects, and in his
estimation, in 46 of the 50 cases the similarly rare maternal impression
corresponded very closely to the lesion in the neonate) and analyzed
them for general tendencies. In 41/50 cases, he reported the pregnant
mother directly seeing or hearing about a lesion (which may be a wound,
surgery, or something else) in another person. In 6 cases, she
experienced something on herself — these are more comparable to those of
the Kausalya princesses of our national epic. Stevenson describes some
of the cases in greater detail. One was reported in the British Medical
Journal in 1886. Here a woman in the 4th month of her pregnancy dreamt
that a rat had bitten off the great toe of her right foot. Consequently,
“she awoke screaming, and narrated the cause of her fright to her
husband, who corroborated her statement”. When she delivered her child,
it lacked the very same great toe she lost in her dream. This case may
be compared to the examples of Kausalya princesses, in that the
impression was not the sight of a lesion in someone else but in the
mother. However, the one distinguishing feature of the epic example is
that the premonitory impression happened at conception rather than
pregnancy proper.

By considering an additional set of less reliable cases, Stevenson drew
up a more extensive list of 113 cases of maternal impressions. In this
set, he found 80 cases with the impression in the first trimester, 20 in
the second, and 13 in the third, which, as he noted, is a statistically
significant difference ![(\\chi^2= 72.018, p =
2.299^{-16})](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%28%5Cchi%5E2%3D+72.018%2C+p+%3D+2.299%5E%7B-16%7D%29&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002).
The significant over-representation in the first trimester is aligned
with that period being the most susceptible period in pregnancy for
birth defects from biological causes. For example, it is well-known that
severe alcohol abuse during the first trimester can disrupt the
development of the head, resulting in birth defects. Similarly, studies
on the teratogenicity of high (>10000 IU) doses of vitamin A suggest
that birth defects were concentrated among the babies born to women who
had consumed it before the seventh week of gestation. Importantly, it
maps to the period when morning sickness is most prevalent, which itself
seems to be an adaptation to protect the fetus in early development from
potentially teratogenic compounds in the food. Thus, it also corresponds
to the peak period of defects from the ubiquitination-activating drug
thalidomide that was wrongly used to treat morning sickness (we shall
return to its action below).

From Stevenson’s cases, which are mostly from Occidental cultures and
relatively close to our times (1700-1900s), it became clear that the
idea of maternal impression is indeed a widespread cross-cultural one
with arborizations into other “mystery” phenomena like abhicāra and
reincarnation. This made us revisit the old Hindu medical tradition to
consider the positions they held in this regard. As a representative, we
may consider one of the great authoritative texts of early Hindu
medicine: the Śarīra-sthāna of the Suśruta-saṃhitā, which starts of with
an ancient theory of being. Following the sāṃkhya tradition, it lays out
that from the primordial matter prakṛti, various organs constituting the
body arose. While these organs are seen as being made up of matter
(bhautika
![\\to](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Cto&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
adhibhūta), i.e., transformations (vikārāḥ) of prakṛti, they are said to
have mapping on the realm of consciousness (adhyātma) and the sphere of
the gods (adhidaivata; which cuts across the material and conscious
realms in a “Platonic sense”). This mapping to the gods derived from the
Yajurveda (with some parallels to the puruṣa-sūkta-s and central to the
nyāsa-s of later tradition) is stated thus in Suśruta:

sva svaś caiṣāṃ viṣayo .adhibhūtam \| svayam adhyātmam adhidaivtaṃ ca \|
atha buddhe brahmā \| ahaṃkārasyeśvaraḥ \| manaś candramā \| diśaḥ
śrotrasya \| tvaco vāyuḥ \| sūryaś cakṣoḥ \| rasanasya+āpaḥ \| pṛthivī
ghṛāṇasya \| vaco .agniḥ \| hastayor indraḥ \| pādayor viṣṇuḥ \| pāyor
mitraḥ \| prajāpatir upasthyeti \| tatra sarva evācetana eṣa vargaḥ \|
puruṣaḥ pañcaviṃśatitamaḥ sa ca kārya-kāraṇa-saṃyuktaś cetayitā bhavati
\|\|  
The mapping is thus: Brahmā: intellect; Īśvara (Rudra): I-ness (personal
identity); Moon: mind; directions: hearing; Vāyu: skin; Sun: eyes;
waters: tongue; Earth: nose; Agni: vocal system; Indra: prehensile
organs; Viṣṇu: locomotory organs; Mitra: excretory organs; Prajāpati:
reproductive organs. The final sentence clarifies that while the
evolutes of prakṛti are by themselves unconscious, the 25th tattva,
puruṣa, enters the primal cause (prakṛti) and its evolutes and endows
them its nature consciousness. We layout this sāṃkhya foundation of
Hindu medicine because it is via that intersection of the realm of
consciousness and matter that it tries to explain things that would be
seen as “supernatural” in a modern sense.

The Hindu medical tradition (like that recorded by Suśruta) has a
proto-biological understanding of specific issues generally pointing in
the right direction:  
(1) Unlike the folk idea prevalent in the Indo-European world of the
sperm being a seed sown in the vagina/uterus, it understood that there
was a biological contribution from both the parents. In the case of the
male, it saw that as coming from the semen. That contribution was not
visible in the female, but it postulated an ārtava — a theoretical
ovum.  
(2) It did recognize that there was some sex-determining principle
coming from the semen and the ārtava, though the exact nature of it was
imperfectly understood.  
(3) It recognized a “proto-genetic” principle wherein the parents’
postulated contributions gave rise to different organs in the embryo.  
(4) It presented a primitive theory based on “biochemical expressions”
in the developing embryo for various birth defects (including those
comparable to Pāṇḍu and Dhṛtarāṣṭra), atypical sexuality and
pigmentation differences.

However, superimposed on this essentially biological foundation
(sometimes with pioneering insights) is a belief in different forms of
extra-biological impressions. The roles of the various processes
involved and their effects are voiced by Suśruta thus:

san niveśaḥ śarīrāṇāṃ dantānāṃ patanodbhavau \|  
taleśv asaṃbhavo yaś ca romṇām etat svabhāvataḥ \|\|  
The development of the organs in their proper locations, the fall of
\[milk\] teeth, and the growth \[of permanent teeth\], non-growth of
hair in palms and feet all are \[examples\] of development as per the
natural law \[for that organism\].

Thus, Suśruta and other authorities acknowledge that basic human
development is as per a natural law — i.e., a purely biological process
typical of a given species. However, immediately thereafter, he cites
śloka-s that goes on to describe a very different hypothesis regarding
mental traits:

bhāvitāḥ pūrvadeheṣu satataṃ śāstra-buddhayaḥ \|  
bhavanti sattva-bhūyiṣṭhāḥ pūrva-jāti-smarā narāḥ \|\|  
Those constantly conditioned in the former bodies by the study of the
śāśtra-s become \[even in the current birth\] men endowed in sattva
remembering the former birth.

karmaṇa codito yena tadāpnoti punarbhave \|  
abhyastāḥ pūrvadehe ye tāneva bhajate guṇān \|\|  
Impelled by acts which he has performed \[in the former birth\], a
person attains his \[state\] in the reincarnation. Those activities
which were repeatedly practiced in the former body are also shared by
the \[current one\].

Thus, there was a belief that mental traits transmitted via
reincarnation from the previous birth, like an inclination toward good
learning, and behavioral tendencies acquired by constant practice, were
superimposed on the basic biological development (mentioned above).
Combined with the reincarnational effect (which parallels beliefs in
most human cultures across the world) were various beliefs that may be
considered as belonging to the domain of maternal impression. One of
these is believed to act at the time of conception or just before that,
as was the case with Ambikā and Ambālikā. An old verse cited by Suśruta
records such a belief:

pūrvaṃ paśyed ṛtu-snātā yādṛśaṃ naram aṅganā \|  
tādṛśaṃ janayet putraṃ bhartāraṃ darśayed ataḥ \|\|  
Whoever is the first man the woman may see after her purificatory bath
following her menstruation, the child she births resembles him; hence,
she must see her husband.

The commentators add that if her husband is not around at the moment,
she should see the sun. Thus, the impression of the first man she sees
is said to determine the child’s appearance. The old Hindu medical
tradition also records a variety of alternative causes for birth
defects, some biological and other “impressional”:

garbho vāta-prakopeṇa dauhṛde vāvamānite \|  
bhavet kubjaḥ kuṇiḥ paṅgur mūko minmina eva vā \|\|  
A fetus suffering insults from the derangement of vāta (one of the three
basic bodily processes of old Hindu physiology
![\\approx](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Capprox&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
humors of Greek physiology) or due to the \[unfulfilled\] maternal
cravings (dauhṛda), may indeed become hunchbacked, defective in the
arms, defective in the legs, dumb, or nasal-voiced.

mātā-pitro .astu nāstikyād aśubhaiś ca purākṛtaiḥ \|  
vātādīnāṃ ca kopena garbho vikṛtim āpnuyāt \|\|  
From the mother or father being counter-religious or due to their
inauspicious ways or from their misdeeds in a past incarnation or from
the derangement of the vāta and the like the fetus acquires
birth-defects.

Thus, while a proximal physiological cause (i.e., the derangement of the
doṣa-s) is offered, meta- or “supernatural” causes are also suggested in
the form of unfulfilled maternal cravings and the “impressions” of the
inappropriate ways of the parents in the current and past incarnations.
For the maternal cravings, the Hindu proto-scientists presented a purely
physiological hypothesis within the context of embryological
development:

tatra prathame māsi kalalaṃ jāyate \| dvitīye śītoṣmānilair
abhiprapacyamānānāṃ mahābhūtānāṃ saṃghāto ghanaḥ saṃjāyate \| yadi
piṇḍaḥ pumān strī cet peśī napuṃsakaṃ ched arbudam iti \| tṛtīye
hasta-pāda-śirasāṃ pañca-piṇḍakā nirvartante \| aṅga-pratyaṅga-vibhāgaś
ca sūkṣmo bhavati \| caturthe sarvāṅga-vibhāgaḥ pravyaktaro bhavati \|
garbha-hṛdaya-pravyakti-bhāvāc cetanā-dhātur abhivyakto bhavati \|
kasmāt? tat sthānatvāt \| tasmād garbhaś caturthe māsy abhiprāyam
indriyārtheṣu karoti \| dvihṛdayāṃ ca nārīṃ dauhṛdinīṃ ācakṣate \|
dauhṛda-vimānanāt kubjaṃ kuṇiṃ khañjaṃ jaḍaṃ vāmanaṃ vikṛtākṣam anakṣaṃ
vā nārī sutaṃ janayati \| tasmāt sā yad icchet tat tasyai dāpayet \|
labdha-dauhṛdā hi vīryavantaṃ cirāyuṣaṃ ca putraṃ janayati \|\|  
There (in the womb), in the first month, a bag-like structure emerges.
In the second, starting with metabolic action of the three (śītoṣmānila)
physiological processes, the molecular combinations of the primal
elements comprise a condensed structure. The presence of a lump-like
structure indicates a male; a bud-like structure a female; a tumorous
mass, an intersex. In the third, 5 lump-like forms of the hands, legs
and head develop. The incipient divisions of the various organs and
their subdivisions come into being. In the fourth, the substructures of
all the organs become clearly apparent. From the full development of the
fetal heart, the substance of consciousness becomes apparent. How so?
From the heart being the receptacle \[of consciousness\]. Thus, in the
fourth month, the fetus displays agency for the organs to
apprehend/elicit their stimuli/actions. There are two hearts (one of the
fetus and one of the mother), and from that the pregnant woman is known
to be two-hearted \[thus, the maternal cravings\]. Hence, unfulfilled
maternal cravings result in the woman giving birth to an offspring that
may be hunchbacked, defective in the hands, defective in the legs,
mentally defective, dwarfed, with deformed eyes or eyeless. Therefore,
one must satisfy her cravings as she wishes. Indeed, the woman with
satisfied cravings births a virile and long-lived son.

Thus, the Hindu hypothesis of maternal cravings stems from the old
belief that the heart is the seat of consciousness \[Footnote 1\]. Thus,
the full development of the heart causes the organs of the fetus to seek
their stimuli (jñānendriya-s) or actions (karmendriya-s). These are
expressed via the mother resulting in maternal cravings. The hypothesis
further posits that non-fulfillment of these results in defects in the
fetus. We still do not fully understand the causes for maternal cravings
or their adaptive logic in their entirety. The “spandrel” hypothesis
suggests that they might arise from the uterine nervous connections
activating the neighboring taste-related regions in the part of the
brain known as the insula. However, we find it highly unlikely that the
phenomenon is a spandrel. On the other hand, modern experiments suggest
that, at least in childhood, there might be a liking for the gustatory
stimuli the kids were repeatedly exposed to via their mother’s food
during their fetal development. It is possible the Hindu
proto-scientists made similar observations and accordingly extrapolated
and expanded them to propose the above hypothesis. Indeed, tradition
holds that such maternal cravings in themselves have a prognostic
character. We cite a few examples of these below:

āśrame saṃyatātmānaṃ dharmaśīlaṃ prasūyate \|  
devatā-pratimāyāṃ tu prasūte pārṣadopamam \|\|  
darśane vyālajātīnāṃ hiṃsāśīlaṃ prasūyate  
The woman with a craving to visit a dwelling of sages births a
self-controlled child committed to dharma. Indeed, she who desires to
see an image of a god births a child who would grace a council. She who
wishes to see a carnivorous animal births a child prone to violence.  
godhā-māṃsā .aśane putraṃ suṣupsuṃ dhāraṇātmakam \|  
gavāṃ māṃse tu balinaṃ sarva-kleṣa-sahaṃ tathā \|\|  
She who wants to eat the meat of a *Varanus* lizard births a child who
will sleep well and cling to material possessions. Similarly, she who
craves for beef births a strong child capable of enduring all manner of
hardships.  
māhiṣe dauhṛdāc chūraṃ raktākṣaṃ loma-saṃyutam \|  
vārāha-māṃsāt svapnāluṃ śūraṃ saṃjanyet sutam \|\|  
She who craves for buffalo-meat births a brave child with reddish eyes
and endowed with hair. She who longs for pork births a sleepy though a
brave child.

More generally, the tradition holds that the nature of the child would
mirror the nature of the animal whose meat the pregnant woman desires.
Finally, tradition also holds that there is a direct mapping between the
mother’s body and that of the fetus to account for the classic maternal
impressions:

doṣābhighātair garbhiṇyā yo yo bhāgaḥ prapīḍyate \|  
sa sa bhāgaḥ śiśos tasya garbhasthasya prapīḍyate \|\|  
Whichever part of the pregnant woman’s body is afflicted by
physiological derangement or by injury, the corresponding part of the
child in the uterus is afflicted.

In conclusion, we can summarize the old Hindu medical tradition’s
position on fetal development as involving: 1) natural laws expressed as
biological processes with parental “genetic contributions” as the
primary drivers of development; 2) impressions of past incarnations of
the child; 3) impressions from deeds of parents in current and past
incarnations; 4) fulfilled or unfulfilled dauhṛda-s, which are
physiologically explained as the influence on the mother by the fetal
organs exercising the apprehension of their objects; 5) maternal
impressions from the mother’s visual images post-menstruation and the
mapping of the insults to the mother’s body onto the fetal body. The
widespread presence of the impressionist components of these beliefs
across cultures suggests that they go far back in history. Apparently,
in some Romance languages, the word for birthmark and craving are the
same and reflect a belief that the unfulfilled dauhṛda-s spawn those
marks. The yavana physician Galen believed in the classic maternal
impressions, and Empedocles held that women who fell in love with
certain statues produced offspring who looked like them. Similarly, in
Greek literature, the dark Ethiopian is said to have given birth to the
fair Chariclea because she kept looking at the image of the white
Andromeda while pregnant.

A version of such beliefs played an important role in the history of
biology closer to our times. Had the French soldier Jean-Baptiste
Lamarck (1744–1829 CE) been blown to smithereens by the German guns
bombarding his position that he held with great valor, we might not have
had one of the famous debates in biology that is somewhat artificially
presented in textbooks. Having survived his stint in the French army
Lamarck went on to propose one of the early modern evolutionary
theories. Lamarck’s theoretical framework lay at the transition between
archaic and modern scientific thought — one could say the transition
between proto-science and science. His chemistry was more primitive than
that presented in early sāṃkhya, subscribing to a four-element model of
the universe and opposing the leap towards modern chemistry pioneered by
his compatriot Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier. Aspects of his biology also
remained primitive: on the one hand, he subscribed to spontaneous
generation, apparently disregarding the work of the Italian Fransisco
Redi that showed it to be a myth. On the other, he subscribed to the
existence of a “life force”, which among other things, “tends to
increase the volume of all organs”. Nevertheless, he was a keen
biologist who, through his investigations, realized that organisms of
one form must have evolved from those with another. A part of his
explanation for this process involved a hypothesis based on a certain
proto-biophysics of fluid flow. He argued that the rapid flow of fluids
within the tissues of organisms “will etch canals between delicate
tissues” much like a river erodes its bed. He then postulated that the
differential flow rates that will ensue would lead to the origin of
distinct organs. Simultaneously, he saw these fluids themselves becoming
more complex, giving rise to a greater diversity of secretions and organ
diversification. He combined this proto-biophysics with two so-called
laws to explain the evolutionary process. The first law postulated that
different organs of a given organism were either augmented or diminished
depending on the degree of their use or disuse in the course of its
life. The idea was based on the observation of real somatic adaptation
to environmental pressures happening in the course of an organism’s
life. The second law posited that these characters acquired during the
life of an organism by the first law are passed to their offspring — the
inheritance of acquired characters. In proposing this, he was more or
less following the broad class of ideas coming down from the ancients
that were similar to maternal impression in the general sense.

Charles Darwin’s grandfather Erasmus, who was one of the inspirations
for his evolutionary theory, also accepted the inheritance of acquired
characters, and Charles himself acknowledged this aspect of Lamarckism
and incorporated it as a subsidiary component of his own theory. The
shock waves from Darwin’s hypothesis resulted in a sizable body of
biologists falling back to pure Lamarckism or some variant thereof as a
counter to Darwinism that deeply disturbed them. One such was the
goal-seeking evolutionary theory of the German biologist, Theodor Eimer,
which incorporated the Lamarckian mechanism. Attempts claiming to
demonstrate Lamarckian inheritance of acquired characters went on for a
long time, including that of the famous Ivan Pavlov, but none of these
studies produced reproducible or reliable results. Despite this,
Lamarckism remained popular, especially in France, down to the second
half of the 1900s. A variant of it had tragic consequences in the Soviet
Empire in the form of Lysenkoism. Starting with the embryological work
of Johannes Müller, serious questions were raised about whether
embryonic development was affected by somatic characteristics acquired
by the parents. After Darwin, August Weismann experimentally showed the
isolation of the reproductive germplasm from the somatoplasm of the
adult body in mammals casting doubt on any mechanism that allowed the
Lamarckian changes acquired by the somatoplasm of an organism to be
transmitted to the offspring. The subsequent advances in genetics,
biochemistry and developmental biology over the 1900s made Lamarckism
look less plausible until it was more or less consigned to the history
of science among serious biologists.

However, by the late 1990s, a version of the “inheritance of acquired
characters” started making a comeback within the Darwinian framework.
Microorganisms, especially prokaryotes, show rampant horizontal gene
transfer. The horizontally transferred genetic material integrated into
the genome or a plasmid can then be transmitted to the offspring. Its
subsequent maintenance would be subject to natural selection. In fact,
the selection could act even before the transmission to the progeny; for
example, the transfer of a gene confers immunity to a virus or
resistance to a toxin (e.g., antibiotic). Thus, one could see it as a
process of acquiring an adaptation that is then transferred to the next
generation. Indeed, several organisms, like bacteria, have sophisticated
mechanisms for acquiring foreign DNA. This could be in the form of the
competence system that allows DNA uptake in certain phases of their life
cycle or domesticated viruses that can act as transfer agents for DNA.
Less understood, but potentially in a similar vein, are the lipid
vesicles derived from cells that might also carry nucleic acids. Thus,
the acquisition of characters encoded in the transferred DNA from the
environment has been institutionalized in many bacteria. Indeed, the
commonly cited prokaryotic immune mechanisms, namely the CRISPR and
PIWI-based systems and other systems we have discovered, can be seen as
variants of this process of controlled acquisition of genetic
information (in this case, from invading elements like viruses) that is
then inherited by the offspring. However, this is entirely within a
Darwinian setting with selection post-acquisition explicitly taking the
place of use or disuse as an augmenting or diminishing agent.

In prokaryotes, this transfer of DNA in part plays the role of sex.
Eukaryotes have evolved an institutionalized sexual mechanism that is
decoupled from ambient DNA transfer. Nevertheless, they too have been
extensively acquiring “ready-made” adaptations through horizontal DNA
transfer. That said, from relatively early in eukaryotic evolution,
there have been repeated adaptations for “setting aside” a germplasm
from the somatoplasm. In the unicellular eukaryotic world, we see this
in the ciliates, which set aside their germplasm in the micronucleus
while running their cells with a somatoplasmic macronucleus. Indeed, the
macronucleus loses a good part of the genetic information maintained and
transmitted to the next generation in the micronucleus. Of course, this
separation of the germplasm and the somatoplasm is the norm in
eukaryotes like the animals. Moreover, a similar phenomenon to the
ciliate macronuclear DNA loss is seen in several animals like the
*Ascaris* nematode worm or the lamprey, where part of the genome is shed
in the somatic cells. In vertebrates, in cells like lymphocytes, the DNA
is again lost or mutated as part of the generation of immune antigen
receptors. In the neurons of at least some vertebrates, the genome is
edited by the jumping of transposons. However, all these “acquired”
somatic changes are kept out of the germplasm segregated early on from
the somatoplasm. The origin of this separation seems to be due to the
genetic “addiction” pressure exerted by genomic selfish elements against
their loss by excision, as seen in the macronucleus or the somatic
genomes of some animals. This has gone hand in hand with mechanisms that
suppress the expression of these genomic selfish elements in the
germline. This suppression process is achieved by a class of mechanisms
collectively termed “epigenetic” or transmission of information over and
beyond that transmitted by the genome. Along with this, pressures to
safeguard the genomic integrity of the germline have also resulted in
strong blood-germline barriers in various animals.

On one hand, these discoveries have been the strongest strike against
impressionist information transmission, including Lamarckian acquired
characters — a consequence of the strong shielding of the germplasm in
several eukaryotes from the somatoplasm. On the other hand, the
epigenetic mechanisms have revived a version of this transmission
because they do seem to transfer non-genetic information
inter-generationally. There have been claims that such epigenetic
mechanisms might be behind the intergenerational transmission of the
effects of trauma. However, the evidence for such claims is rather
questionable, and at best, they remain uncertain to date. Nevertheless,
at least in some animals, like insects, there are other forms of
epigenetic information like endo-parasitic bacteria transmitted via the
germline (e.g., *Wolbachia*), which influence the sex ratios by killing
a subset of the offspring produced in matings that disfavor their
transmission. These bacteria often encode toxins to enforce their
“addiction”, several of which attack the genomic DNA of their host,
including, as we discovered, by mutating it. Thus, there is a
possibility of transmission of acquired effects through epigenetic
mechanisms that have developmental consequences in a more limited sense.

One of the major discoveries of modern developmental biology, including
ones we have contributed to, is the role of protein ubiquitination in
regulating development. A major aspect of ubiquitination is its action
on protein stability, i.e., tagging of key developmental regulator
proteins for their degradation. Thus, both the disruption and
enhancement of various ubiquitination pathways can result in a diverse
array of birth defects. As noted above, the mechanism of action of
thalidomide is via the enhancement of one of the ubiquitination systems,
which in turn results in the degradation of a transcription factor
causing birth defects. It is conceivable that other than toxic
compounds, like thalidomide, certain other stresses (or, if true,
transmitted epigenetic information) impinge on the ubiquitin system to
affect the stability of various developmental regulators resulting in
birth defects.

Coming a full circle, with an improved understanding of biological
processes, beliefs in maternal impressions in the broad sense, which lay
within the domain of mainstream medicine from the days of the ancient
Ārya-s to the late 1800s, were gradually excluded from it. As Stevenson,
perhaps, the last intrepid believer in it in the western academe noted,
these reports more or less vanished in the 1900s. We are not sure if it
is a useful avenue to revisit. Nevertheless, being cognizant of it being
a tenacious feature of the cross-cultural belief landscape, we believe
that it is something that can be better investigated with the sharper
tools that are currently at our disposal. We have a range of mature
technologies that span nucleic acid sequencing, biochemistry, and
developmental biology, allowing us to more directly probe birth defects
than ever before. These could be brought to bear more systematically on
the suspected cases of impressions — in the least, the conclusions might
contribute in a more humdrum way to our understanding of developmental
processes.

Finally, if one were to see a case where one is inclined to bypass
biological explanations for the “supernatural”, then one may ask if the
relationship between the impressing stimulus and the impression is
really causal or a manifestation of the mysterious “synchronicity”.
While those inclined toward the rationality of the age might abhor the
very mention of synchronicity, it may be simply something they have not
experienced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Footnote 1: As an aside, we may note that Suśruta records that Śaunaka
proposed the head to be the controller of the organs and director of the
development of other organs rather than the heart: pūrvaṃ śiraḥ
sambhavati +ity āha śaunakaḥ \| śiro mūlatvāt pradhānendriyāṇām \|
However, this more correct apprehension seems to have been dropped in
parts of Hindu biological tradition for the more primitive heart theory
proposed by Kṛtavīrya
