+++
title = "Speculations about the"
full_title = "Speculations about the DruhyusPart 1"
date = "2014-05-25"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/speculations-about-the-druhyus-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/speculations-about-the-druhyus-part-1/).


					Speculations about the Druhyus-Part 1				



[ May 25, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/speculations-about-the-druhyus-part-1/ "Permalink to Speculations about the Druhyus-Part1")

-   in [Vedic
    History](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/vedic-history/)
-   [3
    Comments](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/speculations-about-the-druhyus-part-1/#comments)

# Speculations about the Druhyus-Part1

Speculations about the Druhyus

Part 1: Possible Founders of a Kshatriya-Centric Ritual Tradition?

Amongst the five tribes of the Chandravamshi, the Anu, Druhyu, Puru,
Yadu and Turvashu; the Druhyu remains the most mysterious, having
eclipsed into obscurity at a very early stage in traditional history as
chronicled in the Puranas. The Druhyus were probably the most powerful
amongst the five peoples of the lunar dynasty at the time when
Yuvanashva was king of the solar-clan Iksvakus and his son Mandhatr was
the prince and ready to assume leadership of the Iksvaku army from his
father.

Yuvanashva was married to Gauri, daughter of Matinara, king of the
Purus. Owing to this matrimonial alliance, the Iksvakus were obliged to
defend the Purus from the threat of the Druhyus who were making inroads
into Madhyadesa, the Vedic heartland and realm of the Purus. Mandhatr
dealt the Druhyus a crushing defeat and killed their king, Angara.
Succesive military intervention by Purukutsa successfully drove the
Druhyus out of the Northwest frontier and the formerly Druhyu-controlled
lands were soon occupied by the Yadu from the south and the west-ward
moving Usinara faction of the Anava tribe. The Sivi branch of the Anu
dynasty would go on to establish the famous kingdoms, including those of
Madra and Kekaya.

So, what happened to the Druhyus since the Puranas cut short the
geneaology, indicating that they fell into oblivion? Is it possible that
some of the Druhyus might have remained for perhaps a few centuries more
in the Northwest of what we call modern India? That is, could the Punjab
continued to have been home to the Druhyu people after the recurring
waves of Iksvaku offense, and be a safe haven for their cultural
practices to flourish?

Although evidence is almost zero, and we can only make an educated guess
for all of these questions, the following speculations might be of some
merit by their sheer virtue of being able to connect several disparate
threads in our recorded tradition and scripture.

A number of essential points to note in this regard:

1.  The slain ruler of the Druhyus, Angara, or Angara-setu as he is also
    known in some Puranas was succeeded by his son, Gandhara after whom
    the famous Gandhara country is named, and metamorphosed in modern
    times into Kandahar, Afghanistan. Mandhatr’s son Purukutsa is
    recorded to have engaged the Mauneya Gandharvas by attacking from
    the Narmada River, at the request of the Nagas who were despoiled by
    the Gandharvas. \[1\] Is this a sign of a brief Druhyu resurgence,
    led by their prince, Gandhara as the terms, “Gandhara” and
    “Gandharva” are etymologically related? It also makes sense since
    Angara and Mandhatr were contemporaneous. Their respective sons
    would have been contemporaries as well.



2.  Some of the Druhyus must have remained in the Punjab region, where
    the Anu established a number of kingdoms including those of the
    Madra and Kekaya. The reasoning for this is the fact that in the
    famous Battle of Ten Kings (Dasarajna) that pitted the North
    Panchala king and the Rig Veda’s greatest hero, Sudas against a
    conglomerate of other tribes; the latter includes the Anu and
    Druhyu, who are often mentioned together. This could very well imply
    the assimilation and thus the continued survival of the Druhyu
    tribe, and by extension, their traditions and practices in the Anu
    region.



3.  Just 2-3 generations before Sudas: Bharata, the brother of Rama of
    Ramayana fame, was the son of Dasaratha by Kaikeyi of the Kekaya
    kingdom. After Rama assumed rulership of the Ayodhya Kingdom,
    Bharata went over to the Kekaya country of his mother to rule. From
    there, his sons Taksha and Pushkara invaded the Gandhara country and
    established two capitals in their own names, Takshasila and
    Pushkaravati. The Madra kingdom seems to have been undisturbed by
    the accounts of both Ramayana and Mahabahrata. But as Pargiter
    points out in his seminal and ground-breaking work, Ancient Indian
    Historical Tradition (pg. 279-280)



“Bharata’s mother was a Kaikeya princess and he obtained that kingdom
apparently. His two sons Taksa and Puskara are said to have conquered
Gandhara and reigned there in Taksasila and Puskaravati
respectively……The two states in Gandhara receive no further notice and
were probably absorbed among the Druhyus.”



So, we can safely assume that the Druhyus and their culture managed to
survive in Madra, Kekeya and Gandhara.





Keeping these points in mind, it would be now pertinent to examine some
verses in a lengthy hate speech Karna makes to Shalya with respect to
Shalya’s Madra heritage. That whole section of the Mahabharata is
nothing but vitriol, and sparing not even Madra’s northwestern
neighbours, extends the diatribe to the Gandhara people as well.



**madrake saṃgataṃ nāsti madrako hi sacāpalaḥ madrakeṣu ca duḥsparśaṃ
śaucaṃ gāndhārakeṣu ca rājayājaka yājyena naṣṭaṃ dattaṃ havir bhavet
(Mbh: 27.80-81)**

****

“The Madra is fickle-minded. Friendship is lost amongst the Madra as
purity is lost amongst the Gandhara and a sacrifice where the King
himself offers the libations.”



And after a protracted exchange between Shalya and Karna taking
pot-shots at each other, Karna ends the colloquy by once again lashing
out at the Madraka and related Northwestern peoples. Karna recounts a
tale where the famous king-turned-demon Kalmashapada is rescued by
another king while sinking in a stream. Upon being rescued, the demon
reveals to the king the mantra by which demonic possession or the effect
of poision can be overcome.



**mānuṣāṇāṃ malaṃ mecchā mecchānāṃ mauṣṭikā malam mauṣṭikānāṃ malaṃ
śaṇḍāḥ śaṇḍānāṃ rājayājakāḥ rājayājaka yājyānāṃ madrakāṇāṃ ca yan malam
tad bhaved vai tava malaṃ yady asmān na vimuñcasi iti rakṣopasṛṣṭeṣu
viṣavīryahateṣu ca rākṣasaṃ bheṣajaṃ proktaṃ saṃsiddhaṃ vacanottaram
(Mbh: 30.70-72)**

****

“Themlecchasare the dirt of mankind: the oilmen are the dirt of the
Mlecchas; eunuchs are the dirt of oilmen; they who have Kings
(Kshatriyas) offering oblations for them, are the dirt of eunuchs. The
dirt of those who have Kshatriya priests, of also of the Madrakas, shall
be thine if thou do not abandon me.”



It is quite striking that the poet through the medium of Karna, after
insulting the chastity of women in the Madra and aforementioned
countries and using a repertoire of harsh insults, should twice use the
imagery of Kshatriya priests as the ultimate albeit rather unconvincing
metaphor for the depravity of the Madra people. The poet, likely to be a
Brahmana himself, must have felt very strongly against such a practice.



On a more important note, although the poet uses the “Kshatriya priests”
idea only as a metaphor and does not directly accuse the Northwestern
Madraka and Gandharaka peoples of it, it can be reasonably concluded
that this practice must have been especially prominent amonst the
Northwestern Madraka and Gandharaka peoples, given that he makes Karna
repeatedly state how the Pancala, Kuru, Matsya, Surasena and Cedi, and
even the eastern Anga, Magadha and Kalinga peoples are conversant with
pious practices.

The hypothesis: Could it be that the Northwest inherited the tradition
of Kshatriya priests from an ancient Druhyu or Anu-Druhyu culture?



At first, the scarcity of information about the Druhyus in the tradition
compels us to see the hypothesis as a lost cause. However, Mandhatr’s
grandson Trasadasyu would be a good starting point. Unfortunately, we do
not have any narratives about this Trasadasyu who, from the dynastic
lists reconstructed and synchronized by Pargiter, is understood to be
the first one to bear this unique name. In the next post, we would
explore the terms, “Dasyu” and “Dasa” to clarify our understanding of
what the Druhyu culture might have been and conclude if the above
hypothesis can at least make sense.











Footnotes



\[1\]: The Nagas could have been one of the early, serpent-worshipping
warrior tribes which was widespread in Northern India incuding parts of
Rajasthan. Mandhatr had married Bindumati, daughter of king
Sasabindhava, the then ruler of the Yadavas and fathered Purukutsa. The
maternal connection with the Yadavas would have proven useful for
Purukutsa’s offense against the Gandharvas, as the Narmada river was in
Yadu territory. It is interesting that the Nagas sought the assistance
of the Iksvakava.

Tags: [arya](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/arya/),
[aryan](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/aryan/),
[bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[bharatavarsha](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharatavarsha/),
[druhyu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/druhyu/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[ikshvaku](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ikshvaku/),
[iksvaku](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/iksvaku/),
[india](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/india/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[purana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/purana/),
[puranas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puranas/),
[ramayana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ramayana/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

