+++
title = "The Joy of Discovering"
full_title = "The Joy of Discovering SynchronismsPart 1"
date = "2014-05-27"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/).


					The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 1				



[ May 27, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/ "Permalink to The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 1")

-   in [Delving into the
    Text](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/delving-into-the-text/),
    [Vedic
    History](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/vedic-history/)
-   [3
    Comments](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/#comments)

# The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 1

**Note: I had received feedback that some of the posts are difficult to
understand. Hence, I created a new page for
[downloads](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/downloads/ "Downloads")
that can be seen next to the “About Me”. I will upload important
documents there which might help readers better appreciate the articles.
As of now, I have uploaded pdf files of certain pages from Pargiter’s
Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, that will illustrate the map of
Vedic India as well as the genealogical lists of the various, great
dynasties that ruledBhāratavarṣa. It is recommended that youread the
articles in this blog in conjunction with the uploaded files.**

In the** [previous
post](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/the-historical-wasteland-of-hindu-exceptionalism/ "The Historical Wasteland of Hindu ‘Exceptionalism’")**,
we had noted the long and continuing neglect of the puranas’ testimony,
and had also briefly mentioned Pargiter’s unique work, outstanding among
western scholars for its emphasis on the overall credibility of the
Puranas. However, even the most insightful contributions hardly escape
the clutches of the thinkers’ biases and even Pargiter was no exception
to this.

Pargiter had distinguished between two types of traditions-the
Brahmanical and Kshatriya. The Brahmanical tradition was the Veda
Samhitas, the Brahmanas, Aranyakas and Upanishads, which had their own
ahistorical concerns and not too perturbed by the lack of historical
consistency in their content. Hence, Pargiter would argue that such
texts, with their main focal point being a religious agenda such as
rituals or the greatness of Brahmanas, were not sufficiently reliable as
sources from which a cogent history can be derived. On the other hand,
the Kshatriya tradition consisted of the Puranas whose Vamsa accounts,
in delineating the genealogies of kings, display a remarkable sense of
consistency. This implies that these sources represented a dispassionate
attempt to preserve the memory of one’s own renowned ancestors. Of
course, the Puranas too had their share of fantastic myths, which
Pargiter conveniently explained as a Brahmanical spin on an otherwise
Kshatriya account. The Itihasas, namely the Mahabharata and Ramayana,
were more difficult to fit into Pargiter’s neat, dualistic scheme.
Pargiter, rightfully though, had greater respect for the historical
value of the Mahabharata as compared to the Ramayana, where the sense of
chronology/genealogy is a little anachronistic.

However, this excessive bias against the Sruti as a valid witness to the
historical developments of the Brahma-Kshatra was a hindrance to
realizations that might finish a particular historical puzzle. Sudasa
Paijavana, one of the greatest heroes of the North Pancala dynasty and
also the most memorable doyen of the Rig Veda. Sudasa and his troops
were collectively addressed as the Bharatas in the RV while he battled a
confederate of ten (Actually more than ten, but the RV rounded it off to
ten for, perhaps, poetic or metrical reasons) kings, the Dasarajanya.
One of these ten enemies he struggled against was the Puru. Many
indologists, being outsiders to the Vedic tradition and of a lethargic
disposition towards developing their narratives in consonance with
Pauranika testimony, spout off nonsensical claims like, “The Bharatas
and Purus were opposing tribes” and even worse, “The Bharatas and Purus
later merged to form the Kuru state”! A brief study of the genealogical
lists would demonstrate that Bharata Daushyanti was a distant descendant
of Puru. The Bharatas had several offshoots later on and the eldest
branch ruled at Hastinapura (Founded by the great Hastin, the fifth
descendant of Bharata Daushyanti), while junior branches include the
North and South Pancala dynasties as well as the Dvimidha. Hence,
Pancalas, Dvimidha and the kings of the Hastinapura line are all
Bharatas and thus Pauravas. Tradition does not remember any non-Bharata
Paurava clans. Hence, the term, “Paurava” can only be applied to
Bharatas unless it is explicitly used to refer to an individual born
before the time of Bharata Daushyanti.

So who was this unnamed ‘Puru’ enemy that Sudasa and his ‘Bharatas’ had
battled against as alluded to in the Rig Veda? Obviously, it was another
Bharata clan, apart from North Pancala. The most logical hypothesis
would be that it was the eldest branch of the Paurava-Bharata that
reigned at Hastinapura. Sudasa’s campaign against the ‘ten kings’ was
indeed a massive effort and must have been to overthrow the incumbent
rulers of Hastinapura as well as other major kings in the region. There
is an interesting piece of textual evidence from the Mahabharata to
support this hypothesis, as Pargiter points out in his monograph, “The
North Pancala Dynasty” and the relevant portions are worth quoting in
full:

“Now epic tradition in one passage takes up this story and carries it to
a conclusion which very naturally is not noticed in the Rigveda. It
relates the story from the Paurava side, calling as usual the Pauravas
Bharatas and this dynasty Pancalya. The passage condensed runs thus.
While Samvarana was king (of Hastinapura) there was great destruction
among the people. The kingdom was wasted by manifold calamities—famine,
pestilence, drought, and sickness. His foes in great force smote the
Bharatas. The victorious Pancalya defeated him in battle, and king
Samvarana fled with his wife, ministers, son, etc., and dwelt in a
forest fastness near the River Sindhu and the mountains a very long
time. The rishi Vasiṣṭha went to them. They welcomed him and the king
secured him as purohita. Vasiṣṭha espoused their cause and inaugurated
him as Samraj over all Kshatriyas. Samvarana dwelt in Hastinapura and
made all kings tributary.”

And also, “Puru, whom Sudas defeated at the Parusni, and even perhaps as
far west as the Sindhu, was the Paurava Samvarana who was defeated and
fled to the Sindhu. The decline of Sudas’s kingdom after his death and
the defection of Vasiṣṭha from his family to Samvarana enabled Samvarana
to take the field again against Sahadeva or Somaka, and not only recover
his own kingdom but also reduce the power of the Pancala kingdom. The
hymns give the Pancala version, but only in the first stage, and
naturally there was nothing to glorify in the final result. The epic
gives the Paurava version and notices the whole campaign, but yet deals
tenderly with those Rigvedic kings in not mentioning the Pancalya’s name
and in merely stating Samvarana’s final success curtly without any
description of it.”

A number of interesting things to note from the Rig Vedic as well as the
Mahabharata account:

1.  As per the Mahabharata account, a certain Vasiṣṭha became the
    priest-i.e. Chief Minister-of Samvarana. However, in the Rig Veda,
    Sudasa had won his battles with the guidance of the Vasiṣṭhās.
    Hence, the Vasiṣṭhās seem to have switched their loyalty and
    defected from North Pancala to support Samvarana’s return to power.
    Interestingly, there seems to be support for a confrontation between
    Sudasa and the Vasiṣṭhās following their short-lived honeymoon
    period that lasted till the end of the Dasarajanya battle, in which
    they had emerged victorious. Sakti, the son of Vasiṣṭha and probably
    also others among the Vasiṣṭhās, were killed by Sudasa’s party. This
    is remembered by the Taittiriyakas in their Samhita (TS 7.4.7). At
    any rate, the absence of Vasiṣṭhās in the hymns that concern
    Sahadeva and Somaka, Sudasa’s son and grandson respectively, also
    stands to prove that the Vasiṣṭhās had abandoned the North Pancala
    dynasty.

&nbsp;

2.  But how the Vasiṣṭhās became the chosen priests of Sudasa is another
    fiasco in itself. A particular Visvamitra was the original priest of
    Sudasa before being rendered “mindless” (Vicetanah) at a sacrificial
    performance by Sakti, the Vasiṣṭha. The position of priest goes to
    Vasiṣṭha. The Visvamitras would later acknowledge the Jamadagnis for
    restoring them with the ‘Sasarpari’ speech. (RV 3.53.15-16) Also in
    this long and famous hymn, the last four verses are said to be
    imprecations against the Vasiṣṭhās and a focused study of it will be
    completed in the future. While this might initially seem like a
    combat with magic and rites, the political implications are obvious.
    The Visvamitras had made an alliance with the Jamadagnis, an
    observation that would later lead to the interesting synchronism I
    had discovered. Furthermore, this close association of the
    Visvamitras and Jamadagnis is remembered in the Taittiriya Samhita
    at two places, and that too in the context of their joint opposition
    to Vasiṣṭha. (TS 3.1.7; 5.4.11)

&nbsp;

3.  The Mahabharata version calls Samvarana and his troops, ‘Bharatas’
    whereas the Rig Veda uses the same to address Sudasa and his army.
    It was clear that by the time of the internecine conflict between
    the Bharatas of Sudas and Samvarana, the term, ‘Bharata’ had taken
    upon a meaning of royal power and connoted an imperial sovereignty.
    Hence, at least in the third, sixth and seventh books of Rig Veda,
    the North Pancala were referred to as Bharatas while in all other
    places, the term was exclusively reserved for the kings of
    Hastinapura. On the other hand, the term, ‘Paurava’ had become a
    generic term to describe a tribe, an ethnic group and could be used
    for both parties. This is why there are contradictory statements in
    the Rig Veda about Puru during the time of Sudasa’s confrontation.
    The following verse are both from the 7^(th) Mandala of the Rig
    Veda, composed by the Vasiṣṭhās, when they had been allied with
    Sudasa.

“vaiśvānara pūrave śośucānaḥ puro yadagne darayannadīdeḥ” RV 7.5.3c

“For pūru, Oh vaiśvānara, you shone; which forts, oh Agni, you
splitting/rending, would light up! (i.e. burn)”

“abhi yaḥ pūrum pṛtanāsu tasthau dyutāno daivyo atithiḥ śuśoca\|” RV
7.8.4c

“He who overpowered pūru in battle, as a resplendent divine guest he
shines!”

vy ānavasya tṛtsave gayam bhāg jeṣma pūruṃ vidathe mṛdhravācam \|\| RV
7.18.13c

“The wealth of ānava (descendants of anu), to the tṛtsu-s, he
apportioned (as spoils). In the fight (or, in the assembly?), we
defeated pūru of contemptible speech!”

pra paurukutsiṃ trasadasyum āvaḥ kṣetrasātā vṛtrahatyeṣu pūrum \|\| RV
7.19.3c

“You led trasadasyu, \[the son\] of purukutsa, to the obtainment of
kṣetras; puru in the killing of vṛtras (metaphorically, enemies)”

This explains the varied use of the term, ‘Puru’; where the hostile use
of ‘Puru’ is set up in contradistinction against ‘Bharata’ when the
whole of Pauranika and Itihasika tradition agrees that the latter is a
descendant (and therefore subset) of the former.

Now that we have clarified the four most critical points, [**we are
ready to encounter another textual
piece**](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-2/ "The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 2")
that will corroborate Pargiter’s solution to the puzzle of the
mysterious ‘Puru’ foe of Sudasa in the Rig Veda (Whom we had identified
as Samvarana) and also enlighten us on the related historical
developments.

Tags: [hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[india](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/india/),
[indo-aryan](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/indo-aryan/),
[indo-european](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/indo-european/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[paurava](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/paurava/),
[puru](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puru/),
[ramayana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ramayana/),
[rig](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rig/),
[sudas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sudas/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

