+++
title = "An interview with Roy"
full_title = "An interview with Roy Perrett"
date = "2018-03-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/03/16/an-interview-with-roy-perrett/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/03/16/an-interview-with-roy-perrett/).

An interview with Roy Perrett

The post which follows is part of the [occasional
series](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/category/interview/) here at the
Indian Philosophy blog in which contemporary philosophers and scholars
discuss their work. I had the opportunity to have an informal
conversation with Roy Perrett during a trip to [Ashoka
University](https://www.ashoka.edu.in/) at Sonepat, outside of New
Delhi. Rather than record our discussion verbatim (whether by podcast or
transcription), I’ve written up notes on our conversation, and had Roy
check it over for accuracy. Roy Perrett is currently Visiting Professor
of Philosophy at Ashoka University and has written a number (over
seventy) of articles and books on both Indian and Western Anglophone
philosophy.

I first asked Roy what he’s working on currently, and what he’s aiming
at with it. As readers familiar with his work will know, he has always
pursued a range of topics, and his answer reflected that. He’s writing a
set of essays focusing on the metaphysics of self, mind, and moral
psychology. In addition to drawing on Indian materials, he’s considering
including some Chinese philosophers discussing evil and human nature. As
for his goal, he characterized it broadly—it’s to understand things
better. While pursuing this goal, he noted that he has a subsidiary aim
to show that engaging with Indian and Western thinkers is fruitful, but
the primary motivation is philosophical. He wants to answer questions
such as, “What is the most plausible account of the nature of mind and
self?”, “What is the nature of moral motivation?”

Over dinner the previous evening, he had already shared a longer version
of his biographical/academic narrative—which might be one answer to the
question of how he came to study Indian philosophy. Roy says of that
story simply that it’s the usual narrative anyone has: various things
happened and he reacted. In Indian terms, it’s karma. In sociological or
historical terms, perhaps, it involved something about the time period
in which he found himself, the 1970s. As for how this interest is
related to his current position, which is Visiting Professor of
Philosophy at Ashoka University, he notes that while he’s presently in
an institution which wants to incorporate Indian materials into the
syllabus, this was not always the case. For half of his professional
life, he was focusing on Indian philosophy without it being related to
his professional responsibilities. Though there is now a trend towards
narrow specialization, he, like other philosophers (and here he cited
Putnam, Lewis, and Nozick, for some examples) is interested in a lot of
things. Although his colleagues didn’t always understand his interest
(wondering if it was an eccentric hobby, or why someone able to do
analytic philosophy would spend time on Indian thought), he emphasizes
that it’s a philosophical virtue to be familiar with more than just
Western analytic thought, for instance. After all, good philosophy will
take seriously any argument you can come up with and put forward.
Philosophers are not merely scholastics.

Turning to the topic of students who might, like him, find themselves
engaged by Indian thinkers, I asked him what advice he would give to
students who want to pursue their study. He reiterated a theme which had
emerged the evening before, over dinner with undergraduates: one’s
professional chances as a philosopher are very slim in today’s job
market. He says that it’s not something he encourages students to do
unless they genuinely cannot imagine doing anything else. After all,
despite having put a tremendous investment into one’s Ph.D., at the end
of that time, if you don’t get an academic job, you may have to leave
academic philosophy behind. However, for those students who do wish to
forge ahead, he sees two major strategies. One can be a specialist in
(Classical/Medieval etc.) Indian Philosophy, in the manner that there
are specialists in Ancient Greek Philosophy. Or, one can draw on
multiple traditions, but be grounded as an expert in Western philosophy,
publishing in analytic philosophy journals. In explaining this latter
approach, he drew an analogy with the way feminist thinking has
penetrated academia, so that rather than keeping it in a silo of Women’s
Studies departments, now people are bringing feminist perspectives to
bear on thinking in a wide range of disciplines. This is analogous to
how he thinks the study of Indian philosophy will (and should) go.

At this point, I asked him about the study of Sanskrit and other Indic
languages which are important for reading philosophical texts. Given
these two strategies, how should students think of language study,
philology, and so on? He said that given human limitations, one again
has roughly two paths: you can be a philosopher who is Indologically
literate or be an Indologist who is philosophically literate. However,
this doesn’t mean that Indology and philosophy do not need one another.
Rather, there is a communal task of opening up Indian philosophy, one
which will draw on work from all over. The Indological focus in places
like Hamburg, Vienna, Tokyo, etc. is as crucial as the more
predominantly philosophical approaches elsewhere.

Ultimately, his hope is that philosophers everywhere might eventually
feel like they need to know something about Dharmakīrti and other great
minds of Indian philosophy, just like they should know something about
Aristotle. However, most philosophers don’t read Frege in German unless
they are specializing in his thought. Roy compares the experience of
reading Indian philosophers in translation and non-specialists knowing
something about these texts to reading Russian novels in translation.
Maybe those of us who can only read them in translation can’t appreciate
fully a poet like Pushkin due to limitations of what can be conveyed in
the English medium, but we can still read with appreciation an author
like Tolstoy. And many of us consider our lives would be much poorer for
not having read him (even if only in translation).

On the topic of books, I asked him about his major intellectual
influences, philosophical or otherwise. He notes that his *[An
Introduction to Indian
Philosophy](http://www.cambridgeindia.org/Academic/subjects/Philosophy/An-Introduction-to-Indian-Philosophy?ISBN=9781316634820)*
has a list of people working in Indian philosophy who have influenced
him through conversation and correspondence, not just through their
academic writing. But four major works on Indian philosophy that
impacted him were Karl Potter’s [*Presuppositions of India’s
Philosophies*](https://books.google.co.jp/books/about/Presuppositions_of_India_s_Philosophies.html?id=wHvGnQEACAAJ&redir_esc=y)
; B.K. Matilal’s
[*Perception*](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/perception-9780198239765?cc=us&lang=en&);
J.N. Mohanty’s [*Reason and Tradition in Indian
Thought*](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/reason-and-tradition-in-indian-thought-9780198239604?cc=us&lang=en&);
M. Hiriyanna’s [*Indian Conception of
Values*](https://books.google.co.jp/books/about/Indian_Conception_of_Values.html?id=5owRAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y)
(Mysore: Kavyalaya, 1975).

As for where he’ll turn next, Roy says that he has a number of projects,
including the previously-mentioned one on the self and moral psychology.
He’s become more interested in Gandhi’s work and how to understand what
he was doing as philosophical. Whether in book form or in conversations
with other people, he’s always thinking about the value of life, the
role of film and literature in our lives, topics in ethics, aesthetics,
philosophy of religion, and so on. He reiterates that this is what he
sees himself doing as a philosopher: addressing questions like “What
makes a life worth living?” and “What are the candidates for providing
value?” These are the questions that motivate him.

Finally, returning to the bigger question of Indian philosophy more
broadly, I ask him if he has thoughts on where the field should go next.
He resists the question’s presupposition—why should he, or any single
person, say where it should go? As he has said above, in the context of
the range of skills necessary to do Indian and Western philosophy well,
no single person can embody in themselves everything necessary to
understand Sanskrit texts, to think philosophically, to draw
(appropriate) connections in Western philosophy, and so on. This is a
communal project and one which requires individuals reflecting on what
they can contribute before engaging in their work. For instance, he and
other like-minded philosophers depend on scholars who spend decades
reading a single text and the commentaries written on it. However,
ultimately, his concern is whether the text is saying something true or
not. After all, he concludes, this is his task as a philosopher – to
understand things better.
