+++
title = "Of psychological depths"
full_title = "Of psychological depths"
date = "2018-03-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/03/18/of-psychological-depths/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/03/18/of-psychological-depths/).

Of psychological depths

In my [previous
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/02/unconscious-illusions/)
about the way the mind’s automatic processes get things wrong (and how
that point is important to Buddhists), I turned to the experiments of
Daniel Kahneman (and Amos Tversky) on false cognition. I claimed that
the kind of automaticity they describe is a better explanation of what
Freud would have called the unconscious mind, citing the quip that “the
unconscious is unconscious not because it’s repressed but because it’s
not conscious.”

Some [excellent comments from Patrick
O’Donnell](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/#comment-208329)
took me to task for this claim. Patrick is pointing to the importance of
the distinction between cognitivist approaches like Kahneman’s on one
hand, and a very different kind of modern Western psychology on the
other. Freud is by far the best-known practitioner of this other kind of
psychology, but I think that it encompasses a wider variety of thinkers
including Carl Jung, and very likely going back to Nietzsche.

I treat these thinkers as practising one single kind of psychology with
reference to a key comment of Patrick’s. He claims that “cognitive
science is studying that which far closer to the surface of conscious
awareness (hence its amenability to experiments) and thus, strictly
speaking, does not treat the ‘unconscious’ mind.” I think that in this
respect Freudian psychoanalysis is best placed within a larger group of
psychological approaches that *do* claim to treat an “unconscious mind”
that is much further away from “the surface of conscious awareness”.
[Kurt Danziger](http://www.kurtdanziger.com/), in his interesting
[history of American experimental psychology and its
vocabulary](https://www.amazon.com/Naming-Mind-Psychology-Found-Language/dp/080397762X),
uses the term “depth psychology” to describe such approaches – he names
[Alfred Adler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Adler) as one of its
main protagonists alongside Freud and Jung. That term seems entirely apt
to me, in part because Freud himself appears to have used it as
self-description (in his “Beyond the pleasure principle” and “The ego
and the id”), and in part because of the very nature of what these
approaches have in common: that they seek to get beyond “the surface of
conscious awareness”, whose opposite must surely be “depth”. So while I
acknowledge [Patrick’s
point](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/#comment-208361)
that contemporary self-described “depth psychologists tend to frown on
Freud, at least in comparison with Jung”, on reflection I think the
description of Freud as a “depth psychologist” remains entirely apt.

The name aside, Patrick’s larger point is that Freud claims to be
observing something very different than Kahneman &co. do. And I think
this point is correct and of high importance – especially in reference
to any comparison with Buddhism. For what we are dealing with here, I
have realized from my exchange with Patrick, are two quite different
kinds of psychological “depth”. In [my first comment to
Patrick](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/#comment-208325)
I had said that “the hot motivational structures you describe are pretty
widespread – a great deal of Buddhist thought and practice deals with
the difficulty of rooting them out when they go down so deep.” His
response is worth quoting in full:

> habits are hard to break, and not necessarily because they’re
> unconscious, but because, through praxis (often over many years,
> beginning in our young adult lives if not earlier), they’ve become so
> ingrained (much like other things we learn): that they can be broken
> or changed is evidenced in many parts of life even if not as often as
> we would hope or like: such changes rarely require anything like
> psychoanalytic intervention, whereas those habits that are profoundly
> irrational or conspicuously distort our efforts to live a more or less
> “rational,” “normal” or “sane” life do strike me as having unconscious
> sources that require therapy of one kind or another (one, like
> psychoanalysis, with substantial pedigree).

I claimed that what Buddhists seek to eradicate is “deep” in the sense
that it is deeply *rooted* – hard to root out, hard to eradicate.
Psychoanalysts and other depth psychologists, by contrast, are claiming
to find phenomena that are deep in quite a different sense: that they
are hard to *discover*. There is an important commonality between the
two approaches, which my [initial
comment](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/#comment-208325)
had tried to note, in that both reject the Cartesian assumption that the
conscious mind is generally in control of itself, master of its own
house. That rejection is important because the assumption goes so far
beyond Descartes: we tend to think of “belief” in a simplistic sense
that identifies it with assenting consciously to propositions, not
recognizing the important things in which we do not actually control the
things we “believe”. All this was the main point of the [original
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/),
on which I don’t see any disagreement between Patrick and myself.

Yet the differences remain. And on this point what strikes me is that,
as I understand them, the target of Buddhist practices may be closer to
what is identified by Kahneman and Tversky than by Freud. That is: I
don’t think Buddhists claim it is hard to *know* what is wrong with us.
It is just hard to get *rid* of the problem – as Kahneman, I think, also
shows. In part, I think, this is because Buddhists are less concerned
than depth psychologists with individual difference: we *all* are
suffering from the same delusions, which makes them, at some level,
obvious. We might not have been able to figure out that suffering comes
from craving until somebody told us that, but once they do, we are able
to assent to the proposition without much difficulty. The hard part
comes in getting that proposition to take root at a level beyond our
fleeting consciousnesses, to be something we feel and act on rather than
just articulate. In this respect, it seems to me, Buddhists may be
considerably closer to Kahneman than to Freud.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/03/of-psychological-depths/)
