+++
title = "Haldane"
full_title = "Haldane"
date = "2013-03-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/03/20/haldane/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/03/20/haldane/).

Haldane

[![haldane](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/haldane.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/haldane.jpg)

John Burdon Sanderson Haldane, FRS \[1892-1964\] was one of the three
main founders of modern population genetics, along with Sir Ronald
Fisher and Sewall Wright.

In his life he played many parts: biochemist, physiologist, geneticist,
soldier, popularizer of science, and spy. On occasion, he was even a
fictional character.

Son of Britain’s most prominent physiologist, (John Scott Haldane,
another eccentric polymath) he worked in his father’s lab by age 8 and
was already acting as a human guinea pig. He attended the Dragon School,
Eton (which he hated) and Oxford, which he loved. He mastered Latin,
Greek, French and German and received a double first in mathematics and
classics, although his interest was already turning to science. He was
fascinated by the newly rediscovered Mendelian theory of genetics and
made a significant discovery before graduation – genetic linkage, which
occurs when different alleles are inherited jointly because of their
proximity on the same chromosome. He discovered this by analyzing his
younger sister Naomi’s guinea-pig colony. That early work was
interrupted by the First World War, in which he served as an officer of
the Black Watch – a Scottish regiment known by the Germans as the
“Ladies from Hell”, because of their kilted ferocity. JBS Haldane in no
way detracted from the regiment’s reputation: he was often in combat and
actually enjoyed it. In fact he reveled in killing the enemy, personally
delivering bombs behind enemy lines. His commander called him the
“bravest and dirtiest officer in my Army.”

After service in France and Iraq, with occasional time outs for recovery
from wounds and experiments in which his father exposed him to chlorine
gas in order to test new gas masks, he resumed his research work, first
as a fellow at Oxford and then accepting a Readership in Biochemistry at
Cambridge where he taught until 1932. During that time at Cambridge he
did most of his systematic work on evolutionary genetics. He was the
first to estimate the mutation rate of a human gene and introduced the
concept of genetic load, the net effect of the substandard genes in a
population.

In 1927, he showed that the chance of fixation – reaching 100% frequency
– of a single copy of an advantageous allele with advantage s is 2s.
This key insight explains why a very limited amount of hybridization
with another species is bound to result in the acquisition of most of
their favorable alleles, and also plays a role in our analysis of the
recent acceleration of human evolution. The work of this period is
summed up in his classic The Causes of Evolution.

Of course helping to found the central theory of biology could not fully
occupy his time. He made major contributions to enzyme chemistry. He
acquired a wife, not without some trouble and strife, since she
(Charlotte Burghes) was inconveniently married to someone else at the
time. He was the first to suggest the possibility of ‘test-tube babies’
and the currently fashionable ‘hydrogen economy’. His famous essay “On
Being the Right Size” elegantly shows how size itself (through the
square-cube law) determines fundamental biological features.

His speculative writings such as *Daedalus* inspired works of science
fiction, in particular Aldous Huxley’s *Brave New World* and Olaf
Stapledon’s *Last and First Men.* He even shows up as the villain:
Weston, in C. S. Lewis’s interplanetary trilogy, is thought to be
modeled (in part) on Haldane.

In 1933 he became professor of genetics at University College, London.
Naturally, since he was now a professional geneticist, he spent more and
more time on other subjects. He did important work in chemical genetics,
which served as a foundation for modern biochemical genetics. He spent
much of his efforts on the popularization of science, writing hundreds
of essays. This included almost 400 essays in the *Daily Worker*, the
publication of the Communist Party – no coincidence, as Pravda used to
say. He had become a Socialist during his time in the trenches and had
drifted left over the years, eventually joining the Party and becoming a
member of the Daily Worker’s editorial board. Party loyalty resulted in
ridiculous attempts at defending Lysenko’s genetic theories about the
inheritance of acquired characteristics, which he of course knew to be
nonsense.

During World War II, his war work involved experiments (including
experiments on himself, as usual) at high atmospheric pressure aimed at
protecting submariners, a continuation of his and his father’s work in
the physiology of respiration. At the same time he appears to have been
an active Soviet agent (code name Intelligensia), judging from the
Venona decryptions of coded Soviet messages. This is by no means
surprising: Haldane, born without fear, always acted on his beliefs.
Unfortunately, as Mahanti says, although in science he was the most
open-minded of men, in politics he was dogmatism incarnate.

His first wife broke with Communism around this time after visiting the
Soviet Union and learning far too much about it; their divorce soon
followed, and he married Helen Spurway, a young geneticist who shared
his political delusions.

Fortunately for the progress of science, the authorities did not become
aware of his treason during his lifetime. He continued to do important
work: in 1948 he came up with the idea that sickle-cell anemia and other
hereditary disorders of red cells were most likely an evolutionary
response to malaria – more generally, that infectious disease must have
been a potent influence on human evolution. Those fertile ideas have
since been abundantly confirmed – we have a few things to say on that
topic later in this book.

Also in 1948, Lysenko managed to have Mendelian genetics *banned* in the
Soviet Union, something which even Haldane could not swallow (although
he had managed to tolerate the death by starvation in the Gulag of his
colleague Vavilov). This led him to leave the Communist Party in 1950
and stop his endless blathering about dialectical materialism – although
as late as 1962, he still thought of Stalin as “a very great man who did
a very good job.” You know, like Tamerlane.

One of his most important achievements in later life was training and
inspiring his graduate student John Maynard Smith, who became one of the
most prominent biologists of the last half of the 20^(th) century. He’s
said to have told Maynard Smith that he would lay down his life for two
brothers or eight cousins, anticipating the theory of kin selection.

He spent the last years of his life in India, claiming that he had left
Great Britain because of the Suez crisis, but actually motivated more by
a general distaste for the Establishment and by interest in India’s
flora and fauna. In that period he wrote a famous, influential, and
wrong paper on the ‘cost of natural selection’, concluding that one
substitution every three hundred generations was the maximum possible
rate of evolution: as it turns out, the human race over the past few
thousand years has been evolving at roughly one hundred times that
maximum rate. In India, Haldane found it impossible to get along with
any kind of authority or administration, as had been the case for all
his life: this limited his success there.

He contracted colon cancer in 1963, at the age of 72, and died on
December 1, 1964.

We think that people have underestimated the importance of Haldane’s
work for several reasons. The first is that his work had such breadth
that few non-polymaths could fully appreciate or evaluate it. The second
is that he was an intensely annoying person. For example, in his work on
respiration he learned how to speak while inhaling as easily as while
exhaling – which allowed him to speak *continuously*. More than that, we
think that his contemporaries were irritated by the way in which he
wasted his talent. Although he was “probably the most erudite biologist
of his generation, and perhaps of the century” (White 1965), legendary
for his memory and originality, he *would* spend his time on politics,
on endless petty rebellions against every kind of authority, and worst
of all on science popularization. And yet he still accomplished more
than they did – what could be more irritating than that?

