+++
title = "Clever Sillies"
full_title = "Clever Sillies"
date = "2015-11-13"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/13/clever-sillies/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/13/clever-sillies/).

Clever Sillies

I don’t have good numbers on this, but I often get the feeling that
bright people are particularly susceptible to moderately complicated
intellectual scams, like Marx and Freud and foot reflexology. By the
way, I would guess that you all have noticed that foot reflexology
teaches that each part of the body has an image on the sole of the foot
– logically this must include an image of the foot itself! Brouwer!
Quaker Oats Box!

I would like to have more certain, more quantitative knowledge about
this (about clever sillies, although the foot thing is also interesting)

Anyhow,I was reading a post by by Scott Aaronson (a smart guy) about
silly nomenclature in the “social sciences”, which touched upon past
delusions of this sort- but with the implication that Scott probably
wouldn’t have succumbed to such nonsense. But I kinda think he would
have, considering that he takes modern feminism seriously, enough so to
have asked a therapist to chemically castrate him, since he was such a
threatening, yet miserable, tool of the patriarchy.

But, as I said, he’s a bright guy: why did he ever believe any of this
shit? Why would he ever have taken feminism seriously? Roughly speaking,
you can factor an ideology into a statement of preferences and a theory
of the world, usually one that can be inscribed on a 3″ x 5″ card: I
cannot think of any example in which feminism’s index card ever showed
any predictive power at all (male rhesus monkeys prefer toy trucks, for
example) . I mean, Andrea Dworkin, really?

I’m pretty sure that an unusually high fraction of high-achieving types
in math and physics show a funny, low-fitness personality, but that’s
something different, I think.

