+++
title = "Erotic poetry will make"
full_title = "Erotic poetry will make you a better person"
date = "2014-11-24"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/11/24/erotic-poetry-will-make-you-a-better-person/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/11/24/erotic-poetry-will-make-you-a-better-person/).

Erotic poetry will make you a better person

There is a bit in U.R. Ananthamurthy’s novel *Samskara* about a young
brahman who listens to his teacher’s description of Śakuntalā and gets
so hot and bothered that he runs off and jumps into the river, where he
meets and makes love to an outcaste woman.

As soon as you start reading a work on poetics (*alaṅkāraśāstra*),
you’re likely to encounter a premodern version of the “defense of the
humanities.” Literature will make you a better person, or more
precisely, it will help you achieve the four goals of human life: being
good (*dharma*), having material resources (*artha*), enjoying pleasure
(*kāma*), and attaining liberation (*mokṣa*). Today, I’m thinking of
Viśvanātha’s in the *Mirror of Literature* 1.2 (*caturvargaphalaprāptiḥ
sukhād alpadhiyām api kāvyād eva yatas tena tatsvarūpaṃ nirūpyate*), and
his completely *pro forma* explanation (involving the words “it’s
completely obvious”).

I have been spending a lot of time lately with a poem, the *Sattasaī*,
which Indian theorists of literature also spent a lot of time with. This
is an anthology of Prakrit poems which are mostly about illicit sex:
between unmarried young people, between a woman and her brother-in-law,
between a young wife and a lonely traveler, between a husband and his
menstruating wife, and so on. Now, I know that poems like the *Rāmāyaṇa*
were read with a general moral: “act like Rāma, and not Rāvaṇa”
(*rāmādivat pravartitavyaṃ na rāvaṇādivat*). I have looked in vain for a
reflection in the literature on poetics on the ethical lessons that a
text like the *Sattasaī* teaches us. And I have wondered whether the
rise of a certain “social aesthetic” in Sanskrit literature (described
by Sheldon Pollock in *Journal of Indian Philosophy* 29 \[2001\]:
197–229) in fact contributed to the declining readership of this kind of
poetry.

One possibility was reading these poems “against the grain,” as
Ravicandra did with Amaruka’s love poetry (see Yigal Bronner’s article
in *Journal of Indian Philosophy* 26 \[1998\]: 233–261). Ravicandra
interpreted each poem of the *Amaruśataka* as simultaneously describing
love (*śṛṅgārarasa*) and advocating dispassion (*śāntarasa*). In the
case of the *Sattasaī*, we have Hāritāmrapītāmbara’s commentary, which
brings to bear on every verse an ethical norm (*dharma*), a piece of
practical advice (*nīti*), and a conclusion for religious practicioners
(*yukti*). For example, the famous verse that Ānandavardhana used as an
example of “saying the opposite of what you mean”:

> Here is where my mother-in-law sleeps. Here is where I sleep. And here
> is where the servants sleep. Don’t stumble into the wrong bed,
> traveller, in the dark of night.

Pītāmbara starts from the ethical norm that is implicitly about to be
violated here and skips to the conclusion that religious practicioners
(*yogin*s) shouldn’t sleep in anyone else’s bed anyway, since they are
after all too devoted to their practice to even sleep in a bed.

But apart from this strategy of neutralizing the morally ambiguous
character of the poetry, I can’t begin to understand how careful readers
of this literature—as Bhojadeva was—could claim that it leads to the
attainment of all human ends in a direct and instrumental way. I would
be happy to take any hints in the comments. But do the people who
justify the arts and humanities today by reference to their instrumental
value really believe their own arguments?
