+++
title = "What is the relationship"
full_title = "What is the relationship between Advaita Vedānta and bhakti? A guest post by Patrick S O’ Donnell"
date = "2014-11-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/11/28/what-is-the-relationship-between-advaita-vedanta-and-bhakti-a-guest-post-by-patrick-s-o-donnell/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/11/28/what-is-the-relationship-between-advaita-vedanta-and-bhakti-a-guest-post-by-patrick-s-o-donnell/).

What is the relationship between Advaita Vedānta and bhakti? A guest post by Patrick S. O’ Donnell

(You have probably already encountered Patrick on this blog, but in case
you did not, his Academia page is
[here](https://sbcc.academia.edu/PatrickSODonnell) —be sure to check all
the bibliographical tools. The following text is part of an email
conversation between the two us, which we thought might have been of
interest for the readers of the blog. Feel free to join the discussion!)

Is it a pivotal assumption that Advaita Vedānta and *bhakti* spiritual
praxis are intrinsically at odds with each other?  

I always thought *bhakti* spirituality was an integral if not
indispensable component of Advaita Vedānta, in the same manner, say, we
might speak—after Ram-Prasad—of “Śāṅkara’s Kṛṣṇa theology” as
dialectically “integral and pedagogically critical” to Advaita
philosophy and spiritual praxis or, with Eliot Deutsch, of *saguṇa*
Brahman as a “state of vital loving awareness” and an “objectification
of determinate spiritual experience.” I find Ram-Prasad’s conclusion
compelling, namely, that “one role for the theology of Kṛṣṇa is to
transmute devotion into gnosis: the presence and promise of Kṛṣṇa
permits the human response of love to become a path of self-realization,
while Kṛṣṇa’s grace \[!\] is itself to be understood as the prompt for
that realization.”  
The role for *bhakti* here is, I suspect, analogous to the way in which
propositional reasoning found in Socratic dialogues and exemplified by
Socrates himself is essential to preparing the interlocutors for
nonpropositional insight (into the Good) in the Platonic sense…or the
way the Daodejing avails itself of words and concepts toward preparing
us to (paradoxically) appreciate the limits of same by way of
nonpropositional awareness (hence the goal of a ‘clear’ or ‘empty’
heart-mind) of Dao: The invariant Dao is nameless, that is to say,
however much we may have recourse to language and images or symbols in
the attempt to explain its meaning in conceptual terms, to point to or
evoke the Dao, these concepts, images and symbols do not suffice by way
of informing us at to what Dao truly, or metaphysically (or mystically)
is, or Dao *qua* Dao.  
This does not mean that we cannot in some sense have cognitive or
propositional knowledge of, so to speak, the manifestations or effects
of Dao (thus Daoists rely on words, mages, analogies, metaphors,
allegories, stories, and sayings such as ‘proverb-like aphorisms’ in
both the Daodejing and the Zhuangzi to talk, insofar as one needs to and
can talk…), only that such (propositional) knowledge is not, in the end,
equivalent to what is, after all, the Dao. In short, this speaks, I
think, to how we might make sense of Śāṅkara’s Kṛṣṇa: we can (and
should) acknowledge an indispensable role for *bhakti* spirituality
within Advaita Vedānta (specifically, if not minimally, a purificatory
and preparatory role), viewing assertions or arguments that fail to
acknowledge this as anomalous (perhaps motivated by sectarian polemics
and posturing) and in need of explanation.
