+++
title = "brAhmaNas as choice"
full_title = "brAhmaNas as choice targets Partition edition"
date = "2019-11-20"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/11/20/brahmana-s-as-choice-targets-partition-edition/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2019/11/20/brahmana-s-as-choice-targets-partition-edition/).

brAhmaNa-s as choice targets: Partition edition

While H blunderers fail to understand the critical importance of
brAhmaNa-s in the conservation of Hindu religion, enemies are quite
clear about it – whether it is the Portuguese or Muslim mobs.

The below is from
<https://twitter.com/curiosweetie/status/1197059305049952256> :

“Brahmin ka Janeu” dialog from
[#TanhajiTrailer](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TanhajiTrailer)
reminds of my grandfather recalling the horror of partition. Their house
was located in the fields close to Indus River…during rains, the fields
would flood, so the houses were made of 2 stories. One primarily resided
on 1st floor during rains. Every household would have wooden ladders
that could be pulled up when last person climbed up to the first floor.
During partition, they used the same to escape the rioting mob. At night
these ladders would be pulled up. The whole night, plunder, killing,
rape, massacre would go on. Every family would be awake whole night
waiting for morning to come and get some relief from the horrors.
Morning was the time to seek out ways to escape and also get supplies in
case one couldn’t escape yet. In the morning the Pathan police would
come with truck loads of Hindu bodies from the night to dump in Indus.
He recalls, that as the policemen dumped the bodies with glee on their
faces, they would stop if the body was of a Brahmin, pick the janeu and
make a show of it. Teasing the families on first floor, looking at the
horror and they would laugh and play with those janeu before dumping the
Brahmin body while mocking that tonight would be their turn to bear the
same fate. Sometimes a pile a janeu would be made on the side.

