+++
title = "Gundeshapur"
full_title = "Gundeshapur"
date = "2017-01-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/gundeshapur/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/01/30/gundeshapur/).

Gundeshapur

Some of the more useful drugs are a product of “traditional medicine”.
Colchicine for gout, digitalis, aspirin. The best current drug for
falciparum malaria is the result of project 523, where the PLA (at the
request of Ho Chi Minh) had people dig through old Chinese herbal
manuals. Communism and Taoist magic – the royal road to drug
development. Tu Youyou received the Nobel prize for this work in 2015;
truly, there are other ways of knowing.

Which suggests that it might be worthwhile checking out other versions
of traditional medicine. Sure, we should revisit classical medicine –
reread
[Dioscorides,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pedanius_Dioscorides).
Maybe we’ll all be swigging
[theriac](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theriac) in a few years.

A virgin medical tradition, one that hasn’t already been mined out,
might be more promising. The Sassanid empire had its own intellectual
tradition – much of which was lost in the Arab conquest. Not many of
their works survive. We know, though, that they had their own medical
tradition, centered at Gundeshapur, with a teaching hospital, library
and an academy of learning. Gondeshapur gave refuge to Syriac Christians
and Hellenistic philosophers. Indians and Chinese visitors translated
Chinese and Indian texts on mathematics, astronomy, and medicine.

It is possible that manuscripts of some of the lost works of Sassanid
civilization still exist – in dry caves, for example, like the Dead Sea
Scrolls. Worth a look.

