+++
title = "On “philosophy of"
full_title = "On “philosophy of religion”"
date = "2020-12-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/12/06/on-philosophy-of-religion/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/12/06/on-philosophy-of-religion/).

On “philosophy of religion”

A while ago I was contacted by an academic publisher asking me to review
a new introductory textbook on philosophy of religion. I didn’t do so,
even though the publisher offered me a stipend. The main reason was just
that I didn’t have the time for it. But the more interesting reason was
my objections to the work’s entire project.

The book’s proposed table of contents spoke of a work devoted entirely
to God: the concept of God, and arguments for and against his existence.
That is not an idiosyncratic approach; there are many existing textbooks
in “philosophy of religion” that take the same approach. So there was
nothing especially or unusually outrageous about this textbook and its
other. *And that is exactly the problem.*

It was an alienating experience for me as a Buddhist and a philosopher
to read that table of contents. This supposed “philosophy of religion”
has *absolutely nothing whatsoever* to do with the philosophical
concerns of *my* “religion”. Granted, I have
[written](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/protestantism-and-populism-in-religious-studies/)
*[ad](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/on-body-ritual-among-the-nacirema/)
[nauseam](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/10/why-the-study-of-religion-shouldnt-be-about-studying-religion/)*
about how “religion” is an unfortunate and misleading concept, so I
don’t have much invested in a “correct” definition of it. That said,
most common-sensical understandings of “religion” *do* include Buddhism
among the traditions. One of the most viable ways to defend a book like
this would be to make the bold definition that religion is about God,
and that since (at least Theravāda) Buddhism is not about God, it is
*ipso facto* not a religion. One would likely have to make the same
claim about Confucianism and Daoism. But that is a controversial claim,
and a philosophical claim in its own right – one that, at the very
least, deserves its own space in the table of contents.

One might argue that “Hinduism” is more about God, but that is also a
tough claim to make. *Some* “Hindu” philosophical traditions, most
notably the Viśiṣṭādvaita school of
[Rāmānuja](https://www.iep.utm.edu/ramanuja/), are all about God. But
many are not. Later scholars in the Nyāya school, such as Uddyotakara
and Udayana, attempt to prove the existence of a god that underlies the
universe, but earlier thinkers did not see this as necessary even though
they were in regular debate with Buddhists. Their far greater concern,
like the Buddhists’, was with the self.

In short, “philosophy of religion”, as it is defined in that textbook,
really means the philosophy of the Abrahamic traditions. Even within
those the emphasis is Christian, for Christianity is considerably more
concerned than Islam and especially Judaism with *belief* in God. Many
Jews disclaim belief in God entirely and yet still consider themselves
devout, because orthopraxy matters considerably more than orthodoxy –
it’s about what you *do*, or don’t do, more than what you believe. So if
the “religion” in “philosophy of religion” meant Judaism, it would
likely concern itself considerably more with ethics and right conduct
(as indeed the works of [Maimonides](https://www.iep.utm.edu/maimonid/),
arguably the greatest Jewish theologian, did.)

But again, the problem is not just this one textbook (which shall remain
mercifully nameless). The textbook is merely reflecting “philosophy of
religion” as it is normally understood, and that very normality is the
problem. To a large swath of philosophers, “philosophy of religion”
simply *means* a dialogue between Christianity and atheism (which
thereby includes various middle positions such as agnosticism and
deism). And this definition has perpetuated itself, because, not
surprisingly, the people attracted to that field have usually been on
the spectrum between Christianity and atheism themselves.

Now so far this story has been one-sided, because there is a way in
which the academic field of “philosophy of religion” is actually *two*
academic fields, at least in North America. I [noted once
before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/why-we-should-ask-what-science-is/),
following the lead of an [excellent edited volume by William
Wainwright](https://www.amazon.com/God-Philosophy-Academic-Culture-Discussion/dp/0788503022),
that “philosophy of religion” is (perhaps not surprisingly) conducted
within both philosophy and religious studies – and it means something
almost entirely different within those two fields. The discussion in
this post so far has been about what we might call “APA philosophy of
religion” – philosophy of religion as it is practised in the
analytically dominated American Philosophical Association. There is also
*AAR* philosophy of religion, as practised in the American Academy of
Religion.

AAR philosophy of religion generally does a better job of representing
traditions outside of Judaism and Christianity. The problem with it is
that with religious studies more generally: religionists often tend to
shy away from actually *doing* philosophy, and merely talk about other
people’s. So we’ll hear a presentation on Muslim or Hindu takes on
metaphysical questions, but not about whether the presenter thinks those
takes are accurate. In this problem, though, AAR philosophy of religion
essentially exaggerates the more general problem with analytic
philosophy’s Other, [“continental”
philosophy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/analytic-and-continental-philosophy/):
an approach that appreciates the depth of existing philosophies, but
often at the expense of doing philosophy oneself. (One of the exciting
things about [Speculative
Realists](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/02/do-speculative-realists-want-us-to-be-chinese/)
like
[Meillassoux](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/10/the-world-before-and-after-us/)
is they break this mold: they’re continental philosophers who actually
*do* philosophy.)

So I don’t think the answer to the APA’s narrowness of vision is just to
turn to the AAR. Fortunately, the narrowness of philosophy as an
academic field has been called into question more lately. For [all my
reservations](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/05/why-philosophy-departments-have-focused-on-the-west/)
about Jay Garfield and Bryan Van Norden’s [NYT
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html?_r=0),
I appreciate that they made the point, and that it appears to have
struck a nerve. It is my hope that academic philosophy departments are
slowly opening up – and I hope this will include the field of philosophy
of religion. It’s exciting to imagine the new possibilities that their
opening up would allow for constructive cross-cultural philosophical
work. And as they do, I hope they learn from the less constructive but
still insightful work of their religionist colleagues.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/12/on-%22philosophy-of-religion%22)
