+++
title = "A short discussion on"
full_title = "A short discussion on pertinent issues presented by the sabarimalA matter"
date = "2018-07-22"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2018/07/22/a-short-discussion-on-pertinent-issues-presented-by-the-sabarimala-matter/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2018/07/22/a-short-discussion-on-pertinent-issues-presented-by-the-sabarimala-matter/).

A short discussion on pertinent issues presented by the sabarimalA matter

It’s often argued that restrictive rules, in terms of temple entry or
offering worship at one, impinge upon the “right to participate in
religion” of those who are thus restricted. This stems from a
fundamental misunderstanding of participation as intrinsically a
positive act.

What do I mean by “positive act”? Most of us see would see participation
as actually (and thus, positively) doing acts one generally does in a
religious setting: such as entering a temple or performing a particular
ritual.

However, this is not a realistic understanding of our dharma or any
religion for that matter. When you participate in a religion, you do so,
not only by doing what you are obligated to do, or doing something
optional but allowed for you, but also by not doing what is prohibited.

You participate in the dharma when you abstain from meat on
vrata/upavAsa days or enter a temple after removing footwear. That
“negative acts” or abstentions were seen as participation is clear when
one reads our texts. Let me elaborate.

Negative obligations are a core & critical component of participation.
This is why “yama” (restraint) is one of the eight components of
aSTANGga yoga. This is why various types of vrata-s are part of popular
dharma as encapsulated in the purANa-s & other sources.

This is why yAmuNAcArya, the great shrIvaiSNava AcArya, holds in his
AgamaprAmANya that, in truth, nobody is fully forbidden from “shrautam”.
Why, because the shruti has general, restrictive injunctions like “Don’t
injure creatures”, etc which every human is qualified to follow.

Similarly, when a woman, identified as having reproductive capabilities
(for practical purposes, identified as a 10-50 age group), accepts the
restriction pertaining to sabarimala with devotion, she is fully
participating in the religion, in the worship of the deity.

This “negative” participation is, in no way, less profound and
meaningful than the direct, “positive” participation of the men and
women of the allowed age groups. One such example of such a
participation can be seen in this wonderful music video here:
<https://t.co/8xDrA2wIHM>

The core point at the centre of all this is that within any system, its
followers truly participate only be adhering to both the positive
obligations and negative injunctions (prohibitions) which define the
very unique essence and identity of that system.

And this is not uniquely applicable to Hindu sects but will apply to any
belief-practice system defined as a religion. You cannot be said to
participate in a religion if you are not participating in the dietary,
sexual or other restrictions laid down in that religion.

At this point, one may raise the argument that the restrictions in the
case of sabarimala are not left to the conscience of the worshipper but
enforced and thus, this would impinge upon the freedom of the individual
worshipper to practice the religion as he or she sees fit.

The only real & truly honest response to this argument is that the
temple is essentially the residence of the deity who is also the owner
of the temple & is entitled to an absolute enjoyment of this property,
as amply indicated by terms such as devasvam, devagRha, etc.

But, wait? A deity is no “real person”. How can he/she enjoy this
property? Well, if the law can recognize the personhood of a body
corporate (a company), its right to own property & transact in its own
name, nothing ought to prevent a similar recognition in the case of
temples.

There is a long, historical precedent (from both texts & inscriptions)
allowing the recognition of a deity’s legal personhood, full ownership
of its residence (& other properties) & freedom to decide how the
residence ought to be accessed or enjoyed by other persons.

In accordance with what is the deity’s will executed & implemented by
the priests and/or management who are both, verily, the deity’s
trustees? The Agama-s or relevant tantra-s or paddhati-s known to govern
the temple from very inception or simply known as last remembered usage.

Some idiot Hindus stated that the argument that shrI dharmashAstA in his
form as ayyappa is observing naiSThika brahmacharya is not a sensible
one as it suggests that ayyappa is “unable to see his women devotees in
the 10-50 age group as sisters or mothers”.

Again and again, Hindus excel at showing mediocre quality of thought.
Firstly, the mythos and rituals associated with a particular temple are
not meant to be read as physical realities and anthropomorphic qualities
are not be superimposed on the deity.

Our deities have transcendental and most subtle bodies. They do not “eat
offerings” or “observe brahmacaryam” in the same way mortals would be
seen in our mundane level of reality. Rituals and myths operate at a
higher level of reality. What is the significance of this?

**Well, this is the significance:**

**This is how our ritual spaces work and something I hope can be drilled
into the heads of the judges who have no erudition about our religion.
The deity’s nature (in Southern Agamika & tAntrika temples, this is
based on the mantra-s installed in the deity’s icon/vigraha), location
of deity’s shrine, nature of rituals done, type of priesthood, kind of
food and flower offerings made to deity, nature of people who come to
the temple, colors of garments worn by the deity, priests & devotees &
many other factors all have to cohere with one another as far as
possible.**

**All these factors come together to create a coherent “ritual reality”,
which is the ultimate fruit a sincere worshiper truly yearns for. The
deity’s presence becomes fully manifest and becomes a source of
blessings for the worshipers and their families. Different Agama-s and
tantra-s have their own versions of the “ritual reality” or “ritual
universe” they are asking the priests and others to enact on this
earth.**

An example of this logic of ritual coherence: The shaiva Agama,
kAmikAgama states that the fierce forms of both shiva & viSNu should be
installed at village/town outskirts & not in the interior. Why so??

This choice of location (outskirts) matches with deity’s fierce nature,
as that which is fierce & potentially dangerous must naturally be away
from the dwellings of men. So, in the cases of temples & towns
planned/designed in accordance with kAmikAgama, this will be the rule.

The idea of ritual coherence operates at sabarimala too. The mantra-s
installed in that ayyappa mUrti in times of yore embody the naiSThika
brahmacAryatvam (permanent celibacy) intrinsic to that deity. This is
the essential nature of the deity; his “essential ritual reality”.

The “ritual reality” of a temple is harmed or even destroyed when the
stipulated rules in place are not respected. In this case, the relevant
rule would be the prohibition on the entry of women having reproductive
abilities.

Such an entry alters & disrupts the “ritual reality” the temple seeks to
manifest in this world. The concepts of “ritual reality” & “ritual
coherence” lie behind our idea of “ritual space”. What may be
appropriate in one sacred space may be completely inappropriate for
another.

Example: In the shaivAgama-s, the presence of rudrakanyA-s. These young,
pious virgin girls devoted to shiva perform dances in front of him & are
even invited, along with the priests & king to be the very 1st
recipients of the divine glance of a newly consecrated shiva!)

This would not be the case for the ritual space of ayyappa. The women
would have to wait till certain biologically innate characteristics are
gone with age, before seeking to visit ayyappa.

This is nothing to do with ayyappa’s “mind” as some idiots wrongly
understand, Nothing can upset or agitate the mind of a transcendental
being. But when the same transcendental being is installed in an icon
with mantra-s, etc, certain formalities come into effect.


