+++
title = "Black Egyptians"
full_title = "Black Egyptians"
date = "2017-03-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/03/15/black-egyptians/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/03/15/black-egyptians/).

Black Egyptians

There’s a a talk
[abstract](http://sarkoboros.net/2017/03/ancient-human-dna-and-proteomes-at-saa-2017/)
out that mentions some moderately ancient DNA info from Egypt, from
around 2000 to 3000 years ago.

They \[Johannes Krause et al\] say “ancient Egyptians shared more Near
Eastern ancestry than present-day Egyptians, who received additional
Sub-Saharan admixture in more recent times.” Today Egyptians, most of
them, have around 20% sub-Saharan ancestry. Apparently it used to be
less than that – how much exactly we’ll see when the article comes out,
probably. Copts might give you a rough idea of what Egyptians used to be
like – whatever the SSA fraction is in modern Copts \[probably lower
than in typical Egyptians\], it was probably lower still 2500 years ago.
In particular I would expect that the West African component just wasn’t
there yet, although some of the East African component probably was.

I touched upon this in a
[post](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/05/29/out-of-africa/) a while
back, where some geneticists, in the course of an extremely
dubious/tenuous/whacked attempt to figure out whether humans left Africa
thru Sinai or Yemen, for some insane reason assumed that Egypt used to
be black.

The background here is that people whose ancestors came recently out of
sub-Saharan Africa want to be able to point to the big historical
accomplishments of their ancestors. The problem is that there aren’t
any, other than some domesticates, like sorghum. Amerindians have the
same problem – they developed some really important crops, but it’s hard
to point to a important technique, discovery, idea, or invention that
they originated \[in many cases because someone in the Old World had
already done it, thousands of years earlier\].

