+++
title = "DARC matters"
full_title = "DARC matters"
date = "2017-03-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/03/26/darc-matters/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/03/26/darc-matters/).

DARC matters

DARC (Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines) is a receptor expressed on
red cells, key in the infection of those cells by vivax malaria. A
version of the gene that eliminates expression of this receptor on red
cells (and prevents vivax infection) has reached very high frequency (up
to 99%) in sub-Saharan Africa. A new
[article](http://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1006560)
in PLOS Genetics concludes that this was driven by some kind of strong
selection, but a long time ago ( \~40,000 years). They estimate that the
Duffy-negative mutation conferred a selective advantage of about 4.3%,
leading to effective fixation in about 8,000 years. Not everywhere in
Africa – didn’t happen in the Bushmen, Naturally they suspect that the
selection was driven by vivax malaria , but they’re a bit mystified
because today vivax is usually mild ( at last when compared with
falciparum malaria). Vivax is often found in places where it can’t be
transmitted year-round (because of winter) : it waits in the liver
\[hypnozooites\] and reappears later, sometimes much later. I’ve heard
of cases where it reemerged as much as 40 years later. Which means that
it can’t afford to be too severe – it has to let the host survive.

However, in the tropics, it could get away with being more virulent, and
perhaps it did, in the past.

An advantage of 4.3% is a lot, as selective advantages go, easily enough
to drive a gene frequency from a tenth of a percent to 99% in a few
thousand years. In much the same way, a behavioral tendency (heritable
of course) that led men to have sexual intercourse with women other than
their primary mate, when practical, could become very common even if it
only resulted in a few percent extra surviving children per generation,
say 2.2 instead of 2.1 . Compound interest. A behavior wouldn’t have to
yield 100 extra children in order to become common (although producing
an extra 100 would certainly have that effect!). In the same way, a
heritable behavioral tendency that *reduced* the average number of
offspring by a few percent would also become rare over a few thousand
years.

What fraction of the practitioners in various human sciences understand
this wee bit of population/quantitative genetics? Very few, I think.

