+++
title = "An appraisal about"
full_title = "An appraisal about mormonism from the hindu standpoint benefits, cohesion, barriers"
date = "2015-08-31"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2015/08/31/an-appraisal-about-mormonism-from-the-hindu-standpoint-benefits-cohesion-barriers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2015/08/31/an-appraisal-about-mormonism-from-the-hindu-standpoint-benefits-cohesion-barriers/).

An appraisal about mormonism from the hindu standpoint: benefits, cohesion, barriers

The following is from a dialog amonga few friends about the LSD (sorry
LDS) church.

**Priesthood levels**  
In my mid-twenties, I had been baptised in the LDS Church. I was
actively involved with various other religious groups at the time, and
this I told my Mormon teachers who had been giving me lessons for a few
months, but they honestly said, “Baptism is only the beginning, not the
end. It only qualifies you to continue to study our theory and
sacraments.” So I did. After baptism, one is automatically inducted into
the first level “Aaronic priesthood”. Based on proven abilities and
completed sacraments, one can rise up to higher priesthoods such as
Melchizedek, etc. In many ways, the LDS Church is modeled on Freemasonry
or other esoteric schools with their distinction betwen neophytes,
hierophants, adepts, etc.

Let’s say most of the members are part of the Aaronic brotherhood. They
take their task seriously, which mostly revolve around communal
responsibilities, church protocol and ritual, and the occasional
privilege of temple duties. First the communal duties: Sunday church
attendance is necessary. There are specific rituals that are part of
that service that one gets one’s turn to conduct. The bishop and his two
aides (and their wives) also keep a very close eye on members and
develop a personal relationship, in order to spot different types of
talents. For example, if they think you fit, they will invite you to
give a talk on your choice of Biblical or Book of Mormon verses after
the regular sermon. It is common to be invited for fireside at the
bishop’s home.

After about a year of regular tithing, responsible discharge of duties,
etc., the bishop gives one a temple recommend during one of those
one-on-one chats. This is a time-limited permit to visit the local
Temple, where certain exclusive sacraments are conducted. In my case, a
sacrament known as “baptism of the dead” was round the corner, and he
suggested I might like to go see the temple, and also participate if I
wanted to. Of course, I wanted to. The temple is architecturally
beautiful, and also mystical. Pin drop silence and extreme hygiene
within, and we all had to change into special vestments as soon as we
entered. Baptism of the Dead is very much like the offerings to the
Pitris or ancestors in Eastern cultures, and I find it silly how it is
mocked by mainstream Christians. All in all, I had a wonderful
experience there. One our way out, we found some anti-Mormon pamphlets
thrown onto the premises by some mainstream Christian groups.

A little way into one’s journey as a Mormon, one can also avail of a
visit to certain adepts they have in the church, with special
clairvoyant abilities. For instance, there is one type of adept who can
meet you, pray with you, and then tell you a lot about your life so far,
like an astrologer. He can then tell you about some upcoming
opportunities and obstacles in the next phase of your life. Most
importantly from an organizational perspective, he tells you which one
of the “12 tribes of Israel” you fit in. The church divides its members
into 12 sections based on some intrinsic characteristics. Relate this
fact back to the chapter I linked previously.

**Communal catharsis**  
On the first weekend of the month, members fast. They break their fast
after Sunday Church, which has a special kind of service. One part of
that service is a very “cathartic” sort of “bearing testimony” and
renewing one’s faith. Most long-time members go up to the podium and
tearfully share realizations and bear testimony. It is a sort of regular
uninhibited expression that reminded me of the “Du’a e Komayl” practiced
by Shi’as (usually on Thursday evenings – when Friday is supposed to
have begun according to the Islamic calendar). It is a unique form of
communal catharsis that has multiple effects on the psyche.  
**Some high culture**  
That said, the Mormons are culturally closer to the classical culture of
Western civilization than most Americans I meet. The cultural bar is
high, and every family has at least one or two members who play a
classical instrument. Church leaders advise wards on what kind of music
to avoid and what is best for spiritual edification. I knew very
successful Mormons who went jogging listening to Western classical music
on their iPods, or perhaps a lecture on scripture. Good classical
literature was encouraged. A couple of the more nerdy types could
fluently speak Greek and Latin, and were getting a PhD in linguistics.
Another one was a PhD in political science, with fluency in Hebrew and
Arabic. Usually their Mormon identity is concealed in public – you would
be surprised howmany Mormons hold offices of public influence. At that
time, even the president of our university was Mormon.

**Communal responsibilities**  
The communal responsibilities of members are taken very seriously. There
is a division of labour betwen the “priesthood” and the “sisterhood”. If
you’re ever under the weather, just make a call and a couple of sisters
will bring over hot homemade meals and do anything else to make you feel
better. Similarly, if anyone is moving homes, you could receive a call,
and about 15 people will turn up to move all their furniture in 2 hours
flat on fine Saturday morning. Apart from ad hoc calls, one is also
assigned specific responsibility for one (or more) members. One such
girl I was responsible for called me at 11 pm one weeknight with a
migraine – I had to take her to the emergency, and finally dropped her
home at 4:30 am. Responsibilities extend beyond emergencies or practical
work – it is also to provide warmth, and also to have fun. A lot of the
fun that Mormons had was with other Mormons. They actually ended up
doing stuff that was far more fun (not to mention healthier) than what
my non-Mormon American friends would do. The Mormons would go out to
movies, go camping, rent motorcycls and go on a roadtrip, go whitewater
rafting, skiing, play volleyball, whatever.

The Mormon ethic was forged as part of the American frontier spirit.
Contrary to Hollywood’s depiction of the “wild west”, th frontier spirit
was one of selfless cooperation and trust. At that time you were far
more likely to get robbed in New England than on a frontier community.
People left their doors unlocked, they left excess firewood and grain at
the doorstep in case anyone else needed it, etc. They had lots of
children to populate the land. AND they militarily trained all members
in the use of weapons, horseriding, etc., to fed of and drive forth
Indians and others. In addition to native Americans, Mormons had to
fight of mainstream Christians who made war on them. They also had an
“end of times” mindset. Each and every Mormon household stocks food and
other supplies for a few months worth of survival in case of
catastrophe. As a grad student, they advised me that even though I
didn’t have a household yet I should set aside some such supples as a
token, just to cultuvate the Survivalist mindset. That frontier spirit
continues. Sometimes the whole ward would go to the shooting range and
fire off rounds! Athletic ability and hardiness was considered premium.

Apart from regular church service, there were lots of other activities –
intellectual, spiritual, strategic/organizational, public outreach,
sporting, or just fun. Members could choose whatever meets their metier.
Birds of a feather would thus form groups – but one of the tasks of the
bishop and others was to consciously prevent hard groups forming, and
regularly hold mixers in which all types fraternized. This point is
important in terms of, both, the psychological and also genetic
philosophy of Mormonism and its ideas of creating healthy communities
and individuals, which of course, is in common with other esoteric
‘gnostic’ sources I came across. It is described in this chapter of the
Book of Mormon: <https://www.lds.org/scriptures/bofm/jacob/5?lang=eng>

**Marriage**  
When I was involved, I was in the “singles ward” – a church specifically
for unmarried Mormons. Marriage is very important to them, and of
course, the pressure to pair up is strong. At that time I was in a bit
of a “brahmachari” phase, so I tried to keep my distance from these
activities, but that can have consequences – girls who may be interested
will actually complain to the bishop, and he will have an avuncular chat
with you. The church held a lot of sessions to educate young Mormons on
the reality and responsibilities of marital life. They also had fine
examples to emulate among the elders. Until recently, Mormon women were
mostly socialized to be home-makers, but in this generation a lot of
them have become successful career women.

Mormons do believe in love and attraction rather than pure arrangement –
this I found specially interesting. So, they have chaperoned social
spaces where people get to socialize and meet. Such as balls, or other
outings, or just church itself. They teach their younger ones,
especially boys, that finding a good partner is as much an adventure of
self-discovery as anything else, and that one should not be too rash or
immature, and not too conservative either. Prayer is a part of seeking
whether a potential attraction is true or not, etc. The women seem
equally aggressive. No, prematiral sex is a strict no-no, but these days
they permit some physical intimacy restricted to necking and a bit of
mooching around. A lot of good, modern psychological study about
marriage and relationships is current in Mormon circles, and for the
most part I found a healthy and mature attitude among my peers at that
time. However, as I mentioned, the changing expectations of women is
emerging as a subversive factor.

Note that in Mormon marriages, it is common for the wife to complain to
the bishop or the husband to complain, if the spouse as some behavioral
problems in the marriage. By “complain” I mean seeking support and help,
perhaps a mediator. But as you can imagine, this often becomes
political, like an extended family’s interference in a marriage. Usually
it is the woman who bears the brunt of this social pressure – though
occasionally one finds a male who wants to cut loose and transition to
the “liberal” faction also bears the brunt of ostracism and insecurity
in his own family. Mormons were also polygamous, though that is another
stricture that has been officially overturned by the church. But some
ultra-orthodox types in Utah still insis on practicing it.

**Women: Attrition vs retention**  
The other factor is their women. Women by nature are exogamous. I find
that many Mormon women feel a little suffocated, because popular media
is constantly showing them how the “American woman” is much “freer” and
“independent”. So, many of them have been pushing to take up careers at
the cost of large families, or to delay marriage. Many also wish to
marry other Mormons who are “liberal”. According to the church, a
marriage is recognized by heaven only if it is performed in the Temple –
which means both partners must be Mormons in good standing. So that is a
deterrent to many Mormon women who might have married non-Mormons, or
even Mormons who are not active members. Yet, the strain is there. I
foresee that slowly the community will separate into distinct
“orthodox”, “liberal”, etc. The classic “drop on blotting paper” model
that one sees with Jews, Muslims, and now Zoroastrians.

“Liberal” Mormons are not “non-practicing”. A non-practicing Mormon
ceases to be in god standing, and he has to follow some steps to be
admitted back into the Church. In some stakes (parishes), they even have
special rehabilitation and outreach programs for non-practicing types. A
“liberal” Mormon is perhaps one who is free about experimenting with
some things not forbidden, but not native to the tradition. Like
experimenting with Buddhist or Hindu meditations, or eating meat a lot
(strict Mormon rules say one may eat meat, but only “sparingly”), or
being okay with a little bit of public display of affection. Some may
even hold the relatively blasphemous view that Mormonism is NOT the only
way to heaven and there are many other valid traditions – a view that
may be held by many senior adepts in the Church, but whose public
expression before the neophytes and others is seriously discouraged. So,
some women tend to feel “freer” wit a liberal type spouse. They feel
they would be judged les, and the institutional apparatus of the church
would impinge less on their relationship than if they were married to an
orthodox type.

**Counseling**  
For members who need psychological counseling for anything, the church
provides it from experienced professionals on their own premises. One
major campaign they had was about pornography addiction, requesting
members to sek help if they found themselves addicted in ways that was
distorting their reality and social life. A few came up on fasting
Sunday and talked openly about their habit, then bore testimony
tearfully, determined to overcome it with the community’s help. The
bishop was equally emotional at them stepping forward. I mention this to
show the level of trust and community bonding, geared toward improving
the individual. These people underwent professional therapy enhanced by
their spiritual support, and were not at all considered outcast or
inferior, but rather superior and better candidates for, say, marriage.
This was the mindset – of elevating those who seek a corrective process,
rather than merely those apparently free of external misbehaviour. I
mention this sexual aspect especially because I found it in stark
contrast to the treatment of sexuality in the Indic groups I was
simultaneously involved with.

**Missionary work**  
A very important part of every Mormon’s life is going on a mission. It
is like being in the trenches – an experience that any two Mormons can
sit down and bond over – like veteran soldiers. Mormon teenagers start
saving up their own pocket-money, and then make an offering to the
Church, asking to be sent on a mission. Depending on howmuch they have
saved up, the Church will decide where they go. Sometimes if they have
special skills, the Church may put some of its own money into their
mission. E.g., a friend had learned Japanese by the time he was 16, and
although he had only saved up a couple of thousand, the Church sent him
to Japan for a year and a half. During their missions, they are usually
sent in pairs. The pair have a very, very restricted lifestyle – no
television or even phones or internet. They can write one letter a month
to their parents if they want to. They have a strict daily regimen
starting from pre-dawn, of prayer, study, meditation, service, and
roaming the streets preaching. It tests their mettle, not just as
individuals, but also coping as a team of two. Most go on missions as
young awkward teenagers, and come out much stronger to face life. Young
women also go on missions, though for shorter durations.

**Diversification**

The community has until recently been fairly homogenous, culturally and
genetically. It has been like a tribe. They also had racist strictures,
considering the Nordic superior, and the darker ones inferior, with
blacks being meant by God to be slaves. But those strictures were later
overuled and discarded. Still, there is an undercurrent of Nordic
supremacism in the church. One of the girls who was keen on dating
strangely had a father who was a museum curator and had a fascination
for Nazi memorabilia. Karma works through daddy’s girl, too.

In recent times, the community has become prominent because it has taken
an expansionary strategy and diversifying like never before – into other
cultures, races, etc. How it copes with this is going to be interesting.
It has ALWAYS been a missionary religion, but only within a certain soft
diversity that has now turned hard.

**Some positive effects on wellbeing**

The upshot of all of this is that, assuming one’s own intentions are
right, there is a lot of positive energy and wellbeing one can derive
from being part of the Mormon community. But this is not to say that
that is always the case…

**Falling off and its consequences**

I did not “break” from the church, just fell away, and so am now in the
“non-practicing” category on thei register. Last year they actually sent
out feelers. As I said, I was first avoiding getting into the dating
scene, partly because I was actually (and foolishly) considering
becoming a brahmachari, ad partly because I knew it would be difficult
for me to continue my involvements with Indic and other groups I was
also heavily involved in. So that was a sore point. I finally did go out
with a few groups, and even dated one girl before giving up the idea
totally. That itself was seen as a rebuff, and the bishop expressed
concern. The web of social relationships that holds a community together
is mostly orchestraed by the females, it seems to me. The level of
harmony or disharmony stems from how they are treated and the level of
involvement or freedom they demand. I still remained involved, but after
a certain point I withdrew as I selected only a few groups to continue
to be involved with. At that time, I knew it was going to be socially
awkward, as some close friends from the Church cut themselves off from
me. I expected this, but didn’t mind it at all. However, others in the
Church who are far more involved…for them this can be traumatic.

**Value of barriers**

You had mentioned the strong missionary orientation as also the
development of a segment of non practicing Mormons or Mormons who are
more “liberal” and how you think in the future the split of Orthodox vs
other Mormons may emerge. Perhaps there is some connection between the
2. What I read from Eric Kaufmann and Michael Blume is that in first
world industrialized countries the optimal strategy for growth is what
they call “preach and breed” i.e., missions in the early days to form a
core group of committed members, followed by erection of some barriers
against the outside secular world, and maintenance of a high birth rate.
Blume had once shared a research paper which concluded this but I can no
longer find it as he took down his old blog posts. Their explanation is
that groups like Jehovah’s Witnesses that evangelize a lot also tend to
lose out a lot because outsiders (as in the new converts) often bring in
outside/secular influences consciously or not. These barriers also
connectwith what Kaufmann calls strong religion and Richard Sosis
research on costly signaling. Paradoxically its the most liberal/few
rules churches and religious groups that seem to lose the most members
to secularization while religious groups that require you to make an
effort and invest your time and follow rules have stronger retention
rates.

