+++
title = "The Moriarty MOOC"
full_title = "The Moriarty MOOC"
date = "2013-07-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/02/the-moriarty-mooc/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/02/the-moriarty-mooc/).

The Moriarty MOOC

Nowadays, inspired by programs like CSI and NCIS, many students want to
become some sort of forensic scientist. The problem is that are very few
such jobs. I have heard that there are something like 20 times more
forensics graduates than openings. This is not really caused by an
overall shortage of crimes, more by a shortage of *interesting* crimes.
When some dirtbag stabs his old lady, after beating the shit out of her
for years, caught while still gripping the bloodstained murder weapon,
who needs CSI?

Or (adding a little local Albuquerque color) when some upstanding local
citizen stabs and beats his mother and her boyfriend, puts them in the
trunk of her car, then drives to the Central Avenue Bridge and throws
them both into the river in broad daylight – because voices from the TV
told him that they were clones – maybe you don’t need someone wearing a
dog collar to solve the case.

Clearly forensics graduates would benefit from an increased number of
*sophisticated* crimes.

The solution is obvious. Just as one lawyer in a small town starves,
while two wax fat, we need to teach our budding malefactors how to take
things to a higher level, and commit *interesting* crimes. The courses
– naturally, massively online courses, with a worldwide audience – would
teach crooked accounting, undetectable poisons, and safecracking. There
would be courses on simple and advanced cons, everything from the badger
game and the Spanish prisoner to impersonating the Time Police. The
curriculum would include language courses (thieves’ cant), and practical
cryptography – *why* don’t the bad guys use PGP? There would be
tutorials on how to create substances that greatly resemble the ash
residue of certain tobaccos, and seminars on hiding bodies. Many
existing courses on forensics and law enforcement would be cross-listed.

Forensics majors could finally make use of their training, and many
would go back for graduate school. We’d have new (for-profit) journals
covering research in dark-side forensics and law enforcement. Many
tenure-track positions would be created! The Mob would finally have a
good reason to send their scions to Harvard – you can be sure that the
Ivy League would not lag behind. I wonder what buildings would be named
after them…

With the greatly increased demand for minions and consulting detectives,
unemployment would disappear.

