+++
title = "Genetic Language Delay"
full_title = "Genetic Language Delay"
date = "2013-07-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/12/genetic-language-delay/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/07/12/genetic-language-delay/).

Genetic Language Delay

Recently, Wojciech Wisniewski and company found a deletion that
eliminates an exon of the gene TM4SF20, a transmembrane protein
expressed in the brain. The mutant protein is terminated prematurely
and apparently accumulates inside the cell.

This mutation causes severe language delay, and also causes
ominous-looking MRI brain scans, with white matter hypertensities (WMHs)
scattered over the brain. Normally those spots are the result of brain
aging, something you see in octogenarians. Incredibly rare in kids.

So far this is mildly interesting, in a depressing sort of way, but the
genetics journals are full of new ways for your genes to screw you.
Almost always, those newly discovered genetic syndromes are extremely
rare, sometimes limited to a a single family. Mutation creates them,
selection cuts them down.

But this one is common, at least in Southeast Asia. It’s a dominant –
one copy causes trouble – and the gene frequency looks to be around 1%
in Vietnam. It’s also been seen in people from Burma, Thailand,
Indonesia, and the Philippines, although there’s no estimate of the
frequency in those countries yet.

This is weird. Deleterious dominants should never be common, certainly
not in a big population. It’s rather like those claims about a common
dominant form of prosopagnosia – but the guy making that claim was
probably just wrong. This one sounds real – they have found the gene,
they seem to have good evidence of severe language delay in carriers,
careful MRI studies, have done mouse genetic studies, etc. And the
carrier parents report language delays in their own childhoods.

The kids seem to eventually catch up in language, at least to some
extent. Some of the parents are smart, or at any rate have had academic
success. Still, it’s hard to believe that all those funny-looking spots
on the MRI brain scans are harmless – particularly with increasing age.

It’s a puzzle. Probably not to the authors, who come out of the medical
world, but it is to me.



