+++
title = "Book announcement Three"
full_title = "Book announcement Three Pillars of Skepticism in Classical India by Ethan Mills"
date = "2018-06-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/06/21/book-announcement-three-pillars-of-skepticism-in-classical-india-by-ethan-mills/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/06/21/book-announcement-three-pillars-of-skepticism-in-classical-india-by-ethan-mills/).

Book announcement: Three Pillars of Skepticism in Classical India by Ethan Mills

Pre-orders are now available for a book by one of our bloggers, [Ethan
Mills](https://ethan-mills.weebly.com/) (Assistant Professor of
Philosophy, University of Tennessee at Chattanooga).

Ethan Mills: *Three Pillars of Skepticism in Classical India: Nagarjuna,
Jayarasi, and Sri Harsa*, Lexington Books, 262 pages, 978-1-4985-5569-2
hardback, 978-1-4985-5570-8 ebook. [Link to
publisher.](https://rowman.com/ISBN/9781498555692/The-Three-Pillars-of-Skepticism-in-Classical-India-Nagarjuna-Jayarasi-and-Sri-Hara#)

**From the publisher:** Beginning with the earliest strata of Indian
philosophy, this book uncovers a distinct tradition of skepticism in
Indian philosophy through a study of the “three pillars” of Indian
skepticism near the beginning, middle, and end of the classical era:
Nāgārjuna (c. 150-200 CE), Jayarāśi (c. 770-830 CE), and Śrī Harṣa (c.
1125-1180 CE). Moving beyond the traditional school model of
understanding the history of Indian philosophy, this book argues that
the philosophical history of India contains a tradition of skepticism
about philosophy represented most clearly by three figures coming from
different schools but utilizing similar methods: Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi,
and Śrī Harṣa. This book argues that there is a category of skepticism
often overlooked by philosophers today: skepticism about philosophy,
varieties of which are found not only in classical India but also in the
Western tradition in Pyrrhonian skepticism. Skepticism about philosophy
consists of intellectual therapies for those afflicted by the quest for
dogmatic beliefs. The book begins with the roots of this type of
skepticism in ancient India in the Ṛg Veda, Upaniṣads, and early
Buddhist texts. Then there are two chapters on each of the three major
figures: one chapter giving each philosopher’s overall aims and methods
and a second demonstrating how each philosopher applies these methods to
specific philosophical issues. The conclusion shows how the history of
Indian skepticism might help to answer philosophy’s detractors today:
while skeptics demonstrate that we should be modest about philosophy’s
ability to produce firm answers, philosophy nonetheless has other uses
such as cultivating critical thinking skills and lessening dogmatism.
This book is situated within a larger project of expanding the history
of philosophy. Just as the history of Western philosophy ought to inform
contemporary philosophy, so should expanding the history of philosophy
to include classical India illuminate understandings of philosophy
today: its value, limits, and what it can do for us in the 21st century.
