+++
title = "Alternative theisms and"
full_title = "Alternative theisms and atheisms (part 1)"
date = "2018-06-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/06/23/alternative-theisms-and-atheisms-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/06/23/alternative-theisms-and-atheisms-part-1/).

Alternative theisms and atheisms (part 1)

One of the main advantages of dealing with worldviews other than the one
you grew up in is the fact that you are exposed to doubts and
alternatives. One of such cases regards the nebulous category of
religion (to which Amod dedicated some illuminating
[posts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/on-body-ritual-among-the-nacirema/)
on his blog), which in Europe and America is often confused with just
“belief in (a) god(s)”. Part of the definition of religion is its being
other than philosophy, so much that philosophy is looked upon with
suspicion when it is mixed with “religious” purposes, like in the case
of soteriology.

However, as soon as one encounters Buddhism, one is faced with the
alternative: Either Buddhism is a religion (in which case, one would
need to update one’s definition of religion) or it is a philososophy (in
which case, one would need to update one’s definition of philosophy).

A similar case regards categories such as “Atheism”. Atheism as it is
common nowadays is a relatively recent phenomenon in the Euro-American
world, so much that one risks to postulate that it is a result of the
Enlightenment, of Positivism, of the success of Science etc. A glance at
South Asia shows that this is not the only way atheism can find its
place in the history of philosophy. As shown by Larry McCrea, atheism
might have been the rule rather than the exception in South Asian
philosophy until the end of the first millennium. This also means that
the later shift towards theism has a completely different flavour,
insofar as it comes out of a different background.

I am especially intrigued by the moment in which this turn took place,
with thinkers composing theistic texts and/or reinterpreting their texts
and traditions in a theistic way. A typical example is the adoption and
adaptation of Mīmāṃsā (originally an atheist philosophy) within theist
Vedānta in the first centuries of the second millennium CE. I have
already discussed about the various steps of this incorporation by
Rāmānuja and Veṅkaṭanātha. What remains fascinating is

1.  how Mīmāṃsā was rebuilt through this encounter, with its atheism
    reconfigurated as negation of a given form of theos, but not of any
    form whatsoever.
2.  how Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta was challenged to produce a sustainable
    version of theism.

To elaborate: Theism in South Asia needed to grow in an environment in
which atheist objections where the norm. It had, therefore, to inoculate
itself with possible answers to these objections and to rethink an idea
of the divine which could resist these attacks.

**How could this phenomenon be studied?** As usual with South Asian
philosophy, many of the fundamental texts have never been edited and
remain in manuscript form. Of the ones which have been edited, only a
tiny minority has been translated. Of these translations, only a
minority can be understood on its own right and independently of the
Sanskrit (or Maṇipravāḷa) original. Still less common are works
elaborating on the theology entailed in these texts (among the
exceptions let me name Carman, Clooney, Mumme and Oberhammer;
Ram-Prasad’s *Divine Self* especially focuses on Rāmānuja’s different
concept of God). In short, texts need to be edited, translated, studied,
compared with each other and read keeping in sight the goal of
understanding the phenomenon of the convergence of theism and atheism.

**Why at all should it be studied?** The Mīmāṃsā author Kumārila Bhaṭṭa
writes that without a purpose, even a foolish does not act, and in fact
Sanskrit authors regularly announce at the beginning of their treatises
the proximate and remote purpose of their works. In the present case,
the proximate cause is the desire to understand the interactions between
atheism and theism by looking at them from an unexpected perspective and
to throw light on a fundamental chapter in the history of South Asian
philosophy.
