+++
title = "Made in China"
full_title = "Made in China"
date = "2021-02-25"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china).

Made in China



**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

As tedious as it grows with repetition, I’m afraid the old Santayana
chestnut that “those who cannot remember the past are condemned to
repeat it” remains no less incisive in our amnesiac age. Data and
infinite information might be at our collective fingertips, but who do
we depend on to judiciously tend them? Who makes it their mission to
remember dispassionately, to carry forward truths both flattering and
inconvenient? Who among us actually knew in the first place? Perilously
few, in my experience.

I recently witnessed a scholar informing his audience that Xi Jinping’s
genocidal inclination towards the Uygurs distinguishes his regime from
its Imperial Chinese forerunners who displayed no such maniacal
tendencies, despite their cruelties. I objected that on the contrary
Imperial China had been the author of multiple genocides of subject
peoples over the millennia. He ignored me. A bystander to the
conversation argued that Sinologists tend to be quite pro-China, so no
one spotlights these awkward truths. He probably didn't know.

Many would argue that we’re already deep into a post-fact era and the
battle to actually remember anything but the blandest contours of our
few millennia of human history has long since been ceded to a postmodern
elite obsessed with facile disputes over race, victimology and their own
most immediately accessible personal feelings. They’re probably right.
But I find it hard to care. I’m too disagreeable and I owe too many of
my intellectual debts and loyalties to humans whose time on earth never
overlapped mine anyway. I can’t bend myself to the vapid ethos of this
ahistorical age I happen to live in. I remember and remember and
remember. It’s probably no use, but it’s what I do.

You’re here reading me, so odds are, you do, too. Many among the 1.4
billion humans behind the Great Chinese firewall defied censors to
[mourn](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/07/business/china-coronavirus-doctor-death.html)
an early Covid coverup whistleblower’s death, gathered for hours
clamoring for any insight about their government’s pogroms against the
Uygurs when a tiny door briefly opened on
[Clubhouse](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/09/technology/china-clubhouse.html),
and struggle futilely to know anything surrounding the 1989 events of
Tiananmen Square or a thousand other moments unflattering to the Chinese
regime’s self image. But us? We do it to ourselves. No one’s surveilling
us to keep us from reading or remembering. We do it to ourselves.

I have a dread suspicion this post, what should be a banal little act of
recollection, will become a recurring feature on this
[Substack](https://razib.substack.com/). Perhaps it’s a necessary role
in an age of atrophy... scattering these occasional little oases of
factual recollection across an arid landscape of righteous amnesia? All
in hopes that the wiser inhabitants of some future age might hopscotch
their way back to storehouses still packed with the millennia of human
memory, fact and reflection we largely ignore.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F892e2d9b-3cbc-4e86-b6b9-768dc71def30_1061x750.jpeg)

**The Forgotten Genocide**

Today there are twelve million Uyghurs in a nation of 1.4 billion
Chinese, a fraction of a voiceless percent. The Chinese have imprisoned
whole communities and are persecuting Uyghurs en masse. Reeducation
camps, a tried and tested instrument in the toolkit of Communist
societies for a century, dot Xinjiang today. Islam and the Uyghur
language are called threats to the regime. Mosques are monitored.
Children are consigned to Mandarin Chinese language schools. The Chinese
Communist Party is executing a slow-rolling genocide.

How can we understand this? We could look back to history. But that
presupposes we know any.

Too often, today’s commentators lack the most basic familiarity with the
lineaments of the Chinese past, even though it is copiously documented.
Absent that basic knowledge, they make recourse to abstractions of
European colonialism or lazily ascribe the inspiration for the current
horror to Hitler or Stalin. They construe the actions of the Chinese
purely in the light of Western history because that is the only
interpretative lever they can operate.

**The reality is that Chinese history itself offers a clear example of
genocide and repression on a mass scale to “fix” a political problem:
the genocide of the Dzungar Mongols in the 18th century**. This occurred
in the northern half of today’s Xinjiang: Dzungaria. Dzungaria was a
territory named for a people who have since been ethnically cleansed
from it. The genocide of the Dzungars reminds us that the template for
government-sanctioned repression and violence of an ethnicity requires
no Western influence. It is a feature of Chinese governance and has been
for centuries.

The Dzungar Khanate was the last of the great steppe empires. Less
storied than the Mongol Empire of Genghis Khan and the Turkic Empire of
Tamerlane, it is now notable for the genocide that accompanied its
destruction. After the Dzungar Khanate was erased, modern China’s
borders gained their final outline. This act concluded the geographical
invention of China as we know it today.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

**The Great Enemy**

For nearly 2,000 years, the empires of the steppe menaced the settled
societies to their west, east, and south. Attila the Hun threatened the
Romans, the Turks plundered northern India, and China was overwhelmed
many times by horsemen from the north. But by the 1600’s, new weaponry
had evened the playing field. The “gunpowder empires” could slowly
strangle the tribes of the open steppe, one canon volley at a time.

Squeezed ever more tightly between the rising powers of Tsarist Russia
and Manchu China, the ultimate demise of the Dzungar Khanate was
achieved through the genocide of the constituent tribes. **Between 1755
and 1757 80% of the Dzungars died or were killed through the concerted
action of Manchu-led forces**, ending centuries of conflict and decades
of rebellion. Dzungaria, the northern half of modern-day Xinjiang, was
thus emptied of Mongols and resettled with Kazakhs and Uyghurs.

The official modern definition of genocide includes “acts committed with
intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial or
religious group.” Manchu authorities issued official orders and
exhortations to attempt total
[extermination](https://books.google.com/books?id=aynFAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA32&dq=Zunghar+genocide&hl=en&sa=X&ei=jedWU7DIBqe2sASikoG4DA&ved=0CDUQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q=Zunghar%20genocide&f=false).
**A non-European power committed this act long before the modern era.**
Genocide requires no connection to European ideologies of colonialism or
the lethal force of machine guns.

**The rise of the Dzungars**

The Dzungars were not only the last of the Mongol Empires, they were
also marginal Mongols. The Dzungar confederacy was a fusion of the Olot,
Torghut, Dörbet and Khoshut tribes, collectively called the Oirats.
During the time of Genghis Khan, the Oirats were forest-dwellers, on the
southern edge of Siberia, not part of the nomadic societies to their
south that joined the Mongol horde. They did not share in the glory of
the conquests. Ethnically, Dzungars who survived the genocide remain
distinct from the majority of Mongols who were ruled by descendants of
Genghis Khan, the Khalkha Mongols.

Between the 14th and 18th centuries, the Oirats were often at war with
the Khalkha Mongols. The Khalkha had prestige and legitimacy on their
side. The Oirats had the fact that they were hardier, tougher, and their
elites less exposed to the comforts of wealth. In other words, **the
Oirat advantage over the Khalkha Mongols was the advantage the Khalkha
Mongols had once had over their enemies**.

By the end of the 17th century, the Oirat tribes who had become the
Dzungars gained the upper hand. In 1691, the Khalkha Mongols forestalled
surrendering to the Dzungars by [submitting
themselves](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mongolia_under_Qing_rule#History)
to the new rulers of China: the Manchus.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

![Ming China on the eve of the Manchu
conquest](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fe275d005-e5af-4f5b-a07d-d1b1e18f5b02_1200x1221.png)

**The rise of the Manchus**

The Manchus were a coalition of tribes that occupied the forest zone to
the east of Mongolia, what we today call Manchuria in northeast China.
The Manchus understood empire and conquest. Between 1115 and 1234, their
ancestors, the Jurchen, ruled northern China as the Jin dynasty. That
dynasty was destroyed by the Mongol invasion from the north.

In the subsequent centuries, the Jurchen tribes reinvented themselves as
the Manchu, and established alliances with the Khalkha Mongols, in their
ancient home of Manchuria. In the mid-17th century, the collapse of the
Ming dynasty presented another opportunity. Between 1644 and 1659 the
Manchus conquered China. Within the borders of Imperial China, they
ruled as Chinese Emperors, founding the Qing dynasty. [Emperor
Kangxi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kangxi_Emperor) reigned as an
exemplary Confucian monarch between 1661 and 1722, and his six-decade
regime helped inspire a wave of early-Enlightenment
[Sinophilia](https://scholarship.tricolib.brynmawr.edu/handle/10066/3597)
in Europe. China embodied to many of the philosophers of the age the
possibility of secular, enlightened despotism administered by rational
bureaucrats.

But there was another side of the Qing: **outside of the borders of the
Chinese heartland they were Manchurian warlords**. Kangxi devoted
multiple months of the year to hunting, a pastime of the steppe and
forest zone, not an avocation typical of Chinese Emperors. Unlike native
Chinese, the Manchus had a [deep
relationship](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manchu_people#Buddhism) to
Tibetan Buddhism, which led to the Manchu absorption of Tibet into their
domains in 1720.

The Manchus had assimilated to many of the folkways of the steppe. They
were comfortable with the culture of the nomads to their west. The
Khalkha Mongols were an essential part of the Manchu military class. In
the 19th century, Mongol generals played a role in suppressing
rebellions in China proper.

**Manchu entanglement with Tibetan Buddhism and the Khalkha Mongols made
conflict with the Dzungar tribes inevitable**. The Manchus stood between
the Dzungars and their ambition to bring together all the Mongol people
under their leadership. In the centuries after the decline of the Mongol
Empire, the scions of Genghis Khan had become habituated to a certain
level of luxurious living which left them less ferocious fighters than
their lean and hungry Dzungar cousins. Over the centuries, the Khalkha
had lost ground to the Dzungars. On the eve of their abrupt pivot to an
alliance with the Manchus, there was no viable independent path forward
between the two rising powers.

Both the Manchus and Dzungar were devotees of Tibetan Buddhism. The
Dzungar interference in the affairs of Tibet was alarming to Manchu
rulers who cultivated and relied upon the legitimacy of Buddhist Lamas.

After their conquest of China, the Manchu had men and materiel beyond
the wildest expectations of any steppe warlord. They went into the
conflict with enormous advantages.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F6b55e5a7-e054-40e7-b7e4-a09b8ee2f578_786x334.jpeg)

**A rebellious people**

The Dzungar Khanate was a predatory steppe polity. Unlike the extensive
bureaucratic states emerging on the fertile edges of Eurasia, the steppe
produced societies that were more often simply a collection of tribes
bound together by personal loyalties. In this way, they were primal,
ancient throwbacks to something deeply premodern. But for two thousand
years, the steppe people also remained state-of-the-art in their
military technology: mounted warriors who could traverse great distances
and strategically retreat whenever the battle turned against them. With
powerful compound bows, they could shoot while mounted, thanks to a
lifetime in the saddle.

It was often far easier for settled societies to pay tribute to the
people of the steppe than resist their incessant raiding. The East
Romans paid tribute to the Huns, and so succeeded in deflecting the
attention of these invaders away to the west. Similarly, it was usually
far more cost-effective for Chinese emperors to provide “gifts” to their
steppe allies rather than engage in resource-sapping wars.

This is the historical precedent into which the Dzungars stepped. Their
ferocity meant that they easily established hegemony over the Muslim
people of the Tarim basin, whom we today call Uyghurs. These urban
Muslims resented rule by capricious Buddhist nomads, and they welcomed
liberation by the Manchus.

Dzungar mobility meant they also interfered in the religious politics of
Tibet incessantly and at will for decades. The title Dalai Lama was
conferred initially by a Mongol ruler in the 16th century. By the end of
the 17th century, the Dzungars were manipulating and controlling
succession in the Tibetan Buddhist hierarchy. It looked as if Tibet
would be absorbed entirely by the Dzungars, just as the cities of the
Tarim basin had been.

**The Dzungar-Qing Wars**

The years between 1687 and 1757 saw [a series of
conflicts](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dzungar%E2%80%93Qing_Wars)
between the Dzungars, and the Qing dynasty. The war came to an end only
when [Emperor Qianlong](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qianlong_Emperor),
a man even more cultured than his grandfather Kangxi, demanded the
liquidation of the Dzungars as a nation.

In response to the recalcitrance of some of his subordinates to carry
out the full extent of his dictates, Qianlong ordered the following
proclamation be read out:

> *Show no mercy at all to these rebels. Only the old and weak should be
> saved. Our previous military campaigns were too lenient. If we act as
> before, our troops will withdraw, and further trouble will occur. If a
> rebel is captured and his followers wish to surrender, he must
> personally come to the garrison, prostrate himself before the
> commander, and request surrender. If he only sends someone to request
> submission, it is undoubtedly a trick. **Tell Tsengünjav to massacre
> these crafty Zunghars.** Do not believe what they say.*

Of 600,000 Dzungars, up to 480,000 may have died. A 19th-century
[Chinese historian](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wei_Yuan) estimated
that 30% of the Dzungar households were directly killed by the Qing
armies. Another 40-50% died of disease and starvation. The remainder
fled to the Russian Empire or took refuge with the Kazakhs.

**The closing of the frontier and the rise of the gun**

Qing victory over the Dzungar was total. The Dzungar nation lost its
ability to resist and rebel. This marked the arrival of the Eurasian
heartland into the modern geopolitical system. Before the rise of the
Qing and the expansion of Russia into the Eurasian interior, the vast
zone had been occupied by mobile nomads and hunters. There were no true
borders on the map, there was territory occupied and inhabited. The
nomadic response to encroachment was to fight or retreat at the first
sign of weakness. They rarely took any significant losses due to their
customary strategic depth.

But the partitioning of Central Asia by Imperial China to the east and
Imperial Russia to the west closed off all avenues of retreat to the
Dzungar. The nomads’ attempt to play Russia off against the Qing met
with mixed success at best. The Russians knew a vigorous coalition of
nomadic warriors could cause them trouble in the future. They remembered
being ruled by Tatar nomads.

With the development and spread of firearms, nomadic advantages in
warfare also diminished. Modern states with extensive systems of
logistics were more effective in fielding large armies for long periods
in distant locales. The Qing wore down the Dzungar, **and ultimately the
campaign of genocide left Dzungar soldiers no homes to retreat to.**

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F3482c7ff-5d93-49bc-af47-b4b4c8e6a86d_602x446.jpeg)

**Rationality and the total state**

The Qing dynasty ruled a China that was heir to thousands of years of
Confucian statecraft. But the Manchus remained a cosmopolitan and
imperial people who also operated outside of the boundaries of Chinese
thought and precedent. In 1691, they signed the [Treaty of
Nerchinsk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty_of_Nerchinsk), which
established a border with the Russian Empire. Their patronage of Tibetan
Buddhism was not in keeping with Chinese tradition, but unsurprising
from a people of the eastern steppe and forest, who had shifted from
shamanism to the religion of the Tibetan Lamas in the decades after
1500. **It also allowed them to absorb and integrate Tibet into the
Chinese Empire for the first time in history.**

The destruction of the Dzungar Khanate also established the western
border of the Manchu Empire in what the Chinese today call Xinjiang,
literally “New Border.” Whereas earlier Chinese Empires had been content
to watch their influence gradually fade into the steppe and desert to
the north and west, the Manchus established clear lines and borders all
around the perimeter of their domains. Though distinct from the
Westphalian tradition of Europe, the Manchus rationalized the geography
of China so that it transitioned easily into the modern era. **Today's
internationally recognized borders of the People's Republic of China are
the outlines ruthlessly carved by the Manchu Empire.**

The Manchu victory over the Dzungars was not due to their particular
skill or ferocity in the arts of war. Rather, they deployed the whole
might of the Chinese nation and various allied peoples (Manchus,
Mongols, and Turks) against the Dzungar in a war of attrition. Modern
weaponry erased the long-held advantage of the steppe nomad against the
Chinese infantry on a man-for-man basis. **Science, engineering, and
modern politics conquered the steppe and exterminated the Dzungar.**

![Qianlong
Emperor](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fe459a7e6-201f-4300-8bee-6e996eacdac9_620x412.jpeg)

**The greatest human stain**

The reason European philosophers like Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and
Voltaire admired China is that it seemed to be a rational empire.
Voltaire also envied what he perceived to be the subordination and
marginalization of religion in Chinese statecraft, in contrast to the
coordination that was typical in Europe at the time.

This was an indigenous development within China, ruled by the Manchus, a
non-Chinese people. **It was part of a broader arc of economic and
political progress across the world, as states rationalized
themselves**, and scientific and engineering principles unblocked
long-standing stalemates. The process bore its full fruit in Europe,
which conquered the world. But the example of China in the 18th century
illustrates that elements of it were present at the other end of
Eurasia.

The Dzungar genocide, and its resemblance to later atrocities under
Americans, Turks, and of course Germans, shows that no time, people, or
place is any guarantee against inhumane behavior. The Manchus had
experienced decades of rebellion and recalcitrance on the part of the
Dzungar. Their ultimate solution was to end the Dzungar as a people,
thereby unburdening themselves of the long war. This was simple logic.

The Uyghurs have been far less violent and problematic for the People’s
Republic of China than the Dzungar Khanate was for Qing China. But the
power and totality of the modern state have progressed far beyond the
18th century. The reach and encroachment of the modern surveillance and
police states are like nothing Qianlong could imagine. Instead of
exhortations to obey, all that is needed today is a decree specifying
that authorities should “[show absolutely no
mercy](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/11/16/world/asia/china-xinjiang-documents.html)”
to the Uyghur “separatists.” And like that, the mechanism of the modern
totalitarian state snaps into motion, a blur of bureaucratic paperwork
and punctilious attention to the details of slowly destroying another
race of humans.

When we in the West react with incomprehension to the horror unfolding
in those remote outposts, we need to realize it is not without
precedent. It is not an act of capricious evil, but a calculated
decision. **Genocide was built into the foundations of Xinjiang itself,
the contested soil suffused with the blood of the exterminated Dzungar
people**. I’m hardly one to exhort anyone to do anything. But ours is an
age when earnest Americans announce unbidden whose stolen native lands
they occupy as readily as they proclaim their pronouns. So could we just
supplement our long-distance concern and hand-wringing with a thought
for the actual facts of the western frontierland of China? Xinjiang is
Dzungar land emptied of Dzungars. And now it looks poised to be emptied
of their Uyghur successors. **Sadly, genocide, that darkest of human
stains, is not a recent Western invention, but Made In China, too.**

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/made-in-china?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

