+++
title = "Link language question"
full_title = "Link language question Hebrew revival and Sanskrit revival"
date = "2015-09-12"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2015/09/12/link-language-question-hebrew-revival-and-sanskrit-revival/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2015/09/12/link-language-question-hebrew-revival-and-sanskrit-revival/).

Link language question: Hebrew revival and Sanskrit revival.

The below note is bya friend.

In terms of what we could learn from the Jews, the revival of Hebrew is
very important:

<http://www.jefftk.com/files/revival.pdf>

India had a unique ecosystem that supported \*genuine\* diversity. This
is best seen in its linguistic ecosystem, with a two-level
Sanskrit-Prakrit division, each one nourishing the other. I compare it
to the water cycle – where the rivers, seas and marshes all contribute
to the crystallization of clouds, and the clouds in turn dispense
distilled water onto all of these again.

But today that ecosystem has been broken. And there is a false dichotomy
and a vicious politics between the “logical” and “sentimental” types
that will never allow Sanskrit to rise and rehabilitate that
ecosystem…which in turn means that all Indian languages will fall to
ugly, “haphazard Anglicization” rather than “systematic
Sanskritization”.

This false politics that thrives on the tension between a “logical” and
“sentimental” dipole (which the Congress has been playing), can be
broken only by policy that is shoved past these voices – either by
sleight of hand or by brute force. That is my takeaway from how it
happened with Hebrew:

1. In the mid-1800’s, a small number of weird, impractical and nerdy
Jews started a “spoken Hebrew” movement, just like Samskrita Bharati.
They started using Hebrew for regular, secular subjects rather than only
religious incantations. Short stories and novels in Hebrew were
published.

2. But that was not enough – only a few Jews were intellectually
inclined to take up this “hobby”, and most of them made “logical”
arguments about how in this modern age we should all learn
German/English/Russian etc (depending on where they were living). Of
course, the same intellectually lazy, “logical” and “practical” members
of Jewish society also paid customary tributes to Hebrew as a repository
of their ancient culture and identity, but no doubt pointed out that it
was wise to be “practical” and accept the reality of the domination of
European languages in modern times…

When some Jews from various countries migrated to the Palestinian
Mandate under British rule, they needed to have a link language. The
towering “logical” types as well as the well-grounded “sentimental” Jews
suggested Yiddish, since that was the language of a majority of
Ashkenazi Jews, like Hindi in India. But Jews from other parts objected
– because they were equally “sentimental” about their mother-tongues.
Then some “logical” types suggested English, given the “reality” of the
post WW-2 “world”.

But unfortunately or fortunately, Israel was founded by those
“impractical” “nerdy” types whose thought currents were not rooted in
the same Reality as the “logical” types. So they made it the law that
Hebrew and no other language would be the link language for multilingual
Israel.

Thus, a gradual “spoken Hebrew movement” created a small but critical
mass of intellects who saw what was possible. Then this small class made
a POLICY decision to goad the rest of the lazy / logical / practical
types to learn the bloody language.

Thus, in India also, we will see the “logical” Indian urging us to just
learn English and keep our mother-tongues for popular culture, and we
will see the “sentimental” Indians urging us to “protect” their
mother-tongues from, both, English as well as one another (Tamil versus
Hindi, etc). Sanskrit will have to navigate this political space deftly,
by appealing to, both, the logical and sentimental, and tricking them
both!

