+++
title = "RITUAL GAMES FOR THE"
full_title = "RITUAL GAMES FOR THE GODDESS PATTINI Rohan Bastin"
date = "2020-05-08"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2020/05/08/ritual-games-for-the-goddess-pattini-rohan-bastin/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2020/05/08/ritual-games-for-the-goddess-pattini-rohan-bastin/).

RITUAL GAMES FOR THE GODDESS PATTINI  Rohan Bastin 

A copy of “RITUAL GAMES FOR THE GODDESS PATTINI Rohan Bastin ” since the
topic was being discussed recently:  
The Sri Lankan deity, Pattini, has a number of games (or keliya) held on
her behalf. They include the hom game (ankeliya), the stick game
(likeliya) and the coconut game (polkeliya). These games share the
feature of a competition between two teams, with most commonly one team
representing Pattini and the other team representing either her spouse
or another male deity. A common but not universal aetiology for the
games develops on the main story of Pattini, to be found written in the
Silappadikaram or “The Ankler”. Specifically it develops on the episode
at the climax of the story when Pattini, enraged at the wrongful
execution of her husband at the hands of the king of Madurai, causes a
terrible conflagration that destroys the city. The fire, which she
starts by tearing off her left breast and casting it at the city she
curses, threatens the whole world with an associated pestilence until
the goddess is appeased by people performing games for her (Wirz
1954:175).  
A number of scholars have documented Pattini games from different parts
of Sri Lanka, most notably Gananath Obeyesekere who situates his
analysis within a compendious study of the rich mythical and ritual
traditions associated with Pattini worship in Sri Lankan Buddhism
(Obeyesekere 1984). These traditions are both oral and textual and go
well beyond the depiction of the goddess in the Silappadikaram, while
preserving the fundamental story of Pattini as the chaste wife who
stoically endures the adultery and squander of her wayward husband, only
to see him wrongly executed for the theft of the Madurai Queen’s anklet
after he has repented and is endeavouring to make a fresh start. Such a
central story serves to unify an otherwise disparate set of goddess
traditions and thus provides an important variant on localised goddess
worship in South Asia. Obeyesekere interprets the Sinhala Buddhist
Pattini myths and rituals as revealing themes associated with
righteousness, kingship and tolerance. He then connects these themes to
Sinhala Buddhist traditions and identifies a close association between
Pattini worship and the traditional Sinhala Buddhist polity, thereby
indicating the emergence of a state cult consonant with the description
of Pattini worship in the final section of the Silappadikaram.  
In his specific interpretation of the games for Pattini, Obeyesekere
focuses largely on the hom game (ankeliya) and to a lesser extent the
coconut game (pe its mainly weighted competition, sexual symbolism, and
the licentiousness of its exclusively male players, the horn game
certainly generates a rich analysis, particularly for such a strongly
Freudian anthropologist as Obeyesekere. He interprets the game as
revealing Sinhalese male castration anxieties as well as repressed
homosexuality, and the importance in Sinhalese culture of shaming
practices. These aspects of Pattini worship bear no Buddhist stamp and
are interpreted in terms of ontologically (as well as historically)
prior childhood socialisation practices. The strong Buddhist themes
Obeyesekere identifies generally in Pattini worship do not pertain to
the games, which are viewed from the more universalising perspective of
psychoanalysis.  
This paper takes up aspects of Obeyesekere’s argument through an
analysis of a village coconut game held on the north-west coast. In
general, the coconut game does not display the same characteristics that
make the horn game such a spectacle, and so has received less analytical
focus. Indeed, its lack of weighted competition leads Obeyesekere to
remark that the coconut game is more properly a game where the horn game
is a ritual (Obeyesekere 1984:401). This distinction between game and
ritual, based on the presence or absence of weighted competition, raises
an interesting set of issues about the anthropology of ritual and the
underlying assumptions concerning the separation of the two. It is
important, though, not to distinguish games from rituals unless these
games are first properly situated in their broader cosmological frame.
For underlying the distinction between game and ritual is a sensitivity
to the teleological aspects of ritual (what ritual is supposed to do)
informing a sense of game as an event without purpose. These
teleological aspects lie at the heart of the various functionalist
approaches to ritual that have been a common thread in the anthropology
of ritual throughout its history. Many regard the heart of the matter to
be the anthropologist’s disbelief in what the ritual is supposed to
achieve and his or her substitution of a participant’s exegesis with an
anthropological function. Thus, the famous Hopi rain dance was not about
rain but social solidarity. Rather than see the functionalist approaches
to ritual deriving from disbelief, however, I see them as deriving from
the teleology characteristically associated with ritual by believer and
non-believer alike. To be mindful of this, it is necessary to examine
each ritual (and game) as broadly as possible. Attention to questions of
meaning as well as questions of function is required; but it must be
done without affirming either an a priori separation between the two or
a conflation of the two.  
To develop this point I shall first describe the coconut game that I
have observed in a north-western village in Sri Lanka, before offering
an initial interpretation. I shall then situate my analysis in the
context of other interpretations of the games by Obeyesekere and others,
before concluding with an analysis of the coconut game as a ritual whose
form must be a game. My argument is that there is nothing essentially
ritualistic about games other than their repetitiveness, and that there
is nothing essentially ludic about rituals other than their alterity.
Neither repetitiveness nor alterity define game and/or ritual; but they
relate to outcomes, and outcomes establish an orientation that is the
potential for the enactment of an intentionality which can, but need
not, create meanings and functions conventionally recognised as
qualities of ritual.  
The Maradankulam Setting The common time for Pattini games is the period
of village-based Pattini festivals known as the gammaduwa held in the
hot post-harvest period after New Year. But games can also be scheduled
as needs require, because they are explicitly linked to removing drought
and pestilence associated with the hot dry season. This theme of
removing pestilence links Pattini worship with the broader south Indian
goddess tradition while also revealing the fundamental ritual
instrumentality associated with the games.  
The coconut game I observed is not part of New Year or gammaduwa
festivities, but is held in conjunction with the festival for the
village guardian deity that is the prelude to the annual temple festival
at Munnesvaram temple — a famous regional temple a few kilo metres from
Maradankulam whose main deity is ostensibly the Hindu god Siva, while in
reality, Siva’s spouse Ambal holds pride of place. For many Sinhala
Buddhists, Ambal is actually Pattini.’ The Munnesvaram festival is held
in the Tamil month of Adi (Sinhala Äsala, corresponding to the period of
July/August) and is associated with the second rice harvest. While
several villages in the region surrounding Munnesvaram participate in
the temple festival and hold their own events prior to the festival
beginning, only Maradankulam stages a coconut game. Moreover, this
village is Tamil Hindu as is the Munnesvaram temple, and not Sinhala
Buddhist as is the case for the majority of the other villages. The
reasons for this are complex and have been examined elsewhere (Bastin
(in press) nd.:1, nd.:2). Suffice to say here that the region is
well-known for its Sinhala-Tamil mix, and that there is a great deal of
ambiguity about the ethnic status of Maradankulam village as well as
about the religious status of Munnesvaram temple. Other aspects of this
ambiguity will be highlighted as my description proceeds.  
In the first half of the 19th century, Maradankulam was the largest
village in the immediate area. Villagers practised wet rice agriculture,
their tank one of a small system fed by the Dedura River roughly twelve
kilometres to the north. Most of these other tanks were broken, however,
and swidden agriculture predominated amongst a small population. Through
the latter half of the 19 century a coconut plantation economy
flourished and the population increased sharply through immigrant
labourers who mainly hailed from the southern Sinhalese parts of the
island. Maradankulam came to be a village amongst other villages bearing
similar populations, but its inhabitants retained a sense of its own
status as a village of traditional landowners and rice cultivators
vis-à-vis the migrant populations of hitherto landless peasants and/or
subordinate castes. The plantation boom also resulted in the
revitalisation of the decrepit Munnesvaram temple under its new owners —
a family of Tamil Brahmins — who revived and expanded the annual
festival in the 1880s. As a regional temple, Munnesvaram presided over
the local territorial unit (pattuva) hitherto consisting of sixty-two
villages including Maradankulam. In the revived festival this
traditional link was celebrated and intensified.  
Caste is not at issue in the four examples of the horn game reported by
Obeyesekere (1984). Members of various castes participate, and team
membership is fluid while acknowledging a principle of patrilineality to
the extent that generally sons belong to the same team as their father.
On this basis, the games can function to incorporate migrants from other
parts of the country (Obeyesekere 1984:406-409). This has occurred at
Maradankulam to only a limited extent. It is the only village to
celebrate any Pattini game, and team membership is relatively closed to
members of an ostensibly single caste village of cultivators (Goyigama
in Sinhala and Vellalla in Tamil). It is striking, then, that the only
village in the immediate area to hold a game for Pattini is the only
clearly Tamil Hindu village and the only village to have a strong
involvement in the Munnesvaram festival. Moreover, its game is closely
tied to the village community and not to the surrounding population.  
The village guardian deity is Aiyanar (or in Sinhala Aiyanayake). In
Sinhala Buddhism Aiyanayake has both a regal and an ascetic form
(Winslow 1984). The former is associated with the jungle and hunting,
while the latter is represented as an old man meditating on Buddhist
texts on the nature of bodily decay and impermanence. Aiyanar is the
popular south Indian village guardian who regally patrols the village
boundaries and is worshipped  
122  
121

through the devotional offering of terracotta horses (Dumont 1959). In
Kerala he is called Ayyappan or Sasta and is the god of the famous
forest pilgrimage site of Sabiramalai (Daniel 1984).  
Dumont notes that the south Indian Aiyanar stands in a special relation
to the main village goddess as regal lord to regal lady, but more in a
sibling relationship than a marital one. In Maradankulam the goddess is
Pattini. While Aiyanar has two other goddesses as wives, villagers know
little about them and they are largely ignored. The god and his wives
are maintained inside the village temple along with the god’s two
brothers, Pillaiyar and Murugan — the two senior sons of Siva in the
Tamil Saivite pantheon. Outside the temple one finds the fourth son, the
fierce guardian god Bhairavar, as well as the lesser guardians
Virabhadra and Viramunda. In addition there is a separate shrine for the
goddess Pattini. Altogether, then, there are seven deities (plus
Aiyanar’s two wives) known collectively as the hatkattiya, a Sinhala
term I translate as the “gang of seven”. Of the six male members of the
gang, three are inside the temple and three are outside along with
Pattini (see Diagram 1). At other village temples one does not find such
a gang. Instead Aiyanayake is inside and outside with Pattini is Suniyam
(or Kadavara). Suniyam is also the Sinhala Buddhist deity/demon
(devatava) of sorcery who bears a similarly ambiguous deity/demon status
as Bhairavar, Viramunda and Virabhadra.” Thus, the spatial arrangement
of inside and outside male deities reflects their nature and place in
the pantheon. This is also revealed in terms of a contrast between the
vegetarianism of the inside deities and the carnivorous outside deities.
The exception is the goddess Pattini who is neither an ambiguous
deity/demon nor carnivorous.  
In Sinhala Buddhism, seven is frequently the number of minor gods
associated with boundaries and custodianship. Linked to them are the
seven Pattinis, suggesting a cultural link with the virgin mother
goddesses that one finds in south Indian villages called collectively
“Pattiniyaman” (Shulman 1980:252).” Typically the pattiniyaman stand in
relation to a male god who is their brother (Trawick 1990:172). The
“gang of seven” in Maradankulam is thus part of a larger complex of
village guardian gods and goddesses in Sri Lanka and in south India for
whom associations with boundaries and territoriality are very strong.
Between the higher and the lower members, the inside and the outside,
stands Pattini who is worshipped in the village in the form of a statue
with seven brass anklets, and who is regarded as mediating in the cosmic
oscillation between the principles associated with the inside and
outside deities. This is a critical point because it describes the key
characteristic of the goddess that the games explore in a variety of
ways.  
The Maradankulam Game Three distinct phases occur on the day of the
coconut game.  
1. The gathering of the weapons and insignia of the “gang of seven”. 2.
The coconut game.  
3. The food offering to villagers and others. The first phase involves
cleaning with water and ghee the weapons or insignia of the deities
outside the temple. These are the seven brass anklets from the Pattini
shrine, the spear from the Virabhadra shrine, the special cleft sword
from the Viramunda shrine and the trident from the Bhairavar shrine. In
the early morning, all of the items are taken to the Bhairavar shrine to
be cleaned before being placed in a wooden box that is wrapped in a  
123

![](https://i.imgur.com/w8h0ycH.jpg)white cloth. Led by the Sinhala
Buddhist drummer who resides in the village, the box is then carried
three times around the temple by the young man who serves as the temple
priest.”- Other villagers carry lighted torches at the head of the
procession and the ends of a white cloth that serves as a canopy. After
the third procession around the temple the box is carried inside and
placed in the temple’s inner sanctum with the statues of Aiyanar and his
two wives. The insignia of Aiyanar’s senior brothers – Pillaiyar’s
ankusa noose and Murugan’s vel spear — are also placed inside the inner
sanctum. The core temple ritual  
– puja – is then performed involving recitation, flowers, incense and
lamp-waving. Thereafter the insignia are returned to their appropriate
shrines.  
In attendance for the first phase is a senior representative of each of
the two lineage groups of the village who comprise the two teams for the
coconut game. Both lineages are patrilineal descent groups who form the
core of village membership and give each villager a specific “estate”
name (vasagama). The largest of the two is the Rajaguru Senadhapathi
which makes up the majority of the village inhabitants, and the other is
the Dissanayake Mudiyansalage. Personal names commence with either of
these, which are often reduced to their initials, so I shall shorten
them also as the RS and DM. Both the vasagama names and the naming
system in Maradankulam, as well as property inheritance, correspond to
Sinhalese social organisation, although the villagers mostly identify
themselves as Tamil and use Tamil personal names.  
Before the second phase begins three large pots of milk rice are
prepared at the entrance to the temple by a small group of village
women. The milk is from coconuts and, thus, the dish is not the Tamil
pongal, which uses cow’s milk, but the Sinhalese kiribath. Once ready
the kiribath is divided into seven lots and is offered at each temple
shrine. While it is prepared the crowd of villagers including men, women
and children gather in the grounds of the temple. Women tend to gather
in the entrance veranda of the temple where the kiribath is prepared.
Like pongal, kiribath is prepared to mark auspicious beginnings and
points of re-origination.  
The coconut game takes place on the clear strip of land adjacent to the
temple’s western wall. Each team consists of four young men from each
lineage, each man having four coconuts that are placed in two piles at
each end of the pitch. The nuts are placed on a bed of leaves of the
margosa or neem tree (botanical name azadiracta indica) and have more
margosa leaves placed over them. Unlike some of the coconut games
reported elsewhere, the only nuts used at Maradankulam are small hard
unfertilised nuts called in Sinhala porapol or fighting nuts. A nut is
thrown underarm through the air and another is held and smashed against
it. In all cases, the end of the striking nut that has the three germ
holes is pointed toward the incoming nut which is turned the same way
when it is thrown. This end of the coconut is classified as female.  
Taking turns to start, the two teams alternate their throwing and
receiving until one of them has all of its nuts broken and the other is
declared the year’s winner. On the occasions I saw the game, the mood
was light hearted with the team members being cheered on and gently
admonished by their kinsfolk. The RS team is known as the Pattini team
and as the “lower team” (yatapila) while the DM team is known as the
upper team” (udupila) and as the Aiyanar team. The DM team stands at the
southern end of the pitch adjacent to the sanctum of the Aiyanar temple,
the RS team stands at the northern end adjacent to the temple entrance.
The numerical dominance of the RS lineage in the village  
125

ensures that they have the greatest support, and this is intensified by
the way most of the crowd gathers at the temple entrance end.  
The RS team won on both occasions that I observed the game and through
maintaining contact with villagers since my fieldwork in the mid-1980s I
understand that the RS team has won in the vast majority of cases. This
is good for the village, for a win by the RS team is a win for Pattini
and such a win indicates that the following year will be a good one with
plenty of rain. But the DM team has won as well and there is nothing to
suggest outwardly that the competition is weighted.”  
Once the game is over sections of the crowd then move to a piece of land
nearby where a prominent villager (and member of the RS lineage) holds
an alms-giving lunch of rice and vegetable curries. Villagers as well as
poor families who live near the village line up on the ground and
receive the meal from the man and members of his family on banana leaf
plates. Again the mood is jovial, although it is noticeable that a
number of villagers who attend the coconut game do not stay for the
alms-giving which seems to be targeted more at the poorer families who
live nearby than at the village per se. The alms-giving is the
appropriate action for a prominent villager. It bestows merit upon him
as a charitable act but also reflects hierarchical relations between
donor and recipient, and for this reason a number of villagers do not
accept the gift by staying away.”  
Rainfall is critical to the life of the villages in the Munnesvaram
pattuva. The area is in the intermediate zone between the wet and dry
zones of the island, and so is dependent on a good monsoon to replenish
the tank. The monsoon, however, can fail and this can result in the
Dedura River not replenishing the tank. The late 1980s were marked by a
major drought that compounded the difficulty of low international
coconut prices and it was no surprise to anyone that during one of these
years the DM team won the game. At the same time, the fortunes of the
game itself waxed and waned with at least one occasion when the teams
were reduced to only two players and one of the DM team was not a member
of the lineage.” Taking shelter from a heavy downpour in September 1999
I was told that that year’s game had been both well-attended and an easy
victory for the Pattini team. We laughed when I indicated the weather
conditions and said that the result was obvious.  
Interpretation The overall context for the coconut game develops a theme
of aggregation. It begins with the gathering of weapons and insignia for
the members of the village pantheon – the “gang of seven”. This is
followed by the game itself, a competition between the members of the
two lineage groups who comprise the core of the village membership.
Finally, the almsgiving is intended as a charitable act by a prominent
member of one of these lineages on behalf of the entire village. That it
does not properly work in this way is important and largely explicable
in terms of the history of village social relations and the history of
the economy of the District. I analyse this material elsewhere, but for
my purposes in this essay it is enough to say that the alms-giving
attempts to complete the process of aggregation that commences with the
temple deities. Consequently, I will focus more specifically on the game
itself and simply ask the reader to note that village life in
Maradankulam is affected by a variety of complex factors that relate to
the contemporary economy and society of Sri Lanka; but that in events
like the coconut game one can see the activation of principles of social
incorporation relevant for regional politico-religious institutions that
predate the contemporary Sri Lankan society and polity.  
Specifically in respect to the game, I want to emphasise the nature of
the nuts used, their treatment and their gender symbolism. Then I shall
consider the membership and characteristics of the teams before turning
to comparative evidence from elsewhere in the island.  
The nature of the coconuts is indicated by the use of margosa leaves.
The margosa tree (or in Sinhala kohomba) grows extensively throughout
Sri Lanka, especially in the drier areas. It is commonly associated with
the village goddess, and above all with health. It is a sought after
tree for house compounds where it is thought to keep the house cool,
clean and free from demons. The leaves are used in medicines, especially
in the preparation of soaps and skin-cleansing solutions. Margosa is
also used in the preparation of medicines for controlling menstruation
and as a contraceptive.” Above all the margosa is associated with the
village goddess and her life-giving cooling power. In the ayurvedic
scheme the margosa is considered to be very cool and is thus a potent
curative for conditions associated with an excess of heat in the body
including dysfunctional menstruation, pregnancy, and also skin diseases
such as smallpox, acne and prickly heat.  
In contrast to the cool margosa, the porapol or fighting coconuts are
regarded as very hot, their heat stemming from their unfertilised or
barren nature. According to one villager these fighting nuts are not
valued (except for the purposes of the game) and the point of the game
is to ensure that fewer nuts develop in this way, Coconuts are an
important part of the village economy. Indeed in recent years they have
surpassed rice paddy as the mainstay of village agriculture. So where
the coconut game was once to ensure rainfall for the rice harvest, it
now serves the additional task of ensuring a good crop of quality
coconuts. My informant added that this was the reason why only the
porapol is used.  
As I have noted, the germ hole end of a coconut is identified as female.
This is the case as much for the porapol as for a normal coconut. The
act of throwing and receiving with the female end reflects a sexual
contest between male and female, upper and lower, and, for Maradankulam,
Aiyanar and Pattini that is associated with Pattini’s chastity as
symbolised by the coconut. Such a sexual contest is even more explicit
in the other games for Pattini that I discuss below. Indeed, the Sinhala
term for game — keliya — is a euphemism for sexual intercourse. The
coconut game can be read, therefore, as a metaphor for a sexual
encounter between Pattini and the village guardian god Aiyanar, but an
encounter that Pattini ideally wins. In the process the barren coconuts
are broken and the fertility and health of the village is ensured. And
all of this occurs as the village prepares for its involvement in the
annual Munnesvaram festival as a client member of the Munnesvaram
pattuva.  
In other villages that celebrate smaller festivals on the day of
Maradankulam’s coconut game, the major theme is the mediation between
the superior god (deva) Aiyanayake inside the temple and the deity/demon
(devatava) outside the temple. This outside figure is described by some
as a god for half the year and a demon for the other half. His nature
turns at New Year and on the day of the festival, as the festival marks
the beginning of the second dark half of the year. The event is marked
by preparing and offering kiribath (coconut milk rice) and by gathering
together and cleaning all the deities’ weapons in the sanctum of the
temple. In some temples this amounts to dozens of swords and metal
pikes, each weapon originally an individual offering to the god
Aiyanayake, whose regal status overshadows his other guise as an
ascetic. Mostly there was only one pot of  
127  
126 kiribath, but in some temples seven pots of kiribath were prepared
with the seven Pattini goddesses in mind.  
Many Maradankulam residents said that other villages used to hold the
coconut game also; but the influx of outsiders in the circumstances of
plantation capitalism had meant that the villages lost their traditions.
Along with other evidence of the lack of collective labour on tank
maintenance, the lack of the games suggests that immigration made for a
largely inchoate social order that was village based but not articulated
through village and regional temple institutions. New villages became
more closely identified with more localised and newer Buddhist temples
run by monks than with the older arrangement. In addition, the area
lacked a local landed elite. Most of the investors in the plantation
economy were Sinhalese entrepreneurs and absentee landlords who remained
domiciled in Colombo and in their magnificent walauwa households in the
south. Consequently, they did not patronise local religious affairs in
the way they did in the south; particularly the Pattini festivals that
have flourished elsewhere with their support, and flourished in areas
marked by similar degrees of immigration (Obeyesekere 1984:404-407).”  
As Obeyesekere notes, extended patrilineages have lost their corporate
character in contemporary Sri Lanka and been replaced by “new ‘status
lines’ with a vague ideology of patrilineal descent” (Obeyesekere
1984:409; see also Obeyesekere 1967:262-266). These new lines have
generally adopted high-sounding vasagama names such as those at
Maradankulam, which suggests that Maradankulam may have reinvented
itself during the colonial era in a manner typical of Sri Lanka in both
the low country and up country areas. It is striking, therefore, that
many other villages in the vicinity of Maradankulam did not so reinvent
themselves, and it is striking too that these same villages did not
develop Pattini game traditions. There is nothing to prevent new social
orders from recreating game performances, and it is for this reason
important not to consider the Maradankulam game as necessarily bearing a
long history, rather than simply acknowledging that where Maradankulam
plays the game other villages do not. Moreover, ethnicity is not at
issue in the Maradankulam game, rather it is a question of village
social organisation and the social status of a deeply
tradition-conscious village in a region that has seen considerable
social change. Tamil Hindu ethnicity does not, therefore, constitute the
older substratum, and nor does Sinhala Buddhist ethnicity. Rather,
ethnicity is emergent from the articulation of, in this instance, ritual
practices with regional identities.  
What the intricacies of the Maradankulam social organisation and their
connection to the coconut game reveal is that the game generates several
possibilities; too many to be dealt with in this paper (see Bastin 1997
nd.:2). Among these possibilities are several functional aspects such as
the relation between the game and local identity. The teams reflect
dimensions of the village social structure, and the game seems to
function in the articulation of this social structure with the broader
politico-religious order. Moreover, the infra-village divisions and
cleavages that I have alluded to reflect the broader process of
socio-economic fragmentation in the circumstances of the cash economy.
These processes affect the game but not necessarily in the direction of
destroying it in a simple passage from tradition to modernity. For
elsewhere it appears that the games have flourished in the conditions of
plantation capitalism.  
These functional aspects of the game should not be neglected out of a
sense of fear concerning intellectual fashions in anthropology. Indeed,
functionalism remains one of  
128 the cornerstones of the discipline, particularly in the popular
discourse on identity formation. And yet it does so in hand with a
rejection of “functionalism” as old hat or as simply concerned with
social equilibrium. Functionalist anthropology was never so limited.
Particularly in the work of Radcliffe-Brown, its concern was the nature
of the social, which is not so far removed from the contemporary
anthropologists whose concern is with ‘identity’ and ‘personhood. Even
more narrow foci on the psyche or geneticallybased adaptive strategies
are concerned with functions as these consist of the objective
recognition of cause and effect amidst the flux and chaos of human
practice. Such functions exist but are limited. The task for the
anthropologist is to recognise their limitations, and to reconcile the
functions with the meanings without substituting one for the other. This
is particularly important when considering ritual phenomena because of
the resonance that develops between the instrumentality of the ritual
and its various functions identified by the analyst. The Pattini games
provide an ideal context for this discussion because they are examples
of that perennial anthropological favourite: rituals designed to bring
rain.  
Comparison With Other Pattini Games The first point to note about the
other games is that they do not reflect a sibling competition between
Pattini and Aiyanayake (or Aiyanar), but more specifically between
Pattini and her spouse Palanga. The dominant but not universal feature,
therefore, is the competition between a male deity and Pattini.” The
exception is reported by Obeyesekere from Maliduva in the Matara
District of the Southern Province where Pattini is associated with both
teams and the coconut game is strictly competitive without any of the
hom game’s weighted competition (Obeyesekere 1984:401). What this means,
though, is that Pattini always wins.  
In Paul Wirz’s description (Wirz 1954:168-176), the village coconut game
is called a pol-gahanava (“coconut-striking”).20 It is spaced over one
week, involves a very large number of ripe fertilised nuts with a
special emphasis on the small hard porapol. Each team starts with the
same number of nuts (about 150 that have been donated or purchased for
the occasion), and every evening for six days the team plays with a set
number. If during this time one team’s supply of nuts is exhausted the
remaining nuts from the other team are divided for the game to continue.
The fighting porapol are kept until last because the outcome of the game
turns on the final nut. But each evening that day’s winner is declared
and the winning nut is carried thrice around a bo or banyan tree next to
the playing area under which two temporary shrines have been erected; a
north-facing shrine for the lower team and a south-facing shrine for the
upper team.” The day’s winner is kept in its appropriate shrine and used
at the end of the competition when it comes down to the two last nuts,
but is also carried around the village under a white cloth on the night
of its victory with the team members and supporters loudly declaring
their win. The broken nuts from the previous competition are pressed for
their oil which is presented to the local temple (devale) along with the
two remaining nuts. The presentation follows a procession to the temple
in which one member of each team carries a nut above his head,
accompanied by other villagers dressed up as lions, Veddas, demons, holy
men and as transvestites. The assembly dances outside the temple during
the presentation of the nuts which are then covered in cooling water and
turmeric powder, before being brought  
129outside for the final competition. The nuts are then kept inside the
temple for three months, the winner displayed prominently while the
pieces of the loser are kept under a table. The nuts are then pressed
for oil for the temple lamps. According to Wirz, this final throw is
highly significant:  
The result of the last contest which always takes place before the
devalaya \[temple), is not without consequences: If the yatipila \[lower
team\] win the match, i.e. when their nut remains whole, it is a good
omen; if, however, it is left broken and that of the udupila (upper
team\] is left undamaged, it is a bad sign. In the latter case, it is
understood that Pattini-devi is angry or at least grieved (Wirz  
1954:175). Wirz interprets this final divinatory component through the
origin myth of the game where the games for Pattini were developed after
Pattini had commenced her furious fire-storm destruction of the Pandyan
kingdom and had added a pestilence that afflicted the whole country. The
games were a way of compensating the goddess for ending the pestilence
(Wirz 1954:176). Wirz suggests that the wrong outcome of the final throw
possibly results in Pattini’s anger because the upper team reminds her
of her dead husband (Wirz 1954:175 fnl). When I discuss the weighted
competition of the horn game, it will become clear that Wirz’s
explanation is missing the point.  
Bruce Kapferer’s unpublished material on the coconut game indicates a
stronger territorial component whereby the upper team visits a number of
places in a small area and competes with localised lower teams.23 The
overall movement is encompassing as it describes a boundary that links
several villages around a centralised Pattini festival (gammaduwa). Such
a territorial component is highly significant. Firstly, it brings the
upper team into association with the wandering guardian (in my case
Aiyanayake) who patrols the village boundaries. Secondly, it suggests
that the game is a critical act preceding the main festival through
being a constitution of the broad boundaries of the ritual space. This
accords with the Maradankulam material when the game is seen in relation
to the village festivities that precede the Munnesvaram festival. The
evidence strongly suggests the importance of the relationship between
Pattini worship and the political structure of the old Sinhalese
kingdoms that both preceded and existed alongside European colonial
rule. Such a perspective sheds an interesting light on the gathering of
weapons in the village temples and on the use of fighting nuts that were
also weapons of war. It also sheds an interesting light on the
constitution of the teams. War and territoriality emerge as important
themes in the coconut game.  
Kapferer also observed that after the serial performance of the coconut
games that describes the boundaries of the micro-region, the upper and
lower teams join for the performance of the horn game on a cleared piece
of land away from any settlements. His description of this game accords
very closely with Obeyesekere’s rich description of four separate
performances from different areas in the island. I now turn to
Obeyesekere’s interpretation of the horn game before considering his
contrast between ritual and game.  
The Horn Game  
There is another Sport, which generally all the People used with much
delight, being as they called it, a Sacrifice to one of their Gods; to
wit Potting Dio. And the benefit of it is, that it frees the Countrey
from grief and Diseases. For the  
130beastliness of the exercise they never celebrated near any Town, nor
in sight of Women, but in a remote place. The manner of the game is
thus. They have two crooked sticks like Elbows, one hooked into the
other, and so with contrivances they pull with Ropes, until the one
break the other, but never is Money laid on either side. Upon the
breaking of the stick, that Party that hath won doth not a little
rejoyce. Which rejoycing is exprest by Dancing and Singing, and uttering
such sordid beastly Expressions, together with Postures of their Bodies
as I omit to write them, as being their shame in acting and mine in
rehearsing. For he is at that time most renowned that behaves himself
most shamelessly and beastlike. This filthy Solemnity was formerly much
in use among them, and even the king himself hath spent time in it, but
now lately he hath absolutely forbidden it under penalty of a forfeiture
of Money. So that now the practice hereof is quite left off. But tho it
is thus gone in dis-use, yet out of the great delight the People had in
it, they of Gompala would revive it again; and did.  
(Knox 1989:186, see also Obeyesekere 1984:409).  
The horn game generally involves a felled coconut palm trunk placed
upside-down at one end of a narrow trench, the base of which is
sprinkled with red powder or red flowers. The tendril-like roots of the
palm are trimmed leaving the bulbous base of the tree sticking about two
metres up in the air as it rests at an angle in the trench (about three
metres long, and less than one metre deep and wide). A deer antler’s
horn is tied to the tree and it is pulled upright in order to be
attached to another horn that is tied to a living tree at one end of the
trench. The fastening ropes are threaded through pulleys, and, once
locked together, the horns are bound so they will not slip or spring
apart. The coconut palm in the trench is usually called the “thunderbolt
tree” and it is held by ropes by members of the upper team. The lower
team is associated with the other tree, the horn tree. As the upper
teams pulls on the thunderbolt tree it rocks back and forth in the
trench and causes the two sets of pulleys and ropes to place a heavy
strain on the locked horns until eventually one of the horns breaks, and
that horn’s team is declared the loser.  
Sticks or wrapped bundles of vine can be used as substitutes for deer
antlers. Once a horn breaks it is replaced and the game continues after
lengthy “rejoycing” by the winners. According to Wirz (1954:177) this is
until either the upper team horn is broken thrice, or the lower team
horn is broken twice. The game will also conclude if neither horn breaks
at all. Obeyesekere describes the game continuing over a number of days
in a special fifteen day waxing moon period (Obeyesekere 1984:384). In
some areas the competition remains decidedly even throughout, while in
others, match-fixing occurs over the first few days and leads to final
competitions that are much more even. This is achieved by pitting
different size “horns” against each other. In spite of the requirement
for an uneven competition the specialist attendants (vattandi) often
risk the evil consequences of the wrong horn breaking first by making an
even match. Obeyesekere sees this as the “spirit of competition”, the
desire to win regardless of the decision’s cosmological import
(Obeyesekere 1984:401).  
Obeyesekere does not share Knox’s qualms about repeating what gets said
and done following a victory. Below I quote one of the many victory
songs recorded by Obeyesekere: Leader: Milk will overflow  
Chorus: Oh listen ye  
131The lower team won. It’s good for the village son Not for hatred son
Diseases will be banished Lads of the upper team You should be ashamed
You ran away, cowards You upper team bastards We are noble ones You are
mean bastards We are meritorious children We won a great victory We won
a good victory The children of the upper team It isn’t nice at all You
give (sexually) to your mothers But lower team children Are children of
Pattini We don’t run away We of the lower team Meritorious are we You
dogs in the upper team …  
Chorus: Oh listen ye …  
(Obeyesekere 1984:406-407).  
This song is accompanied by rude gestures, principally members of the
lower team raising their sarongs and flashing their genitals at the
upper team who stand by and sullenly accept their shaming. For, when
they get the chance, they will reply in kind:  
Lads, we are the kerun karayo (able ones) of the upper team, we are the
able ones If we meet these people (i.e. the lower team) on our way, we
will thrust cannons up their asses, If we meet these people on our way,
we will thrust cannons up their asses. We will thrust cannons! We will
thrust cannons!  
Refrain: Our pleasures are in the horn pitch Lads, we are of the upper
team, we are the able ones.  
We are the able ones, the clever ones of the upper team. If their chap,
a tar barrel, who controls the long arm and the crosspole comes over
here We will rub castor oil, and send into “his” a big injection
(Sinhala injesion, like “prick” of American slang).  
132

\[Repeat refrain\]  
If their folk come to compete at horn playing We’ll give them a belly’s
worth of kolikuttu \[a banana; the whole line is idiomatic, meaning
‘we’ll give them a physical beating’) When we pull the tug ropes, it’s
we who’ll win the games We’ll give ’em duck’s meat to eat and dumplings
(pittu\] made of chaff, We’ll give ’em duck’s meat! And dumplings made
of chaff!  
(Obeyesekere 1984:414-415).  
Obeyesekere includes several other songs that convey these basic sexual
violence themes. He adds that the common origin myth of the hom game
describes how Pattini and her husband Palanga were one day picking sapu
flowers (a white tree flower) with crooked sticks when their sticks
became entangled. Such an entanglement is euphemistically sexual
intercourse. The flower is thought of as a symbol of Pattini’s
virginity. For, most importantly, Pattini is the chaste wife — a virgin
goddess — and so she always wins the game which is her husband’s failed
attempt to have sex with her symbolised in the way that Palanga’s hook
(as penis) breaks. The critical feature here is the idea of Pattini’s
inviolability; her pure status that triumphs in the game. This is
reflected in the way Pattini’s tree is usually the fixed living tree
while Palanga’s tree is the uprooted moving tree, rocking back and forth
in the trench.  
Obeyesekere analyses the horn game in terms of male castration and
impotence anxieties, latent male homosexuality, and the strong desire
Sinhalese display for shaming. The game is, thus, both a cathartic
mechanism and “a mechanism for ventilating, a deep seated need or drive
in Sinhala personality to humiliate others and glorify oneself”‘,
(Obeyesekere 1984:500). Without endorsing the old rigid distinction
between guilt and shame societies, Obeyesekere identifies male shaming
practices as fundamental to Sinhalese socialisation and the anchoring of
primary guilt structures (notably Oedipal structures) to mundane moral
norms as well as the broader cultural expression of such anchoring. In
Sinhalese culture, the primary guilt complex, for men at least, derives
profound expression in the intense bond between mother and son, who may
often continue to share the same bed or sleeping mat well into the son’s
adulthood (Obeyesekere 1984:453). The inevitable Oedipal showdown is
thus intense. It results in a deep psychological attachment to benign
mother figures, principally the goddess Pattini whose cult’s
psychological dimension is of critical concern for males not females
(Obeyesekere 1984:470), and in an active shaming of boys by the older
men of the village. The cathartic release for the anxieties (both
castration and impotence) that emerge through such attachment and
shaming are certain ritual dramas, comic episodes and the horn game.24
The horn game thus serves a principle function of a cathartic rite
giving expression to fundamental psychological processes. Such rites,
which include other aspects of the Pattini ritual corpus, are
distinguishable from ritual designed to convey a stronger moral or
philosophical message — dromena (from the Greek for thing performed)
(see also Obeyesekere 1990). Pattini ritual also includes such stately
and pious rites, but in relation to Pattini games the principal form is
cathartic. The hom game reverses the situation of ideal representations
found in the dromena ritual, and thereby creates a catharsis for Sinhala
male psyches.  
Partly on these grounds Obeyesekere makes no connection between the
games for the goddess Pattini and those other aspects of her worship
that display her strongly Sinhala Buddhist character. From his own
compendious account of wide variations in the game traditions, including
examples from Tamil Hindu parts of the country, there is simply nothing
particularly Pattini-like about the game performances. Instead, they
seem to relate to fairly standard forms of fertility ritual involving a
contest, such as Sir James Frazer documents in volume five of The Golden
Bough (Frazer 1933b). The games thus display the character of a
pre-Buddhist cultural survival that continues into the Buddhist era
through their functional significance as cathartic rituals. In this
sense, the games are not vestiges in the manner of certain other aspects
of Pattini worship that Obeyesekere wishes to isolate as non-Buddhist
(Obeyesekere 1984:284, 300-306). They persevere because of their
functional efficacy, but, critically, there is nothing definitive about
the games vis-àvis Pattini. Once upon a time, they were not about
Pattini at all, and it follows that they still have nothing really to do
with her. What Obeyesekere thus reveals is how a certain historicism – a
sense of the longue durée — underlies and informs his psychoanalytic
approach. As primary guilt structures are ontologically prior to
cultural types, certain cultural practices are older than others. The
Buddhist purity of Pattini is thus preserved from those cultural
practices that may be deemed to compromise it.  
Alternative Interpretation At Maradankulam there are women present;
there are no crude taunts or gestures, and breaking barren coconuts
hardly compares with a thunderbolt tree rocking back and forth in a red
coloured slit trench and causing a breaking strain on two locked deer
horns, symbolic of the penises of the participants. It does not reflect
a sexual struggle between husband and wife but an encounter between god
and goddess who are more like brother and sister. Nevertheless, it is a
contest that ideally the goddess should win, and it is a contest with an
explicit albeit relatively muted sexual symbolism, as well as very
strong symbolism of heat and cooling. Moreover, it is designed to rid
“the Countrey from grief and Diseases” (as Knox put it), a condition
linked to the fires and pestilence that destroyed Madurai.  
Knox called the horn game a “sacrifice” to Pattini (“Potting Dio”). It
may be that he merely wished to emphasise the abhorrent nature of the
practice for his Puritan Christian readership; but the word does relate
to the term Wirz (1954:170) reports for the coconut game, “pol-pujana”
or coconut offering that the temple priest says he is sharing with
Pattini. There is clearly an identity between the team and the offering
and this seems to bear a sacrificial theme. Interpreted in this way, the
games, both horn and coconut, can be looked upon as “sacrificial”
conquests of one team by the other. They utilise to different degrees
the idiom of sexual intercourse (both between men and between men and
women) to describe the victory of one team over the other. So what the
relatively staid Maradankulam coconut game suggests is that the critical
meaning of the Pattini games is conquest. This can then acquire the
potent idiom of sexuality while not being about sexuality in itself.
Importantly, in both games, the winning lower team is the team that is
fixed in place while the upper team is the team from the symbolic
outside. This symbolism resonates with the pre-game activities of
gathering the weapons of the outside and lower fiercer) deities. It also
resonates with certain myths of Pattini where she captures and tames
demonic figures who arrive from the outside. These include Devol Deviyo
(who was also her brother in a previous life), Suniyam, and, at
Munnesvaram, Kali. In relation to these figures, Pattini represents the
firm ground of stability. She conquers the demonic and brings it into
her service which is also the service of humanity. I suggest further
that this is also the meaning behind the procession of lions, Veddas and
demons described by Wirz, as well as the meaning associated with the
jungle gods”, Aiyanayake and Mangara. They all share the characteristic
of marginality and potential destructiveness, and thereby relate as
outside to inside to the staid and inviolable Pattini goddess. The
process of taming the chaotic outside is like the process by which
Pattini’s furious destructive rage was quelled by humans who performed
games on her behalf. These games calmed Pattini who later becomes the
agent for taming the destructive forces that enter Sri Lanka from the
outside.  
The games for the goddess Pattini display, therefore, a potent relation
between territoriality, sexuality, and violence. I am emphasising the
territorial aspect because 1 regard the spatial relations marked out in
the coconut game as a forceful expression of the encompassing movement
associated with Pattini worship. Sexuality here is a potent metaphor of
such encompassment as it relates to the inviolability of the goddess — a
theme associated with Pattini, the chaste wife, as well as with other
important South Indian goddesses such as Draupadi and Sita. They can
also be known as “Pattini” in Sinhala Buddhism where the term relates to
the Sanskrit patni — “faithful or chaste wife” (Shulman 1980:252).
Associated with all of the goddesses, but especially Draupadi
(Hiltebeitel 1991), is firewalking. The good devotee walks over the hot
coals unharmed and thereby imitates the chastity of the goddess. The
fires are “cool”, the goddess is quiet. In a similar way, the myth of
Devol Deviyo plays upon the theme of the cool fire. As a demon, Devol
attempts to invade the island but is confronted by seven mountains of
fire erected by Pattini to block him. But in a previous existence Devol
and Pattini were brother and sister and as a result Pattini’s fires are
no obstacle and Devol’s demonic nature transmutes to a more divine form.
Importantly the change in the nature of the deity occurs for both god
and goddess.  
The games for Pattini need to be examined in this regard and not be
reduced via a certain functionality to any specific meaning.
Obeyesekere’s psychoanalytic approach is very important. It offers
profound insights into aspects of Sinhalese male psycho-sexual
development, the arguments about guilt and shame societies, as well as
the perseverance of Sinhala Buddhist cultural traditions first
documented by Robert Knox in the 17″ century, And one can extend his
analysis to consider the nature of desire in the brother-sister
relationship in Sri Lankan (Dravidian) kinship. All of these psychic
forces and tensions can be given voice through the games, which in their
potent territoriality can move in a number of directions that express
the Sri Lankan life world. In this regard, the games may well offer a
way of thinking about pre-colonial Sinhalese social organisation for
warfare.  
The problem, which is the problem of any functional analysis, is one of
being too limited. Obeyesekere’s intent to locate the games at the level
of the primordial psyche seems driven by a desire to associate Pattini
with pure Buddhist values that may itself be grounded in a primordial
signification. As a result, a great deal of secondary elaboration is
required in order to ensure that Pattini’s status remains intact.  
135  
134  
133

Ritual and Game Finally, I wish to comment on the nature of the weighted
competition. When describing the ultimate throw of the coconut game,
Wirz does not indicate the frequency of the wrong outcome, which
suggests that the coconut game is an open competition in the manner
described by Obeyesekere. And yet, Wirz’s material strongly points to
the ritual content of the game and not to its strictly game status. The
procession of villagers dressed up as marginal figures in Sinhalese
society (demons, forest-dwelling Veddas and transvestites) suggests a
carnivalesque atmosphere quite in keeping with the spirit of annual
religious festivals both Buddhist and Hindu. But no more so than in its
divinatory aspect does the game suggest a ritual purpose.  
The divinatory power of breaking a coconut is evident in the Tamil
wedding, examples of which are performed at the Munnesvaram temple. The
tying of the gold necklace that marks the marriage is done at an
auspicious moment determined in advance by an astrologer. As the
necklace is tied the bride’s father (who can also be the groom’s
mother’s brother) breaks a coconut to augur the event. A clean break
indicates a prosperous and happy marriage while a jagged break is a bad
sign. Not surprisingly, therefore, the mother’s brother may practise
breaking a few coconuts before the wedding and the coconut chosen will
have a good rounded shape that is easy to break cleanly. In short, the
coconut break is not a random event and humans do as much as they can to
negate any uncertainty over a good outcome. The same thing occurs I
suspect with the coconut game and this explains why the lower team wins
more often. Thus, by weighting the competition villagers ensure that if
there is a bad outcome it was not caused by chance.  
What is so striking about the coconut game and even more the horn game,
is that everyone knows the outcome, indeed, everyone desires the
outcome. Yet they create the conditions of sport and uncertainty in
order to achieve an outcome. To do anything else would simply not
produce an outcome, but merely the appearance of an instrumentality that
would probably not work because it has failed to address properly the
cosmic dimension in which it is situated. This is the point emphasised
by Kapferer (1997a) who compares the horn game with Australian gambling
practices and the Balinese cock-fight. His point is that the gods always
play with loaded dice because their games are always inscribed within
the broader cosmic process. In this sense games such as games for
Pattini must always be games and at the same time rituals where the
outcome is known.  
Through this, one can interpret the games as having the potential to
symbolise the antinomy between free will and fate and the nature of the
indeterminate structure of existence. Such antinomy is a theme of the
Silappadikaram. Pattini’s stoical endurance of her husband’s
indiscretions ending with her fury at his wrongful punishment elicits a
tragic relation between fate and duty that is a common theme in the
myths of deified women in south Indian religion. These myths share the
thread of women’s suffering and duty that becomes the condition of
divinity. The antinomy of fate and duty is also fundamental to Buddhism,
and within the Sri Lankan Buddhist tradition it is given great emphasis.
This is not to say, however, that the story is all about Buddhism;
rather, it indicates how the story can function to convey a Buddhist
theme if one wishes it to. Likewise, the games in their divinatory
aspect can express a fundamental Buddhist teaching. They need not be
reduced to a primordial psycho-drama. The question remains whether the
issue of weighted competition and the pursuit of a  
136





desired outcome is an indication of a teleology that marks the games as
rituals, and whether such teleology is fundamental to a practice as a
ritual practice. All rites are for something but some rites are for
something via an outcome that is at the outset unknown. All that is
known is that there will be an outcome. For the weighted competition of
the Pattini games such an outcome is not left to chance and herein lies
its force. At Maradankulam, the upper team can and does win
occasionally. When that happens the implications for the village’s fate
and duty are serious and cannot be disregarded as purely
circumstantial  
NOTES  
1. I have presented a number of papers on the coconut game over several
years including those given at the universities of Leiden, Melbourne and
at James Cook. I thank the various participants for their comments, and
for reading and commenting on the manuscript. I would like to thank
Kingsley Garbett, Doug Miles, Michael Roberts and the two anonymous
referees for Social Analysis. Most of the ideas in this paper have been
discussed at length with Bruce Kapferer who has been intellectually
generous with his ideas as well as his own research data. All
responsibility for errors of fact and interpretation are of course mine.
2. A list of terms, such as this, which require diacritical marks, will
be found in the glossary at the end of the article. 3. Other scholars
include Les Hiatt (1973), Bruce Kapferer (1997a) Paul Wirz (1954), Nur
Yalman (1965) and Glenn Yocum (1982). With the exception of Wirz who
documents all of the games, the other writers focus particularly on the
horn game (ankeliya). Yalman, Hiatt, and Yocum relate the games to
village social organisation, with Yalman’s argument about hypergamy in
Sinhalese alliance providing the context. Kapferer is interested in the
nature of the game’s weighted structure and how this relates to the
nature of chance in Sinhala Buddhist cosmology. Sir James Frazer was
also interested in cosmological themes, and related the horn game to
examples of the tug of war in several cultures where the games were
associated with expelling demons and creating favourable weather (Frazer
1933a:173-182). Michael Roberts (1994) refers to the games with a view
to exploring public shaming practices in colonial and postcolonial
Sinhalese society. On this point, see also Obeyesekere (1984:507-508).
4. Book Three of the text by Prince Ilango Adigal, The Book of Vanji,
describes the origins of Pattini worship in the Chera Kingdom (Daniélou
1965). Sinhala Buddhist Pattini worship replicates this account in so
far as it recreates the importation of a special statue in order to
establish a regally sponsored cult. This theme is also evident in
Mariamman worship among Tamil Hindus of the east coast. Obeyesekere
speculates that the original Pattini was a JainBuddhist deity introduced
via migration and colonisation (Obeyesekere 1984:Chs. 13-14); but his
evidence is flimsy and his argument contentious. It will be addressed
here only to the extent that it influences Obeyesekere’s interpretation
of the Pattini games. 5. Obeyesekere’s distinction between ritual and
game is largely related to his contrast between the two types of game.
He also employs the contrast when comparing examples of the same game
from different areas. Thus, the horn game at Biyanvila (Obeyesekere
1984:404-405) is more strictly competitive, and the coconut game at
Tambiluvil and Karaitivu is more ritualistic (Obeyesekere 1984:566). 6.
For a discussion of the place of scepticism in the anthropology of
religion, see Michael Jackson (1989).  
137



7\. Robert Knox, an English captive of the Kandyan kingdom from 1660 to
1679, described the coconut game as the “chief Play” of the Sinhalese at
New Year only (Knox 1989: 85). 8. Ambal/Pattini is responsible for the
other important goddess of Munnesvaram, Kali, who was tamed by Pattini
when she landed at Munnesvaram from India (Bastin 1996). 9. The British
conducted cadastral surveys in 1816 and 1827 and every decade from 1871.
For a more detailed discussion of this history see Bastin (in press).
10. And also the outside companion to Aiyanar in south India — the
“Black God” (Karuppan) (Dumont 1959). 11. The number twelve is also
significant for both guardian deities and Pattini in Sinhala Buddhism.
On the significance of the number seven, Obeyesekere (1984:459)
downplays the links to the Tamil Hindu traditions, preferring to
interpret the seven Pattinis as bearing specifically Buddhist
connotations. These are the goddess’s seven births and the seven forms
of abstinence she observes in order to remain pure. Underlying both
symbolic codes is a more abstract principle of transition or
transmutation in the cosmic scheme that informs the numerology. 12. The
drummer is from the Berava caste and hails from an interior village
established in the 18th century by the Kandyan king Kirti Sri Rajasinghe
to provide ritual specialists for the Munnesvaram temple. He was enticed
to live in Maradankulam by the offer of a piece of land in return for
service at the village temple. The temple priest is a village inhabitant
and member of the major lineage group in the village. The job is a
part-time position as regular temple rites are held only weekly. 13. The
participants actually call the game porapol rather than polkeliya. They
thus correspond to the Tamils in the east of the country who also call
the game “fighting nuts” (in Tamil portenkai). Although they play the
game slightly differently, the basic features are the same (Obeyesekere
1984:566). 14. Initially I was led to believe that the competition was
completely open but that the winning team won the right to be called the
“Pattini team”. Thus, Pattini always won. I have since been corrected on
this point, my informant insisting that the competition is always fair,
but that the RS/Pattini team usually wins. 15. Another group in the
village hold their own alms-giving a couple of days before the full
moon, and the two events are part of a history of internal rivalries
that I discuss elsewhere (Bastin nd.:2). 16. The late 1980s and early
1990s was also marked by a new phase in Sri Lanka’s ongoing civil war
when members of the Sinhalese JVP party attempted an armed insurrection
in those parts of the country hitherto largely spared from the violence
of the Sinhalese-Tamil conflict. 17. There is also a range of
manufactured toiletries including soaps, shaving sticks and scented talc
with the “Kohomba” brand name, which utilise margosa oil for its
skin-cleansing antiseptic properties. In recent years, Indian
pharmaceutical researchers have been looking closely at the margosa (or
neem) leaf and have begun to support the assertions of local village
practitioners. 18. One of the last places to hold a game was Madampe – a
major trade centre and the seat of local Sinhala Buddhist government
until Portuguese conquest in the late 1570s, and subsequently a major
town and centre of immigration in the plantation era. The Taniyavala
Bandara temple that held the game combines features of the regional
guardian deity with the historical figure of Prince Taniyavala Bahu who
governed Madampe and became a bandara or custodian deity sometime after
his death in the 15th century. The bandara deities are closely  
138

related to Pattini worship and the traditional ruling elite (Kapferer
1997b:32). While Obeyesekere recognises the importance of regal
sponsorship in the Pattini cult he does not extend this link from a few
of the kings responsible for introducing and reviving Pattini worship to
more localised élites, including those whose role derives from the
colonial era rather than the pre-colonial polity. Working in a southern
area very close to one of Obeyesekere’s sites, Kapferer (personal
communication) has identified the local socio-political system, based on
landed wealth and formed under the conditions of colonialism, as central
to the organisation of Pattini worship. 19. In some areas the competitor
is the god, Mangara, who is, like Aiyanayake, the regional guardian and
associated with the jungle and hunting, as well as having an
association, according to Obeyesekere (1984:299), with Palanga. In
another area, the god is Alut Deviyo (Obeyesekere 1984:394); in another
Tamil area he is known simply as Sami and is associated with Aiyanar
(Obeyesekere 1984:565). 20. Wirz’s description of Sinhala Buddhist
healing ritual was based on research in and around Dodanduwa on the
south-west coast. 21. Most likely, the tree is thought to be an abode
for the local guardian deity in his ambiguous deity/demon form.. 22. The
Veddas are Sri Lanka’s aboriginal inhabitants who hold an important
place in Sinhalese culture as the descendants of the Sinhalese culture
hero, Vijaya, and a female member of the island’s autochthonous demon
inhabitants. As forest dwellers, the Veddas are associated with the wild
jungle. The procession suggests a movement from the chaotic margins to
the central temple. 23. Kapferer (personal communication) observed
Pattini rituals in the Deniyaya and Morawaka area in the southern
interior. These differ in a number of ways from the Dodanduwa traditions
studied by Wirz but do relate to the Maliduva traditions described by
Obeyesekere, 24. For his discussion on guilt and shame societies see
(Obeyesekere 1984:500-502). For further discussion of the universality
of the Oedipal complex and of cathartic rites see Obeyesekere (1990).
25. Although he is rarely in fact the bride’s father as the groom is
rarely the bride’s father’s sister’s son. This person, the true
cross-cousin of the bride will attend the wedding and formally renounce
his right (urimai) to his mother’s brother’s daughter. As Trawick (1990)
argues, the ideal of Dravidian kinship and alliance realises
approximations. Strikingly, these approximations form from a kernel of
desire associated with the brother sister bond (Trawick 1990:170-178).
The breaking of the coconut in the Tamil marriage rituals I have
observed can thus be seen as bearing dimensions of sexual symbolism
beyond the level of divination.  
139



related to Pattini worship and the traditional ruling elite (Kapferer
1997b:32). While Obeyesekere recognises the importance of regal
sponsorship in the Pattini cult he does not extend this link from a few
of the kings responsible for introducing and reviving Pattini worship to
more localised élites, including those whose role derives from the
colonial era rather than the pre-colonial polity. Working in a southern
area very close to one of Obeyesekere’s sites, Kapferer (personal
communication) has identified the local socio-political system, based on
landed wealth and formed under the conditions of colonialism, as central
to the organisation of Pattini worship. 19. In some areas the competitor
is the god, Mangara, who is, like Aiyanayake, the regional guardian and
associated with the jungle and hunting, as well as having an
association, according to Obeyesekere (1984:299), with Palanga. In
another area, the god is Alut Deviyo (Obeyesekere 1984:394); in another
Tamil area he is known simply as Sami and is associated with Aiyanar
(Obeyesekere 1984:565). 20. Wirz’s description of Sinhala Buddhist
healing ritual was based on research in and around Dodanduwa on the
south-west coast. 21. Most likely, the tree is thought to be an abode
for the local guardian deity in his ambiguous deity/demon form.. 22. The
Veddas are Sri Lanka’s aboriginal inhabitants who hold an important
place in Sinhalese culture as the descendants of the Sinhalese culture
hero, Vijaya, and a female member of the island’s autochthonous demon
inhabitants. As forest dwellers, the Veddas are associated with the wild
jungle. The procession suggests a movement from the chaotic margins to
the central temple. 23. Kapferer (personal communication) observed
Pattini rituals in the Deniyaya and Morawaka area in the southern
interior. These differ in a number of ways from the Dodanduwa traditions
studied by Wirz but do relate to the Maliduva traditions described by
Obeyesekere, 24. For his discussion on guilt and shame societies see
(Obeyesekere 1984:500-502). For further discussion of the universality
of the Oedipal complex and of cathartic rites see Obeyesekere (1990).
25. Although he is rarely in fact the bride’s father as the groom is
rarely the bride’s father’s sister’s son. This person, the true
cross-cousin of the bride will attend the wedding and formally renounce
his right (urimai) to his mother’s brother’s daughter. As Trawick (1990)
argues, the ideal of Dravidian kinship and alliance realises
approximations. Strikingly, these approximations form from a kernel of
desire associated with the brother sister bond (Trawick 1990:170-178).
The breaking of the coconut in the Tamil marriage rituals I have
observed can thus be seen as bearing dimensions of sexual symbolism
beyond the level of divination.  
139





GLOSSARY OF SINHALA AND TAMIL TERMS THAT REQUIRE DIACRITICAL MARKS  
Ati Tamil month approximating to July/August  
ankeliya the horn game ankus a the elephant keeper’s hook  
Äsala Sinhala month approximating to July August  
dēva deity dēvale deity temple  
devatātāvā class of deity that displays ambiguous divine and demonic
characteristics gammaduva special festival for Pattini  
hatkat tya “gang of seven”; name for the group of deities at the Aiyanar
temple Kali goddess  
kohomba name for the margosa/neem tree  
margosa neem tree Pattinyamman collective name for the seven virgin
goddesses in south Indian Hinduism  
pol-gahanava coconut striking; another name for the coconut game  
portēnkai Tamil name for the coconut game  
Sastā name for Aiyanar in Keralan Hinduism Silappadikaram The (Story of
the) Anklet Siva god  
Süniyam the great sorcery deity/demon udupila the upper team urimai a
right, an entitlement  
vattandi specialist attendant in the horn game  
velala superior Tamil cultivator caste  
yatapila the lower team  
140







