+++
title = "The breeder’s equation"
full_title = "The breeder’s equation"
date = "2013-06-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/07/the-breeders-equation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/07/the-breeders-equation/).

The breeder’s equation

R = h² S.

R is the response to selection, S is the selection differential, and h²
is the narrow-sense heritability. This is the workhorse equation for
quantitative genetics. The selective differential S, is the difference
between the population mean and the mean of the parental population
(some subset of the total population).

For example, imagine a set of parents with IQs of 120, drawn from a
population with an average IQ of 100. Suppose that the narrow-sense
heritability (in that population, in that environment) is 0.5 . The
average IQ of their children will be 110. That’s what is usually called
regression to the mean.

Do the same thing with a population whose average IQ is 85. We again
choose parents with IQs of 120, and the narrow-sense heritability is
still 0.5. The average IQ of their children will be 102.5 – they regress
to a lower mean.

You can think of it this way. In the first case, the parents have 20
extra IQ points. On average, 50% of those points are due to additive
genetic factors, while the other 50% is is the product of good
environmental luck. By the way, when we say ‘environmental” we mean
“something other than additive genetics”. It doesn’t look as if the
usual suspects – the way in which you raise your kids – contributes much
to this ‘environmental’ variance, at least for adult IQ. In fact we know
what it’s not, but not much about what it is, although it must include
factors like test error and being hit on the head.

The kids get the good additive genes, but have average ‘environmental’
luck – so their average IQ is 110. The luck (10 pts worth) goes away

The 120-IQ parents drawn from the IQ-85 population have 35 extra IQ
points, half of which are from good additive genes and half from good
environmental luck. But in the next generation, the luck goes away… so
they drop 17.5 points.

The next point is that the luck only goes away *once*. If you took those
kids from the first group, with average IQs of 110, and dropped them on
an uninhabited but friendly island, they would presumably get around to
mating eventually – and the next generation would also have an IQ of
110. With tougher selection, say by kidnapping a year’s worth of
National Merit Finalists, you could create a new ethny with far higher
average intelligence than any existing. Eugenics is not only possible,
it’s trivial.

So what can you explain with the breeder’s equation? Natural selection,
for one thing. We think that you can explain the Ashkenazi Jews – it
looks as if there was an unusual reproductive advantage for people who
were good at certain kinds of white collar jobs, along with a high
degree of reproductive isolation.

But it also explains why the professors’ kids
[are](http://infoproc.blogspot.com/2010/10/some-data-on-regression.html)
a disproportionate fraction of the National Merit Finalists in a college
town – their folks, particularly their fathers, are smarter than average
– and so are they. Reminds me of the fact that Los Alamos High School
has the highest scores in New Mexico. Our local high school tried
copying their schedule, in search of the secret. Didn’t work. I know of
an approach that would, but it takes about 15 years.

But those kids, although smarter than average, usually aren’t as smart
as their fathers: partly because their mothers typically aren’t
theoretical physicists, partly because of regression towards the mean.
The luck goes away. Henry used to teach here at UNM: he remembers the
“Los Alamos kids”.

There are reasons that that families have trouble running the
corporation Daddy founded: regression to the mean, not just in IQ.
Dynasties have a similar problem: the Ottoman Turks may have avoided it
for a number of generations, partly by a
[form](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_of_succession_to_the_former_Ottoman_throne)
of delayed embryo screening.

And of course the breeder’s equation explains how average IQ is
declining today, because of low fertility among highly educated women.
It also tells you what hasn’t happened, like a 1-std drop since the
Victorian era.

I’m trying to make clear that the breeder’s equation is immensely useful
in understanding evolution, history, contemporary society, and your own
family.

And hardly anyone has heard of it. I checked on Google Ngram Viewer:
zip. “Muon-catalyzed fusion”, “Korteweg-De Vries equation” and totient
show up, but not “breeder’s equation”. It doesn’t even have its own Wiki
page – sheesh, **I** have a Wiki page. “breeder’s equation” has not been
used by the New York Times in the last hundred and sixty years. There’s
not a single mention in S.J. Gould’s bloated, necrotic opus, “The
Structure of Evolutionary Theory”. Aren’t we all surprised?

I have long wished that people had a little LED in their forehead that
would indicate just how full their intellectual tank was, for a given
subject. Seeing a steady yellow light, particularly one that lights up
the entire room, like that of Malcolm Gladwell, would save valuable
time.

When it comes to the most basic understanding of practical genetics, the
talking classes are running on empty. Running wild.

