+++
title = "Dissability"
full_title = "Dissability"
date = "2013-06-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/03/diss-ability/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/03/diss-ability/).

Diss-ability

Stereotype threat is defined as a reduction in performance somehow
caused by a negative stereotype held by other people. They doubt that
you can do it, and that makes you anxious and hinders your ability. At
least that’s the theory. This can’t just be something that happens with
high-stakes tests like the SAT, since the SAT predicts academic
achievement just as well in groups with low average scores as it does in
other groups. Groups with low average scores on standardized test also
do poorly in their course work. No, stereotype threat must be a factor
in every test, every problem set. Like Judge Lynch, stereotype threat
never sleeps.

Why would such a tendency have evolved? What advantage would accrue from
being diss-able? Against, we’re not talking about occasional nervousness
– this involves long-term reduction of abilities. Does it go both ways
(before crossing the street!)? Can everyone do it? If I said “You’re not
so much” to a famous science fiction writer, would he be shaken to his
foundations? Could civilization slip into a death-spiral of incompetence
if everyone started doubting everyone else?

Personally, I have sometimes reacted to doubts directed me by actually
trying harder, often successfully – ” I’ll show you, you
son-of-a-bitch!”. Evidently that reaction is rare, maybe even
pathological. Definitely UnAmerican.

Maybe it’s like the evil eye: only certain people have the ability. In
fact, maybe it *is* the evil eye. When you take a look at it, the two
ideas are extremely similar, and may just be different labels for the
same phenomenon. Note that babies and young children are thought to be
especially vulnerable to the evil eye, which could explain why the test
score gap is in place by age three. It may be that northern Europeans
are especially gifted in this respect. In areas where light-colored eyes
are rare, such as the Aegean, people with blue or green eyes (especially
blue) are thought to bestow the curse. As a Greek professional artist
working at MIT said recently, “The blue eyes cause miasmata.” This could
also explain selective sweeps of gene variants causing striking eye
colors in Europeans – an increase in reproductive fitness flowing from a
ability to curse others makes sense. More than sexual selection, anyhow.

So it’s not so much that diss-ability is a product of natural selection,
more that the evil eye is.

If we can show that ‘stereotype threat’ really is the evil eye, we can
immediately begin to counter its negative effects. Carrying a blue bead,
or a head of garlic with only one clove gives protection. If that
doesn’t work, we can try a tiger claw around the neck, touching a watch
chain, or the hand of Miriam.

How many people does it take to inflict stereotype threat on an
individual or a group? I, for example, think that social psychologists
like Claude Steele are utter dipshits, and of course they are – but
whose fault is that, really?

