+++
title = "Faces in the Clouds"
full_title = "Faces in the Clouds"
date = "2013-06-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/19/faces-in-the-clouds/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/06/19/faces-in-the-clouds/).

Faces in the Clouds

Intelligence analysis is not so hard, if you have common sense, but then
common sense is rare. One serious problem is that the enemy is seldom
obliging enough to supply you with ground truth. If you had it, you
could identify your mistakes, and better yet, identify classes of
errors, which might allow you do better in the future. You could also
get rid of those analysts who were uncommonly wrong, presumably by
promoting them to management.

Consider the case of Scott Speicher, a Navy pilot shot down in the Gulf
War. His fate was unknown in 1991: we had rumors that he was a captive
in Baghdad. Let me steal some relevant lines from Wiki:

\[In April 1994, a U.S. satellite photographed apparent human-made
symbols on the desert floor near the wreck’s location, which might
possibly be Speicher’s E & E (Escape and Evade) sign, suggesting that
Speicher might have survived the crash.” Speculative theories were
developed as to the circumstances of Speicher’s shoot-down, and assuming
he was still alive, why the U.S. military might not want to find him and
why Iraq might not want to return him. “U.S. Secretary of the Navy
Gordon England said, “While the information available to me now does not
prove definitively that Capt. Speicher is alive and in Iraqi custody, I
am personally convinced the Iraqis seized him sometime after his plane
went down. Further, it is my firm belief that the government of Iraq
knows what happened to Capt. Speicher.”

Speicher’s possible situation became a more high-profile issue in the
build-up to war. In March 2002, the Washington Times ran five successive
front-page articles about it, National Review Online ran a long piece on
it,\[16\] and on September 12, 2002, President George W. Bush mentioned
Speicher in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly as part of
his case for war against Iraq.

In April 2003, Speicher’s possible initials were discovered in a cell at
Hakmiyah prison in Baghdad. But later, in 2009, we found (and
identified) the body. He died back in the crash back in 1991, and some
Bedouins buried him, which is why the Baathists couldn’t say what
happened to him. The rumors were false, the reports of the Escape and
Evade sign were wrong, the initials weren’t his, the speculative
theories were wrong. The Secretary of the Navy was wrong, but then being
wrong was part of the job. National Review was wrong – guess there’s a
first time for everything. There was smoke, but no fire – just a mystery
that became fuel for a bunch of desperate, silly, and/or dishonest
people. It can happen. It did happen. But in this example, we *know* the
answer.

This was a typical Iraq story: somehow, we had developed an approach to
intelligence that reliably produced fantastically wrong answers, at vast
expense. What so special about Iraq? Nothing, probably – except that
we acquired ground truth.



