+++
title = "Role of Samskrit Universities "
date = "2020-04-30"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VDBSbmQwOVVVVEZQVkVVeFRWUkZQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VDBSbmQwOVVVVEZQVkVVeFRWUkZQUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1588267257chamuks_articles.JPG)

Samskrit Universities are facing a lot of challenges like inadequate
number of sanctioned teaching posts and grants for infrastructure and
developmental activities, attracting students both in number and quality
etc. In spite of many such difficulties, every Vice Chancellor is doing
his/her best to bring the University to forefront. Yet we need to do a
lot for the strategic transformation of both Samskrit institutions and
Samskrit education. In this context, let there be more debate among
Samskrit lovers. In order to facilitate such discussion, I am giving
here the reply given by Prof B. Mahadevan, Professor of Operations
Management, IIM Bangalore, Founder VC of Chinmaya Vishwa Vidyapeeth, to
a question put to him by me. (Prof Mahadevan is also a scholar of
Samskrit and Vedanta. He conducts Bhagavadgita classes regularly in IIM.
He also offers courses in Samskrit to IIM students. He is guiding
several Samskrit institutions who are engaged in Samskrit education and
promotion. Currently he has been entrusted with a project by AICTE to
write a course book on Indian Knowledge Systems) Hope you would take
this discourse further in your sphere of influence.  
  
**Q: What should be the role of Sanskrit Universities today when there
is a growing demand for Sanskrit among the educated at one side and a
steep decline in both number and quality of formal Sanskrit education on
the other side?**  
  
A: This has to be addressed independently for each of these
stakeholders. There is no “one size fits all” approach possible. We
cannot do the same thing to both the constituencies thinking more effort
of this kind will bring more results to use.  
  
For those who are educated otherwise and have found a reason to get back
to Sanskrit, we need to develop a different method of making them
Sanskrit literate and develop a structured path for it. They may not be
interested in degrees (a vast number of them), but they need several
modules. The first few modules should build their comfort in Sanskrit.
This means introduce them to Sanskrit language and grammar in such a way
that they start feeling very comfortable with the language, they begin
to appreciate the language structure and some important grammatical
constructs. Once they cross this stage (my assessment is 80% simply fail
to cross this stage even when they started with a genuine desire because
today’s models of instruction and teaching etc. cannot deliver this for
them), the they need specific modules. Give their age they have specific
interests. To name a few, Philosophy, health and wellness, Foundation of
good living and Dharma, some kavyas, specific knowledge pertaining to
their work, history and knowledge traditions, unique and differentiating
lifestyles, assumptions about life etc. If such modular instructions are
available, they will be with the Sanskrit domain for long and even
graduate to a much higher level later.  
  
For the student crowd, the bottleneck is not at the input (admissions
level) although we perceive it there. It is actually at the exit point.
What I mean is that if I do not see any other possibility other than
going to a high school to teach Rama sabda etc. or languish as a
contract teacher in one of the RSS affiliated place, why will I enter
into the campus? Unless Sanskrit institutions turn their attention
toward the migration paths for a passing out student in many useful
ways, they will have no hope for increasing the enrolment. It is not
about dancing to the market needs and diluting what is being taught or
supposed to be taught. It is about how to put an icing on the cake so
that it becomes attractive. Out of 120 credits for a UG program, if the
institutions do not set off 24 0 30 credits exclusively address this
issue of gridlock at the exit point, I do not see any means of improving
the enrolment.  
  
In order to achieve both, Sanskrit Universities must cross-pollinate
with other Universities that teach modern subjects, otherwise, new ideas
will not germinate to move forward decisively. The level of
experimentation, sustained effort to set a target, go after it, get it
into a workable idea, offer it through some university activities in a
time bound manner, solicit funding support and networking partners to
accomplish the task are new directions to go for the Sanskrit
Universities. Otherwise the frog in the well syndrome will take over and
we will go round and round with more efforts, more spending but less
result.  
We should not get trapped by “अन्धेन नीयमानाः‍ यथा अन्धाः”  
(A few more answers by Prof Mahadevan for my questions will be published
at a later date)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 1844 \| 30-04-2020 10:50
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

