+++
title = "The Political Genius of"
full_title = "The Political Genius of Rāma Dāśarathi"
date = "2014-09-28"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/09/28/the-political-genius-of-rama-dasarathi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/09/28/the-political-genius-of-rama-dasarathi/).


					The Political Genius of Rāma Dāśarathi				



[ September 28, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/09/28/the-political-genius-of-rama-dasarathi/ "Permalink to The Political Genius of RāmaDāśarathi")

-   in [Vedic
    History](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/vedic-history/)
-   [1
    Comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/09/28/the-political-genius-of-rama-dasarathi/#comments)

# The Political Genius of RāmaDāśarathi

Modern day Upanyāsakas with their highly emotional discourses as well as
the commercial Santa Claus-ification of Rāma Dāśarathi and his Parivāra
in the form of Golu krīdāvastūni, televised nāṭakāni portraying crude
caricatures of the textual personae, comic books or even cartoons that
are solely in the service of profitability, with respect for text
outside the domain of concern. Of course, these forms of media are not
bad by themselves; they certainly incite the interest in the otherwise
unimpressionable, unimpressive generation of Hindus.



But because many of these Hindus do not have that tribal urge to be
entrenched in their own ancestral tradition, they remain as passive
consumers of information from these media, and in the absence of any
other knowledge, they develop a stagnant and monolithic construct of
Rāma and one of the defining characteristics of Rāma in the modern
portrayal is this impeachable sense of peacefulness, especially if it is
followed by helplessness. The Maryāda Puruṣottama is also known for his
valour. But this heroic aspect is buried under our emasculated
identities and only surfaces if it is in the interest of some poetry
talk, especially if it is a Tamil speaker with Dravidian leanings. But
Rjrasva does an excellent job of elucidating this aspect and readers may
read it here:

<http://vajrin.wordpress.com/2012/12/22/ideal-hero-srii-rama-and-his-approach-to-war/>

In this post, however, the aspect I wanted to discuss is the sense of
statecraft possessed by Rāma Dāsarathi. There are factors beyond our
control. Adversities might come upon us in unexpected ways. To fear and
be confused, is of course human. But the hero differentiates himself
from the commoner in cutting short the lamentations and attempt to make
the best out of a situation. A few people have written online about the
Chānakya inside Rāma, especially in the context of his exile and how
this actually benefitted the Ikśvākava dynasty. But the exile in itself
is not exactly his choice and the benefits accrued by this could be said
to be accidental. However, Rāma’s post-return endeavours display a
remarkable sense of genius in the matters of politics and
administration, especially in the light of the geo-political context of
the region.



1.  Following the stabilization of his rule after the return to Ayodhya,
    Rāma saw to it that the Ikśvāku dynasty would spread its area of
    control through means of conquests. But before we analyse these
    conquests, let us see why these conquests were needed in the first
    place? A simple answer would be that Rāma, like any imperial ruler,
    wanted to expand his territory for the usual reasons of resources,
    labour, etc. A slightly more nuanced stance would be that Rāma
    sought to avoid future conflicts among his and his brothers’ sons,
    and hence wanted them to have their own separate domains.



2.  The real expression of rājyatantra by Rāma, in my opinion though,
    was when he assigned his brother Śatrughna the responsibility to
    declare war against the great Yādava king, Madhu, after whom Yādava
    Kṛṣṇa is addressed as Mādhava. Śatrughna slayed Madhu, cut down the
    forested territory called Madhuvana and built the renowned Mathurā
    in its place. What is the reason for this conquest? The account of
    Vālmiki Rāmāyana is that Lavaṇa, the brother of Madhu killed Rāma’s
    ancestor Māndhātṛ. This was obviously an invention as Māndhātṛ
    preceded Rāma Dāśarathi by slightly more than 40 generations! (Refer
    to the Dynastic Lists in the
    [downloads](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/downloads/ "Downloads"))
    This narrative was concocted by the court bards in the absence of
    their knowledge of the real motives behind this battle.



In our real opinion, we can readily understand the motives behind this
battle if we understand the geography of the situation. We shall use the
following map from ancientvoice.wikidot.com, amongst the many other
colourful maps it has, for our reference:

[![Kampilya To
Hastinapura](https://aryanthought.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/kampilya-to-hastinapura.jpg?w=402&h=406)](https://aryanthought.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/kampilya-to-hastinapura.jpg)

Source: <http://ancientvoice.wikidot.com/travel:kampilya-to-hastinapura>

If one consults the [dynastic
lists](https://aryanthought.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/collated-dynastic-lists.pdf "Downloads")
and survey the texts (which takes a lot of time and energy; and given my
other commitments, it takes forever!), one realizes that Daśaratha was
probably a junior contemporary of the great king of North Pañcala, the
Divodāsa of Rgvedic fame. A number of factors that support such a
conclusion is that Ahalya, who was married to a certain Gautama, is
actually the sister of Divodāsa. Also, Daśaratha had fought a certain
Timidhvaja Śambara and it is possible that he was related to the Śambara
who was slayed by Divodāsa. There is another noteworthy synchronism as
well. To quote [Pargiter (pg.
171-172)](https://aryanthought.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/pargiter-ancient-indian-historical-tradition.pdf "Downloads"):

“Andhaka’s brother Bhajamana married two daughters of Srnjaya. Nothing
is said to identify this Srnjaya, but the reference suggests he was well
known, and the best known Srnjaya was the king of N. Pancala. The
genealogical table framed according to the synchronisms established
shows that Srnjaya of N. Pancala must have reigned about this time, and
as Andhaka’s and Bhajamana’s father Bhima Satvata reigned at Mathura as
just shown, a marriage alliance between the two neighbouring dynasties
would be quite natural. In two lists of royal munificence to brahmans it
is said king Satadyumna gave a splendid furnished house to the brahman
Maudgalya, descendant of king Mudgala, of N. Pancala (chapter IX). King
Mudgala therefore was earlier than Satadyumna. The only Satadyumna
mentioned was a king of Videha, Siradhvaja’s second successor.
Siradhvaja was Rama’s father-in-law {ante), so Satadyumna would have
been Rama’s younger contemporary and therefore (according to the
synchronisms just set out) a contemporary of Srnjaya of N. Pancala.
Srnjaya was Mudgala’s fourth or fifth successor, and the Maudgalya
brahmans would have been established three or four generations in
Satadyumna’s time.”



\*For those who are not in the know, Sīradhvaja is the personal name of
the father of Sītā, who is popularly known as Janaka which is a common
name for the kings of Videha.



So what about all this information? Pargiter also cites the following
interesting facts about Daśaratha’s great sacrifice that is discussed at
the very outset of the epic:

“It is remarkable then in the Ramayana, that Kosala’s friendliest
relations were with the eastern kingdoms of Videha, Anga and Magadha
{sic), the Panjab kingdoms of Kekaya, Sindhu and Sauvira, the western
kingdom of Surastra, and the Daksinatya kings, for these are specially
named among the invitations sent out for Dasaratha’s sacrifice; and no
mention is made of any of the kings of the middle region of North India
except Kasi.” ([Reference to Vālmīki Rāmāyana,
I.13.21-29](http://valmikiramayan.net/utf8/baala/sarga13/bala_13_frame.htm))

This is extremely significant as it indicates that Daśaratha was wary of
the increasingly powerful of the kings of the middle region,
particularly North Pañcala. Rāma, after his return to power, must have
been aware of the impending threat from the ambitious North Pañcala
dynasty. If one refers to the map above, one can note the immense
strategic significance in Śatrughna being asked by Rāma to take over the
region, in close proximity to North Pañcala. Śatrughna’s descendants
would have ruled the newly-found city for a few generations and this
might have forced Sudāsa to switch to the Vāsiṣṭhas, the priests of the
Ikśvākavas as his own priests and enter into a mutual agreement not to
frustrate each other’s interests.

Rāma had also developed a very strong alliance with the Niṣādas, south
of Madhyadesa. The Ikśvākavas, together with the solar Videha and Viśāla
dynasties, comprised the earlier wave of Ārya entry into Bhārata and
must have gradually developed a rapport with the existing non-ārya
peoples, against the aggressive lunar clans who were more of a threat to
these indigenous tribes. Rāma’s friendship with Guha and the Niṣādas of
Śṛṅgaverapura comes to mind. This strong presence of a formidable enemy
in the harsh, jungled territory lying to the south of Madhyadesa calls
to memory the following verse from the Rigveda:

rājā vṛtraṃ jaṅghanat prāg apāg uda hathā yajāte vara ā pṛthivyāḥ
3.53.11b

The verse speaks of the victories of Sudāsa in the east, west and north,
conspicuously leaving out the south.

So the great battle of the ten kings, fought bySudāsa Paijāvana
romanticized by the Rig Veda, was probably less dramatic than it
appears. Although it is to a degree remarkable for the fact thatSudāsa
had to contend against many enemies, could it be possible that he was
being kept in line by the greatIkśvākavas and that the Rigvedic seers,
wanting to find favour with the kings of the elite middle region,
quietly ignored the geo-political reality and gave us an exaggerated
account ofSudāsa’s power? The answers to this are not straight-forward
and we are in no mood to carry on this post further than it ought to be
for now. The speculations can await.



With this, we conclude by noting the foresight and sense of strategy
displayed by Rāma Dāśarathi and hope these same virtues aid the new
leadership of Bhārata in quelling the threats to security and stability
from within and without.

Tags: [ancient
politics](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ancient-politics/),
[bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[dasaratha](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/dasaratha/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[india](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/india/), [indian
epics](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/indian-epics/),
[kings](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/kings/),
[lakshmana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/lakshmana/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[purana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/purana/),
[puranas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puranas/),
[ramayana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ramayana/), [rig
veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rig-veda/),
[Rāma](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rama/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

