+++
title = "On The Adamantine Harpe"
full_title = "On The Adamantine Harpe Of Perseus In Light Of The Vajra Of Indra – A Weapon Of The Striker/Thunderer Comparatively Considered"
date = "2021-10-05"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/05/on-the-adamantine-harpe-of-perseus-in-light-of-the-vajra-of-indra-a-weapon-of-the-striker-thunderer-briefly-comparatively-considered/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/05/on-the-adamantine-harpe-of-perseus-in-light-of-the-vajra-of-indra-a-weapon-of-the-striker-thunderer-briefly-comparatively-considered/).

On The Adamantine Harpe Of Perseus In Light Of The Vajra Of Indra – A Weapon Of The Striker/Thunderer (Briefly) Comparatively Considered

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/10/perseus_by_antonio_canova.jpg?w=884)

Something we have written a fair bit upon this year has been the
identification of Perseus as an expression of the Striker/Thunderer
Indo-European deific. As it happens, the Harpe wielded by the hero is –
entirely unsurprisingly – strikingly correlate with the Vajra of Indra,
as well. How do we know?

Consider the following. The Harpe in question is stated in various
sources to be adamantine – and adamantium, the unbreakable metal
(indeed, ‘A-‘ (‘not’, ‘opposite to’, ‘un-‘)+ ‘Damnao’ (‘Conquerable’,
‘Vanquishable’), is its root etymology – ‘unbreakable’, ‘unstoppable’,
and other such understandings are not hard to addeuce therefrom) is
quite cognate in understanding to how we think of and speak of the
Vajra. There is good reason that it has come to mean ‘diamond’ in later
Sanskrit utilization. The original and archaic sense likely pointedly
encompassed meteoric iron – as this would have been one of the few
sources of workable iron during the more archaic era, and something of
fantastic hardness and potency relative to the other weapons of the
period. In the Bronze Age, the ‘Star Metal’ was indeed ‘unbreakable’ and
both rare and potent. And ‘Star Metal’ we can most assuredly call it –
for apart from the attestation via chemical analysis of various weaponry
coming from ultimately celestial mineric origination … we have quite
direct RigVedic statements of a Vajra being conjured by Brihaspati in
the form of a meteorite – utilized to carry out an orbital bombardment
of the subterranean lair of a certain demon-dragon. But those matters
have been spoken of elsewhere by us at length. And a mere co-occurrence
of metal does not securely anchor this co-identification.

What is rather more useful in this regard is the actual mythic provenacy
in the Greek and later Classical literary spheres that has come down to
us for this weapon.

Now interestingly, there are not one but *three* sourcings for the
adamantine blade – forged and thence bestowed by Hephaestus, provided by
Hermes, and also belonging to Athena. So how to reconcile these diverse
accounts?

Well, as it happens, they match up rather well with what we find in the
Vedas. There, of course many are aware of Tvastr forging the weapon of
Indra \[interestingly, spoken of as Indra’s Father\]; however fewer
think of the attestations for Vak Saraswati carrying out just such a
ritual operation to produce the Weapon of Indra. And how many would
recall Brihaspati and Agni … and of course, Rudra in such regard.

These points are not as contradictory as one might first be forgiven for
presuming. For it must be remembered that each Vedic perspective there,
in the relevant Hymnals and ritual manuals and assorted commentary, is
not there to provide us with an exhaustive history and sequential and
comprehensive attesting of proceedings. Rather, each of these is there
for a particular ritual purpose – and therefore emphasizes ‘facings’ of
the narrative as are proper for the invocations being made at the time.

The Vajra, in truth, as we have detailed at great length elsewhere, is
not simply a ‘Thunderbolt’. It is a sort of congealed, immanentized
Force of Cosmic Order (Rta) It- (or rather Her-)Self. This is why there
is such an essential role for Vak Saraswati in its empowerment and
provision (resonant with what we find attested amongst the Greeks for
Athena having the ability to ‘unlock’ the storehouse where the Hellenic
‘Thunderbolt’ is kept), for She is likewise, the in-universe expression
of this supernal and a-priori principle (in Old Norse – ‘Orlog’, that is
to say ‘Outside / Supernal Law’ is most eloquent), and mediates what is
coming through from the Absolute at that Watery liminal sphere about
this place of ours. This, too, is why we find these other deific facings
– Tvastr, Agni, Brihaspati – mentioned … for the conjuring, the
empowerment of such a weapon .. it is the role of a Priest. And see also
my work from last year looking at the concept of the Priest and the
Artificer, the ‘Song-Smith’ we might say, in the Slavic, Nordic,
Hellenic, Vedic etc. spheres. The roles ‘diversified’ with time – so in
the latter texts in the European side of things, we do not tend to make
the obvious connection even despite the direct presence of an Altar and
Altar-Fire, for instance. It is majorly the Vedic understanding where
the true connexion of these is still to be upheld.

In any case – *that* is why the Vajra is ultimately unstoppable. Because
it is a spark of the Absolute. Sent down from even beyond High Heaven to
serve the Divine Cause !

And that is why it is so uniquely fatal to the demon, the chaotic, the
anti-Cosmic Law … because these creatures are defined via their
opposition to Cosmic Law – so with this weapon they meet their
antithesis, their annihilation, their Doom.

Now, to speak further upon the Adamantine Harpe of Perseus – there are
two salient points within the Greek mythology which almost immediately
draw our attention.

The first is that weapon wielded by Herakles in the course of the
Hydra-Slaying. That is to say – the Combat of the Striker/Thunderer
against the Demon Dragon of the Water. It is a seriously powerful and
resonant Indo-European mytheme, I hardly need to name the other
expressions of it and various of the essential details to it. Previous
works have explored this in greater, grander depth than we shall manage
here – but it is worth noting that the ‘burning’ (i.e. application of
Holy Fire), the ‘decapitation’, and often the assistance of a certain
Goddess is mentioned. That Goddess being Athena / Minerva in various of
the Classical accounts, Vak Saraswati (Who may also slay the Demon
Herself in other renditions in the Vedas) for the Hindu remembrance;
figures that are quite closely resonant, as should hardly come as
surprise to find.

Now often we think that Herakles is chiefly associated with a Club, the
bough of a tree – and this is not incorrect. Indeed, it is the very
‘essence’ of the ‘Per-‘ in Proto-Indo-European – ‘Strike’ – that we find
encapsulated there. However, in at least one telling
\[Pseudo-Apollodorus\], we also find flaming arrows utilized. I have
detailed how this, too, is rather commensurate with a Vajra
understanding in a recent piece \[and should probably expand upon this
toadditionally observe that Herakles receivingHis Bow and Arrow from
Apollo – a certain famed Archer deific of quite close concordancy in
various respects to a particular Vedic figure .. in fact, *several*
Vedic figures, given as we have already demonstrated elsewhere, an
intriguing coterminity of Apollo with Tvastr in terms of a myth of the
Song-Smiths\]. But the most archaic iconographic depictions which we
have for Herakles (and Iolaos) ‘gainst the Hydra – have the chief weapon
being the Harpe.

It is unsurprising that what would have been a powerful and advanced
weapon (or, by the mid-1st millennium B.C., perhaps “an elegant weapon
for a more civilized age” … by which I mean an archaic and therefore
archaically powerful in iconic terms device from a more *barbaric* and
Heroic age) for its time becomes how the Weapon of the Striker/Thunderer
is depicted there – even if the specific formulation of the Harpe
postdates the generalized congealment of the myth in question upon the
Urheimat by millennia.

The second of these Hellenic mythic occurrences, pertaining to *another*
employment of a Goddess-bestowed adamantium Harpe … we shall leave for
another time, as there is quite some complexity to it, and in truth it
pertains to another deific as the wielder.

Similarly, we shall leave – for the moment – unexpounded upon certain
other most intriguing elements to Perseus’ narrative which likewise
recall an evidently far more archaic (Proto-)Indo-European ritual and
mythic understanding.

The core and key point here has already been established. Namely, that
the Adamantium Harpe of Perseus resonates well with the Vajra of Indra.
And therefore, conveys a similarly ancient essence to the tale.
