+++
title = "Ex Oriente Lux – The"
full_title = "Ex Oriente Lux – The Necessity For Hindu Understanding As Guide For Hellenic IndoEuropean Mythic Reconstruction, A Brief Exemplar From Kali And MahaGauri In Relation To Demeter Erinyes"
date = "2021-10-14"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/14/ex-oriente-lux-the-necessity-for-hindu-understanding-as-guide-for-hellenic-or-broader-indo-european-mythic-reconstruction-a-brief-exemplar-from-kali-and-mahagauri-in-relation-to-demeter-erinyes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/14/ex-oriente-lux-the-necessity-for-hindu-understanding-as-guide-for-hellenic-or-broader-indo-european-mythic-reconstruction-a-brief-exemplar-from-kali-and-mahagauri-in-relation-to-demeter-erinyes/).

Ex Oriente Lux – The Necessity For Hindu Understanding As Guide For Hellenic (Or Broader) Indo-European Mythic Reconstruction, A Brief Exemplar From Kali And MahaGauri In Relation To Demeter Erinyes

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/10/1200px-demeter_altemps_inv8546.jpg?w=447)

Occasionally, it is suggested that when it comes to the Goddess oriented
mythology and theology – there is little which the various Indo-European
spheres have to offer one another. Particularly as applies the
Hindusphere.

Clearly these claims are incorrect – and often, they rest upon
fundamentally, indeed foundationally fallacious notions that somehow
Goddesses of our ancestors were ‘incorporated’ or ‘assimilated’ from
non-Indo-European sources. The deities, in short, of the far-flung
foreigner, rather than anybody we might be related to. So in the Greek
sphere, pre-Greek or even Mesopotamian – and therefore having nothing to
do with the Indo-Europeans who migrated to Northern India or Northern
Europe. And vice versa.

This would be a rather remarkable thing were it the case – as the
persistent and consistent coterminities we can observe with these
Goddess expressions are so coherent that it should require
trulyincredible ‘coincidence’ for these features to so consistently
align all the way from India to Iceland. But some people just don’t want
to believe …

Anyway, the reason I set finger to keyboard upon this this evening just
gone, is because it was the Eighth Night of NavRatri – Dedicated to Devi
as MahaGauri, the Great White One / Most Beautiful. Why does what I have
just said connect and pertain to the preceding few sentences? Simple.
The mythology around the MahaGauri form of Devi is closely concordant
with elements found in the Greek mythology around Demeter. That is to
say – in both cases, we find the Goddess adopts a ‘Black, Furious’ form
… Kali, Demeter Erinyes – and then, when the time has come for that
Furor-form to subside, She goes and bathes herself in a sacred river,
washing off the dark patina to once again become the shining and radiant
beautiful Mother Goddess so beloved by all.

Now there are, of course, quite an array of other elements to the
relevant Greek and Hindu mythologies which actually do demonstrate that
we are dealing with the same Goddess(es), the same original and archaic
(Proto-)Indo-European myth(s) which have been carried forth and carried
forward by various Indo-European descended peoples. It is not as
‘cursory’ as those relatively short string of elements I have
aforementioned might otherwise imply. But I have already written
extensively upon these matters – and if they are of interest, my earlier
works ‘The Black Avenging Form Of The Earth Mother And The Pursuits Of
The Sky Father As Solar Horseman – A Comparative Indo-European
Typological Evocation’ ([parts
I](https://aryaakasha.com/2020/11/07/the-black-avenging-form-of-the-earth-mother-and-the-pursuits-of-the-sky-father-as-solar-horseman-a-comparative-indo-european-typological-evocation-part-one-demeter-erinyes-poseidon/)
and
[II](https://aryaakasha.com/2020/11/13/the-black-avenging-form-of-the-earth-mother-and-the-pursuits-of-the-sky-father-as-solar-horseman-a-comparative-indo-european-typological-evocation-part-two-surya-saranyu-and-chhaya-the-shadowy/)),
and ‘[The Queen of Serpents – The Serpentine Form of the Indo-European
Earth
Mother](https://aryaakasha.com/2020/12/18/the-queen-of-serpents-the-serpentine-figure-of-the-indo-european-earth-mother/)‘
look at these in greater detail.There is also [an ‘Arka’
post](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/04/01/the-black-avenging-form-of-the-indo-european-mother-goddess-arya-akasha-arka/)
via way of brief synopsis.

Yet the point is a much simpler one: As we have so often said – in order
to more properly and completely understand what is going on in the Greek
iteration of the myth … we can only do so by considering it in the
context of the Hindu understanding to the same figures, the same events,
the same narrative and theological underpinnings. And then, of course,
with reference to Skadi and other such expressions – by adding
additional dimensionality through ‘cross-checking’ the insights thus
gleaned via the other Indo-European perspectives as well.

Phrased in these terms, then, we see the situation as it more truly is.
Not as a rather isolated and minor ‘one-off’ as some might be tempted
to, viz. Demeter becoming Demeter Erinyes – but, instead, as being
something important and quite pervasive … the Mother Goddess becoming
Black and Furious, an enforcer of Cosmic Order ‘gainst the violations of
same by men and even more potent beings than we. Now this is something
which does, again, have more broad (if subtle) occurrences elsewhere
within the Greek canon – but, of course, what has come down to us from
those times is so fragmentary (indeed, it was fragmentary even at the
height of the Classical age … an immense patchwork tapestry of local
mythoi which did not always easily reconcile with one another), that it
is immensely helpful to us to have just such a more macroscopic ‘guide’
to help facilitating us in identifying various expressions of the
typology and thence linking them all back together.

Today’s Night is that of SiddhiDhatri – and in that particular spirit,
we might tangibly suggest that our mission is, so to speak, to ‘Put
Things Back Together Again’. A rather figurative rendering for Her Name
– to ‘Make Whole’, ‘Make Ideal’, ‘Empower’.

A mission of quite some escalating saliency right across the
Indo-European World.

Jai Mata Di !
