+++
title = "The IndoEuropean Queen"
full_title = "The IndoEuropean Queen of the Dead – A BridgingPlace Between Pitru Paksha And NavRatri"
date = "2021-10-05"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/05/the-indo-european-queen-of-the-dead-a-bridging-place-between-pitru-paksha-and-navratri/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/05/the-indo-european-queen-of-the-dead-a-bridging-place-between-pitru-paksha-and-navratri/).

The Indo-European Queen of the Dead – A Bridging-Place Between Pitru Paksha And NavRatri

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/10/l7s4ej3.jpeg?w=454)

Pitru Paksha – the Fortnight of the Ancestors – is nearly at a close ;
and immediately after it comes NavRatri – the Nine Nights of the Mother
Goddess.  
The former, is when the veils between the worlds are thinner, and one’s
ancestors (Pitrs – etymologically cognate with‘Fathers’) are able to
come and visit, to receive both remembrance and offerings of nourishment
from their living kin.

Now as it happens, there is actually a lesser-known underlying unity to
the two observances – if you know how to look.

We so often think that in Indo-European mythology, the Lord of the Dead
is a male deific – and that is not untrue.  
Odin, Hades, Pluto, Dis Pater, and other such terms besides – these are
facings of the Sky Father, something of an ultimate ancestor in multiple
senses of the term, presiding over the Glorious/Ancestral Dead in an
afterworld reachable via the sky or sea (or, more especially, both – as
in PIE cosmology … the sky is *also* a kind of sea, and may be sailed
upon accordingly). And which is, when properly considered, not really an
‘underworld’ in the dark and gloomy sense – but rather, a Solar or Lunar
realm high up, replete with Stars (one of the potential identifications
for the ‘Wealth’ of the Lord of the Dead), and which winds up ‘under’
the world we inhabit via the diurnal procession of Night Sky into Day’s
Dawning.

There is also, of course, His Son – known as Yama in the Hindusphere,
Remus (Iemus) in the Roman – Who rules over the ‘City’ or ‘World’ of the
Dead; a parallel to the World of the Living, as is His Right, as the
First to Die – Who went forth to find and to found such a place so that
when *we* go from this place, we have somewhere to go *to*. It is an
eschatological counterpart to the foundation of the race of Man and
attendant kingdom of the living by Manu / Mannus / Romulus, etc.

It should therefore come as little surprise that in the Vedic cosmology,
we find both Father and Son in that particular place. But that is all as
we should expect – and this piece is a brief look at something perhaps a
little more *unexpected*.

You see, there is also another. And this is an incredibly ancient,
archaic Indo-European understanding which has likewise been preserved
across the thousands of kilometers and thousands of years since the
dispersal from the Proto-Indo-European Urheimat.

That is to say, the Goddess Who Reigns over the Ancestors – and often in
a manner that is quite clearly directly comparable to Her more
immediately thought of Husband.

To quote from one of my earlier works:

“We know that the notion of the Afterlife/Underworld ruled over, at
least in part, by a Goddess is of archaic Proto-Indo-European origins.
We have the direct Vedic attestation for Aditi (the ‘Queen of Law’, the
Law-Giver and Bearer – recall the Law relevant theonymics for Persephone
earlier) reigning over such a Realm, and likewise the Germanics
preserved this understanding in the form of Freyja’s dominion over
Folkvangr (a counterpart realm to the more-well-known-today Valhalla,
indeed drawing from the very same sort of intake ‘populace’); the
Classical mythoi having not only Persephone (and, in Latin terms, the
aforementioned “Juno of the Underworld”), but also Hekate in a
sepulchral association – and further evidence that the Anatolian Greek
perception of Hekate owes something to the Hittites with their own
Indo-European Solar Goddess conceptry (they also knew of the Underworld
Sun; a ‘Solar Afterlife’ being, likewise, an archaic (P)IE conceptive
understanding). Unsurprisingly, “Queen” tends to come up rather
frequently as the apt entitlement of these Goddess expressions –
although to my mind, “Empress” is the better, especially as applies
Aditi. Deyk-tator may have some semi-apt conceptual saliency as well,
given that this is the Goddess of Speech, and Supreme Law(‘s Expressor)
– ‘She Who Points Out’, and Commands.”

To this we can add other elements. One of which concerns the figure
known from later Germanic folk-tradition as Hulda, Holle, Holda,
Perchta, and other such namings. Whom I mention here in large measure
due to the traditions around this female folkloric figure as leading the
Wild Hunt. As we have demonstrated, the Wild Hunt tradition is very much
an understanding of the Indo-European Ancestors riding out alongside
Their Ruler – most prominently, the Sky Father (i.e. Odin, Rudra Shiva),
although evidently also the Mother Goddess likewise. This would fit with
the fact that Odin’s Einherjar are drawn from the population of
Valhalla, which has as its direct correlate, Freyja’s realm of Folkvangr
aforementioned which likewise receives the other half of the Glorious
Dead.

It should likewise come as no surprise to find that Hekate
(interestingly, occasionally identified as a consort of the psychopompic
Hermes) is similarly regarded as presiding over both Ghosts .. but also
the assemblage of these, in potential terrifying phantomic parodos.

And, of course, – and to speak quite directly to something salient for
Pitru Paksha – when, in the course of the Homeric epics and subsequent
Classical mythic writing, a hero is to seek to commune with his
ancestors, Whom does he propitiate? Whom does he invoke?

Persephone, Hekate (or Hecate), and other such facings to Her. (And we
likewise find Demeter having a rather prominent role with favourable
metempsychosis and afterlife, after all, as well).

Now there is, of course, quite the quotient which is not adequately
covered in this brief exposition. Some of it, I intend to return to in
the perhaps not-too-distant future. Much of it, you can find written
upon in various of my previous works.

But for now? It is enough. Besides, with NavRatri immediately in the
future, there shall most definitely be scope for greater
Goddess-oriented commentary very soon.

Hail to the Pitrs;  
And Jai Mata Di !
