+++
title = "Excerpt From A Letter"
full_title = "Excerpt From A Letter Unsent – On The Manifestation Of The Animal Forms Of Fylgja And Vahana"
date = "2021-10-16"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/16/excerpt-from-a-letter-unsent-on-the-manifestation-of-the-animal-forms-of-fylgja-and-vahana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/10/16/excerpt-from-a-letter-unsent-on-the-manifestation-of-the-animal-forms-of-fylgja-and-vahana/).

Excerpt From A Letter Unsent – On The Manifestation Of The Animal Forms Of Fylgja And Vahana

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/10/167187128_10164994755075574_2180124844844639271_n.jpg?w=674)

\[Author’s Note: The following is an extract from a rather personal
letter I’d written some years ago. It attempts to establish a unified
metaphysics for the presentations of the animal forms of the Fylgia of
humans, the Vahanas of the Gods, etc. Its ‘core idea’ is that the
essence-tial spark of the nature at the heart of the being whose
animal-form associate it is – this ‘quality’ finds visual expression as
the result of the medium it is radiating out through. Rather like how
sound-waves are carried to us via air or water (specifically – how
‘speech’ gives literal voice to ‘thought’ which represents its core
inspiration and kernel), and how waves of pressure and force generate
visually apparent ‘ripples’ within liquid (following the immersion of an
object within same – a wake may be generated with movement, likewise).
The medium these reified and externalized qualities are perceived
through – is, of course, the wondrous ‘Maya’ which is the fabric of
reality itself.

In short – when we see (or we ‘see’) such a manifestation, we are in
fact seeing something core and intrinsic to the human or God which the
ostensibly semi-separate visage is associated with. Externalized, and
projected outward through an intervening veil of intersubjectivity,
which provides both the transmission-media … but which also shapes that
which is perceived (or, at least, its perception) in consequence. And
therefore, which may potentially lead to our perception of the
expression being modal to our own informational schema. To a certain
point – I suspect that we see that which we ‘think’ we *should* see, in
order to convey that quality the best to us. Although I emphasize that
that is ‘to a certain point’, and the objective reality of the elements
being represented and perceived means that it is never truly subjective.
Indeed, at most it may always be something of a ‘negotiation’ process
between our perceptions and what’s being perceived (including those
rather hard-headed “I can’t see it, because I don’t think it’s real,
therefore I see *nothing*‘ sorts…). One where, of course, the greater
real-ness of the Divine has the considerable, controlling stake therein.
And may therefore mean that we wind up seeing things *entirely* other
than we had, perhaps, expected. \[In fact, now that I think of it, this
has a broader saliency for religious / mythic visions and iconography –
particularly in terms of the Weapons of the Gods, for example\]

It is presented here, largely without alteration, because it represents
a rather intriguing exploration of several otherwise seemingly disparate
concepts across both the Vedic & Eddic Indo-European spheres. Now I *am*
aware that the way I’m using ‘Purusha’ & ‘Prakriti’ in this analysis is
… different to the more usual metaphysical understanding for these
elements – this is Shakta theology, after all; and people often forget
just how mutable and multifarious some of these one-word terms actually
are across three thousand years and thousands of Sages’ points of view.
So whereas the ‘standard’ view of Purusha & Prakriti effectively has the
former as the ‘Male’ element within the ‘Female’ universe, causing the
latter to teem with life and movement rather than merely just ‘existing’
… these Shakta perspectives go entirely the other way around,
maintaining the older Purusha as Universe conceptry – but also observing
that the investiture of the essential spark of life and the fires
underpinning each action … are actually Devi-empowered, Devi-granted –
something seen via the Kundalini Serpent, and for that matter right
there in the Vedas viz. my favourite RigVedic Hymnal inter many alia.
And with a certain degree of parallel support in other, more Westerly IE
mythoi – an interesting example of which being Athena’s investiture of
Menos into Diomedes and Achilles, causing obvious external
manifestations for both of these great men in the form of coruscating
flame from their eyes or brows. \[-C.A.R.\] \]

“In Nordic metaphysics and mythology, there is the concept of the
Fylgia. The word itself, means something akin to ‘accompaniment’,
although more literally “follower”, and with a broader sense of a
“Guardian Spirit”, a part of the soul, a force of vitality, and a
‘reflection’ \[but not in the illusory sense\] . I suppose we might
therefore think of the Fylgja acting in a more active sense as a guiding
spirit, akin to a guardian angel. It protects you and advises you and
guides you towards a more virtuous and desired future. It is also a
being that also exists independent of you – it can leave and return.
This is possible, in no small part because it is, effectively, of the
Clan, even though it will also associate with particular individuals,
likely the Chieftain of said kin-group. As you may recall from our
previous conversations and explications upon the subject, so much of the
Nordic metaphysics around ‘soul’ is irreducibly ‘communal’ rather than a
matter of the individual. Although once again, to return to one of the
leitmotifs of this overarching piece, there is an arguably useful
employment of the Sanskrit analytical pairing of Prakriti & Purusha to
be deployed here. The Clan’s menfolk, obviously, being the Purusha –
either individually or collectively, and the Fylgia – along with various
other ‘metaphysical’ bonds of empowering kinship, which are irreducibly
interlinked to the Clan’s “soul-well”, – being the Prakriti, or
Prakritis, in question. This, curiously enough, *further* resonates the
Brahmacharini-portion of the NavaRatri Cycle, and other such incidences,
when we consider the integral importance of the Soul-Well for the
concept of Fylgja to begin with; as the Fylgja, effectively, are
‘persistencies’ of some of the best of the womenfolk of the Clan, ‘come
forward’ to safeguard, empower, and otherwise ‘render mighty’ their
descendants \[recall the wording of the relevant lines of the Devi Sukta
of the RigVeda, and also the general empowerment of VAK, of Shakti
within Us … and, for that matter, now that I think upon it, my earlier
referenced point around the elements that are ‘brought forth’ out of the
Gods and Their Weapons to congeal as Durga – and how these are actually
elements of Durga that had been ‘loaned’ out to the Gods in question,
rather than what some presume, around Durga effectively being a
congealment contingent upon masculine divinity, instead of the other way
around\].

And this has some rather interesting *further* #NAS potential when we
consider the strong linkage between, say, Hamingja, and other such
‘Luck’ concepts as “Kripa” \[after a sort\], even ‘Shiva’. ‘Shiva Cha
Me’, ‘Fylgja Cha Me’, Disr Cha Me, indeed. Exploration rendered more
intriguing still, once the ability of the Fylgja to appear, if
necessary, in non-anthropomorphic \[i.e. something resembling an animal,
although likely supernaturally so\] form – as this perhaps moves from
the observational-labelling of ‘Prakriti’, to the rather underexamined
\[in terms of its potential coterminity with the former concept\] clade
of Vahana.

What am I getting at? Well, the animalistic form the Fylgja may appear
in, is an emanation or a projection of the akashic imprint which binds
it and its man, revealing something deep and true about him in its
chosen shape and nature. I would contend, although this is a somewhat
speculative development in #NAS theology and metaphysics, that something
not at all dissimilar can likely be observed \[albeit perhaps with a
much more ‘direct’ linkage/emanation principle going on in at least some
instances that I can think of\] when it comes to the Vahanas of the Gods
and Goddesses, the form and attributes \[and yes, naming – names have
huge potency, it must always be recalled! a pun there, potentially, also
.. twice over\] *also* are so closely keyed to something fundamental and
intrinsic to the Deity in question, as to be a further ‘projection’ and
’emanation’ out of this Akashically resonant and recorded quality. The
grandest example of which, for my mind \[this, too, is a deeply resonant
statement, if you think about it and look closely\], is most surely the
Tiger/Lion Dawon, Who Is Vahana of Mother Durga; as not only does the
veer-y name reputedly mean ‘Bravery’, but the fierce and fiercely
protective nature of these Big Cats for *their* children, especially
\[along with their lethality, terrifying nature and roars \[there’s that
‘Garajit’ concept again!\], beautiful visages of exotic yet exquisite
colouration and shape, dedication, intelligence \[recall all those
instances of Tigers turning the tables on trappers and hunting the
hunters with chilling admirable success; or lions doing likewise,
occasionally in larger formations – tactics, you see, as well as
strategy\], ability to dominate even the most formidable of prey
\[including men, even elephants, and most *definitely*, water-buffalo;
you see what i did there – you may recall from the GHOST DIVISION
portion covering Rakshasas & Brahmaraksasas, how it is not at all
coincidental, to my mind, the frequency with which *Tigers* have formed
the therianthropic thematic elements for various artistic depictions of
same .. even Kali Herself has Tigress visage form in some South Indian
traditions and dances, if I recall – All-Devouring capable, indeed, it
would appear!\], all whilst looking *incredibly*, *indelibly*,
*invincibly* *Regal!!!*\] , is a quality \[indeed, broad-spanning
*suite* of such\] of *clear* resonance and descriptive laksana \[I
couldn’t think of an English word to go there; although ‘significance’,
in the older sense of ‘signifer’-saliency/prominency/aptness/accuracy
may be someways proximate to striking distance for what I mightily mean
here\], that it is not *at all* hard to see how or why the Tiger/Lion is
Durga’s Vahana. Indra’s Airavata \[‘Storm-Cloud’\] is similarly obvious
– and not least due to what can happen due to the phenomenal levels of
testosterone which flow through a bull-elephant’s body when they’re
heated by one form of passions or another, their bellowing sound, their
ground-shaking trampling of the feet, the lightning-arc tusks, and
thick, grey, impenetrable hide which nevertheless conceals a notable
intelligence and communicative ability \[perhaps this recalls, also,
Lady VAC’s empowerment of Lord Indra in the relevant RigVedic Hymn!\],
and the overarching power and”  
  
—

And that’s … that’s where I ended the actual cogent sentences of that
portion to the draft letter. It was almost two years ago, so I am not
quite sure where I had intended to take it next. The draft-notes make
reference to an array of briefly touched upon concepts, and a few
Vahanas of particular Gods and what They might therefore represent
(particularly the Ravens of Dhumavati & Shaani; as well as one of the
dimensions to Nandi for Shiva – ‘Happiness’, literally; there are, of
course, an array of others as I have explored in certain else of my
work). As well as an assertion around my long-standing view about Lord
Skanda riding a Raptor (as in … the sort of dinosaur), due to the
intelligence and tactics of the creatures – although also noting that
the Rooster’s role as an alerter, a warner and watchman of a sort, is
nevertheless rather valid (and the ‘all-seeing’ connotation of the
‘thousand-eyed’ Peacock tail perhaps presumably likewise). I probably
sought to draw the two skeins – that of Fylgja and Vahana – back
together , expressing an indissoluble linkage-of-saliency. Even if the
Fylgja might happen to wander off from the individual male bearer due to
getting fed up with his actions – because it’s the grander, greater and
broader *Clan* which She is a reified expression in relation to (just
as, I suppose, we all are in a certain sense .. the products of our
heritage (and forebears) via this expressive medium of life and human
form and psyche).

Now, of course, I must emphasize that in the intervening years, our
understanding upon multiple points raised within this excerpt have
grown, occasionally quite significantly. And so if you are seriously
interested in several of the areas which I drew from in its course, I’d
encourage looking at my more recent works for a better explication of
them. I should also probably actually do a more comprehensive overview
of the comparative elements and general schema for the Nordic / Germanic
afterlive(s).

In any case – one hopes you enjoyed a *brief* digression through a
portion of an unpublished b-side to my mind. I was at a pretty … strange
time in my life when I was working on this – hadn’t slept much more than
an hour a night for much of three months, for instance, and some heavy
emotional timbre was also enveloping and flowing through me at the time.
Hence why it does some of the … stuff that it does, around multiple
exclamation-marks, parentheses within parentheses, and escalating length
of sentences.  
  
I am also, for that matter, not sure what it says about me that this was
actually part of a love-letter
