+++
title = "Earl Grey"
full_title = "Earl Grey"
date = "2014-01-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/07/earl-grey/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/07/earl-grey/).

Earl Grey

In a previous
[post](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/25/tea-leaves/), I
speculated that that Denisovans might stem from from *Homo erectus*, at
least in part, rather than being a sister group to Neanderthals as
suggested in the paper by Reich and Patterson. It now looks as if this
may the case (the in-part bit) : David Reich has
[said](http://www.livescience.com/41610-ancient-human-sex.html) that the
Denisovan sample had admixture from Neanderthals and also from an
unknown, ultra-archaic population, which might well be *erectus.*

Although my conclusion was approximately correct, some of my data was
shaky. I was considering that Ann Gibbons said – “She was not a modern
human, but a descendant of Homo erectus, an ancestral species that left
Africa almost 2 million years ago. “ Which is mostly wrong, but it
might have been the product of misunderstanding something that Reich
actually said – maybe his group had already seen signs of that
ultra-archaic fraction. Which is not to slam Gibbons, who is a pretty
good reporter.

Other relevant info was more solid. There are a couple of examples, in
Melanesians, of archaic alleles of genes in the innate immune system
that are *very* divergent, old enough to have originated in *erectus.*
Next, we already knew that Denisovan mtDNA had diverged a long, long
time ago, way before the likely date of the split between neanderthals
and homo sap. Lastly, we already knew that modern humans did the deed
with Neanderthals, Denisovans, and some archaic group in Africa – surely
the ancestors of of the Denisovans got around too. In other words,
admixture with the previous owners was the default hypothesis, to be
assumed until proved otherwise.

