+++
title = "Triune origins"
full_title = "Triune origins"
date = "2014-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/19/triune-origins/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/19/triune-origins/).

Triune origins

With the latest
[paper](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2013/12/23/001552), the story
on European origins is becoming clearer. Three populations account for
European ancestry: the Mesolithic hunter-gatherers of western Europe
(dubbed WHG in the paper), early European farmers derived from somewhere
in the Mideast (EEF), and a third group more closely related to ancient
Siberians (ANE) than any existing population. Those Sibermen also
contributed a third of Amerindian ancestry, the rest being similar to
modern East Asian populations.

The key facts are the dates, derived from radiocarbon dating, and
statistical tests on ancient and existing genomes, tests that can show
admixture, tree structure, etc. WHG and ANE are sister populations, but
distinct. Here’s a graphical representation of the model:[![Figure
2](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/figure-2.jpeg?w=640&h=494)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/figure-2.jpeg)

These methods are powerful, but not all-powerful. They can detect
population changes if the intrusive group is sufficiently genetically
different – basically, if it has drifted enough. But I don’t think they
can detect movements of and/or replacements by more closely-related
populations., and it looks to me that there must be more to the story
than we see in this graph. The uniparental lineages hint at more
dramatic events than these autosomal analyses. G2A was apparently very
common in the Impressed-Ware populations along the Mediterranean coast,
but now it’s rare, found mainly on islands and up in the hills. Yet
this analysis suggests that southern European populations such as
Tuscans are 75% EEF farmers – where did the Y chromosomes go? Northern
European populations are, according to these calculations, something
like 35% descended from WHG populations. Those WHG populations seem to
have had exclusively U mtDNA lineages (U,U4,U5, and U8) but those only
add up to a frequency of 10 or 11% in those northern European
populations today. Where did those mtDNA lineages go?

Could be selection. When you look at the explosive expansion of R1b and
R1A (probably originating in the Sibermen), you have to wonder. Or maybe
it was more like the story of the Golden Family, the Jenghiz-Khanites,
or Neil of the Nine Hostages – maybe everybody who was anybody in early
Bronze-Age Europe had to be a descendent of a certain legendary (but
real) king, and this distorted Y-chromosome transmission

Could be near-replacement by some population that was autosomally
similar but fairly different in its uniparental lineages. Could be that
we’re missing something in the analysis.

The Sibermen look to be the Indo-Europeans, or a major component
thereof. And so you must have an Urheimat that is fairly far east – not
in Europe. Before their advent, most of Europe must having been
speaking EEF languages of some kind, of which Basque is the only
survivor. Interesting that this paper say absolutely nothing about the
Indo-European expansion. The word “language” isn’t even used. I wonder
if there is a paper on that in prep, one that makes use of all this new
ancient DNA information. Or, maybe the authors feel it isn’t their
pidgin and are leaving that up to someone else.

