+++
title = "Naturalized kammatic"
full_title = "Naturalized kammatic Buddhism"
date = "2020-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/03/01/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/03/01/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/).

Naturalized kammatic Buddhism

I think [I’ve shown that the kammatic-nibbanic
distinction](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/kammatic-and-nibbanic-buddhism/)
should matter to the historian, textual scholar, or anthropologist
trying to figure out what Buddhism has meant in other times and places.
[Contra Damien
Keown](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/02/does-the-kammaticnibbanic-distinction-fit-the-facts),
it is a helpful [ideal
type](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/10/ideal-types-in-philosophy/)
to understand how Buddhists have thought about their tradition to date.
But should it matter constructively, to us, now?

Yes, it should –at least to [us
Buddhists](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/),
and to anyone trying to think philosophically with Buddhism today.
Because, I would argue, [there *are* things valuable about worldly
life](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/)
–and it turns out that there have always been Buddhists who agreed that
there are, in practice if not in theory. At least some forms of the
dichotomy turn out to reprise the key constructive problem of my
dissertation – the role of [external
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/) in a
good human life – from an intra-Buddhist perspective. The Buddhism of
the suttas, of Buddhaghosa and Śāntideva, turns out to be
[single-minded](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/11/philosophical-single-mindedness-1/):
*only* liberation is important. Buddhists will often identify that
austere Buddhism as normative, the ideal to aspire to –and yet live a
life remarkably different from that ideal. And I think that they are, at
least to some extent, right to live such a life. I [consider myself to
*be* a
Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/), yet
I do not think the suttas are *correct* that worldly things are so
irredeemably marked by suffering, impermanence and essencelessness as to
be worthy only of transcendence. My view of the good, like Aristotle’s,
is [comprehensive and not
revisionist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/):
we are not fools to seek everyday goods like romantic love. *Some* of
our existing goals are misguided, but it is not the case that we should
surrender *all* of them to the reduction of suffering.

That many Buddhists have had such other goals, and even considered them
part of the tradition, is not news to me, and probably isn’t to you if
you’ve been following this blog. What I find particularly helpful about
the kammatic-nibbanic distinction is the way it frames Buddhists’ more
worldly goals in *terms* of karma. For in fact many Buddhists do think
of their lives in terms not of nirvana but of karma –of acting well
because it will be rewarded. This includes philosophical monks like
Śāntideva: the Śikṣā Samuccaya has plenty of passages about how if you
provide beautiful things to monks and stūpas, you’ll become rich and
beautiful and surrounded by beautiful things yourself.

Typically, of course, karma is viewed supernaturally: the rewards of
good acting show up in another life, or even through some magical
connection within this life. But, crucially, [it does not have to
be](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/) viewed
in tht way. As far as I can tell, [supernatural conceptions of karma are
false](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/08/a-buddhist-argument-against-rebirth/).
But karma can also be taken as a way to articulate
[eudaimonism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/naturalizing-santidevas-eudaimonism/)
–the view that being virtuous is typically beneficial for the virtuous
agent’s well-being –and I take this eudaimonic version of karma to be
*true*. I agree [with Dale
Wright](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
that stealing brings bad karma in that one who steals “will find
compassion and intimacy more difficult, be further estranged from the
society in which one lives, and feel isolated and unable to trust
others.”

This is all to say that the Buddhism I advocate *is* a kammatic Buddhism
–just one defined in naturalistic terms like Wright’s. [As Jan
Westerhoff
notes](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/),
on a naturalized account, nirvana looks a lot like death.But unlike
Westerhoff I take that as a reason to have goals beyond nirvana – goals
which Buddhists have traditionally understood in terms of a framework of
karma. (To my mind, texts like [the
Mahāvaṃsa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/)
show that Buddhists have sought such goals for a long time.) [Hsiao-Lan
Hu advocates a “this-worldly
nibbana”](https://www.amazon.com/This-Worldly-Nibbana-Buddhist-Feminist-Peacemaking-Community/dp/1438439326);
I prefer to think of this-worldly *karma*.

Now, in traditional Buddhist societies as I understand them, the
paradigm act for good karma is [upward
giving](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/the-monks-independence/):
giving (*dāna*) to the saṅgha, especially to monks. (The Thai phrase
*tham boon*, which just means “making merit” or “making good karma”,
refers in practice to the act of giving food to monks.) The karmic
benefits of this act – central to kammatic Buddhism – are usually
understood in a straightforwardly supernatural way: giving to monks gets
you a better rebirth. But [the work of Maria Heim (née
Hibbets)](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/files/2010/04/hibbets001.pdf)
reminds us that Indian texts on gift-giving, including but not limited
to Buddhist ones, place very high importance on the virtue of *śraddhā*
(esteem): the upward gift expresses a joy in tribute to the esteemed
monk. In this I see it as close to what [Paul Woodruff
calls](https://www.amazon.com/Reverence-Renewing-Forgotten-Paul-Woodruff/dp/0195157958)
the forgotten virtue of reverence, which “begins in a deep understanding
of human limitations; from this grows the capacity to be in awe of
whatever we believe lies outside our control—God, truth, justice,
nature, even death.” (3) Giving to monks is a cultivation of humility, a
way to remind oneself of [one’s own flawed
nature](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/07/the-dark-side-of-human-nature/)
– which is a crucial part of self-improvement.

This, in outline, is the Buddhism I advocate: a naturalized Buddhism
which is kammatic rather than nibbanic, in part because naturalizing
makes the goal of nirvana/nibbana more questionable. It is a modernist
Buddhism, but one that has room for Buddhism as traditionally practised.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/)
