+++
title = "Metamorphosis"
full_title = "Metamorphosis"
date = "2016-04-21"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/04/21/metamorphosis/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/04/21/metamorphosis/).

Metamorphosis

“transgender” people aren’t: they’re just crazy. Whittling doesn’t
change the wiring of the brain, or the chromosomes. But in principle,
such a transformation is possible. It would be an example of real, deep
biological change – not the the tinkering at the margins we’re actually
on the verge of.

When you think about full metamorphosis in insects, taking a caterpillar
into a butterfly, it’s pretty impressive. You wouldn’t guess that a
caterpillar and a butterfly were even related – they’re really
different. If we hadn’t seen it happen, nobody would believe it
possible. Although there are comparable transformations in other
species. Sacculina, basically a barnacle, crawls along the body of its
host crab until it finds a joint – whereupon it sheds its carapace and
injects a microscopic sluglike essence into the crab. It then develops a
root system of tendrils , which infiltrate the crab’s nervous system
(taking command) and extract nourishment from the crab’s intestine and
stomach. The crab is reprogrammed – it looks like and acts like a female
crab, but but focuses is efforts into caring for Sacculina’s eggs.

Such natural examples show that really *advanced* biological engineering
is possible, even though we don’t know enough to pull it off yet.

But someday we will. Or any rate we will unless we destroy civilization
first, which seems more likely.

Changing sexes (in humans) is not as complicated as turning into a
butterfly, but it would seem to require undoing and re-developing a fair
amount of brain circuitry. Also changing / redeveloping genitalia,
skeleton, muscles, etc. The fact that butterflies can remember some
things that they learned as caterpillars suggest this process would be
compatible with continuity of identity – so afterwards you would still
be ‘you’. Kinda sorta.

Given this kind of capability, changing sex seems fairly trivial. Why
not turn into a butterfly? Or considering the square-cube law, a
centaur, or a merperson?

Eventually, people would be able to easily transform into a physical
form that reflected their true inner nature. I think it’s pretty obvious
what that would be for most individuals.

