+++
title = "Is interdisciplinarity"
full_title = "Is interdisciplinarity easier for scholars of South Asian studies? On the 5th Coffee Break Conference"
date = "2014-06-03"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/03/is-interdisciplinarity-easier-for-scholars-of-south-asian-studies-on-the-5th-coffee-break-conference/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/03/is-interdisciplinarity-easier-for-scholars-of-south-asian-studies-on-the-5th-coffee-break-conference/).

Is interdisciplinarity easier for scholars of South Asian studies? On the 5th Coffee Break Conference

Last week in Rome the 5th Coffee Break
[Conference](http://asiaticacoffeebreak.wordpress.com/http://) took
place. During his introductory speech our Andrew Ollett asked why was
such a project, with an explicit emphasis on a interdisciplinary
approach, born exactly among scholars and students of South Asian
studies.

His (tentative? ironic?) answer was that it was not a coincidence, since
for South Asianists interdisciplinarity is not something they need to
look for, it is already a given for them —since in the same department
live scholars of history, feminist studies, cinema, philology… From the
point of view of Islamic studies, Marco
[Lauri](https://independent.academia.edu/MarcoLauri) agreed that
transdisciplinarity is not bread and butter in Islamic departments. Why
so? Perhaps because Islam defined itself since its beginning against the
other Abrahamic religions. This led Islamic believers (and consequently
also Islamic scholars) to enforce a stricter definition of Islam, one
that would not allow for anthropology, religious studies, etc.

Had you asked me, I would have said that most of us work on South Asia
just because the Coffee Break Project was born out of the pleasure to
work together of a group of friends. Hence the question: **Are we here
*because* we work on South Asia? Or is South Asia just the reason why we
met? The question is open to readers** —even if they work
interdisciplinarly outside the Coffee Break Project.

Cross-posted with minor differences on my own
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com).
