+++
title = "What is the difference"
full_title = "What is the difference between nouns and verbs (according to Mīmāṃsā authors)? Diaconescu vs Clooney"
date = "2014-06-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/06/what-is-the-difference-between-nouns-and-verbs-according-to-mima%e1%b9%83sa-authors-diaconescu-vs-clooney/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/06/what-is-the-difference-between-nouns-and-verbs-according-to-mima%e1%b9%83sa-authors-diaconescu-vs-clooney/).

What is the difference between nouns and verbs (according to Mīmāṃsā authors)? Diaconescu vs. Clooney

What do nouns mean? And what is the difference between nouns and verbs?
Pūrva Mīmāṃsā authors are rightly known as having conceived the first
textual linguistics in South Asia. In this sense, their theory differs
from the Vyākaraṇa one, as it does not start with basic forms having
already underwent an analysis (*vyākaraṇa*), but rather with complex
textual units, the sacrificial prescriptions of the Brāhmaṇas.

The *sūtra*s PMS 2.1.1–2.1.4 constitute the *bhāvārthādhikaraṇa*, the
one commenting upon which Kumārila elaborates his theory of
*[bhāvanā](http://elisafreschi.blogspot.co.at/2009_04_01_archive.html)*
(efficience force) as the meaning of verbal endings\*. But what did
Jaimini mean through them? The first one (PMS 2.1.1) states that verbs
denote *bhāva* (interpreted by Kumārila as meaning *bhāvanā*).

In 2.1.2 an objector proposes that all linguistic expressions could mean
*bhāva* and the next two *sūtra*s discuss the difference between nouns
and verbs. What is this difference? The opinion of ancient and
contemporary scholars here diverge. Let me therefore first present the
*sūtra*s:

> 2.1.3 yeṣām tūtpattau sve prayoge rūpopalabdhis **tāni nāmāni**,
> tasmāt tebhyaḥ parākāṅkṣā bhūtatvāt sve prayoge
>
> 2.1.4 yeṣāṃ tūtpattāv arthe sve prayogo na vidyate **tāny ākhyātāni**
> tasmāt tebhyaḥ pratīyetāśritatvāt prayogasya

It seems (relatively) clear that nouns are linked to something already
there (*bhūta*), whereas verbs express something which is not (yet)
there (*na vidyate*). What is instead debated upon is the meaning of
*parākāṅkṣā* “dependence on something else”. Śabara wants this
expression to say that nouns do not depend on anything else, exactly
since they signify something already existing. Thus, he just suggests to
add *na vidyate* “there is no” (*na vidyata ity adhyāhāraḥ*). Kumārila,
who wants the same meaning to hold proposes in addition the
interpretation *parā ākāṅkṣā* “The dependence on something else \[of the
nouns\] is far away (i.e., non existent”).

Now, if you readers think that adding a negation to a *sūtra* is a too
far-fetched interpretation, you are not alone.

F.X. Clooney, who tried to understand the PMS independently of its later
interpreters (in his *Thinking ritually*), suggests instead to take
*parākāṅkṣā* at face value, and explains that Jaimini’s focus is
constantly on action and that nouns depend on something else in order to
express an action.

B. Diaconescu in his *Debating Verbal Cognition* supports Śabara and
Kumārila’s interpretation, especially insofar as otherwise there would
be no distinction among nouns and verbs regarding their dependence on
something else. Nouns would depend on something else in order to express
an action and verbs would depend on something else since their
denotandum is not yet there, ready to be used.

Thus, Diaconescu follows the tradition and Clooney is rather a
fundamentalist (in the literal sense of going back to the foundational
text). Both methods are interesting and legitimate and my only
perplexity regarding Diaconescu is his claim that he is following
Jaimini and that “Clooney’s stand does not seem to be supported by the
text”. I would have preferred him to clearly state that he read Jaimini
through Śabara etc.

\*This point is oversimplified, since Kumārila oscillates between the
idea that the *bhāvanā* is the meaning of the verbal endings only and
that it is the meaning of the whole verb, including the root.

On *bhāvanā*, see
[these](http://elisafreschi.blogspot.co.at/2009_04_01_archive.html)
posts. For my view on Clooney, see
[this](http://elisafreschi.blogspot.co.at/2012/08/annotated-basic-bibliography-on-mimamsa.html)
post.
