+++
title = "Matilal vs Radhakrishnan"
full_title = "Matilal vs Radhakrishnan"
date = "2014-06-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/08/matilal-vs-radhakrishnan/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/08/matilal-vs-radhakrishnan/).

Matilal vs. Radhakrishnan

A little while ago, Matthew Dasti
[provided](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/#comment-1196)
a fascinating glimpse into the recent, 20th-century history of “Indian
philosophy” – not the doing of it but the studying of it, the history of
“secondary work” into Indian philosophy. Since Westerners have been
studying Indian philosophy for literally hundreds of years now, there is
a significant history there. And it is hardly new to take this
second-order focus. It is old news that the way we (Indians as well as
Westerners) now think about Indian traditions in general has been
deeply, perhaps irrevocably, shaped by the 19th-century Orientalists.
But where Matthew’s comment goes deeper is to look specifically at the
discipline of *philosophy* – and at the 20th century, not the 19th.

I had been
[speaking](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/)
of a key design principle for my course in Indian philosophy this past
spring: I wanted students to see Indian philosophy as a practical field,
not merely theoretical. I wanted them to learn both about the
overarching ideals of liberation from suffering, and the practical
ethical worldview to be found in texts like Śāntideva’s
Bodhicaryāvatāra. (This was a key part of what led me to an [accidental
focus on the Bhagavad
Gītā](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/).)
I contrasted this approach to what I took to be a prevailing view: “Too
often, Indian epistemology and metaphysics are seen as purely abstract
activities with little relation to one’s ethical conduct or even one’s
ultimate liberation…”

Matthew
[responded](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/#comment-1196)
with a brilliant speculation about *why* this view would have prevailed.
He noted an [earlier
comment](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/03/16/the-accidental-gita/#comment-1166)
by Patrick O’Donnell had referred to [Bimal Krishna
Matilal](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bimal_Krishna_Matilal), one of the
20th century’s leading scholars of Indian philosophy and the founder of
the [Journal of Indian
Philosophy](http://www.springer.com/philosophy/journal/10781). And he
suggested that Matilal’s view might have been something of a backlash
against its predecessors:

> I wonder if the apparent divorce of metaphysics and epistemology from
> ethics, as you note, has to do with an attempt to push back against
> the “Indian philosophy as a (mere) path of wisdom” approach that
> Matilal and others wanted to escape. This is a musing and not a claim.
> I’d need to think about it some more, but some of the pioneers in our
> field were really fighting against this sort of thing, which may have
> led them to perhaps go too far in the other direction. Matilal said in
> his editorial vision for the Journal of Indian Philosophy that “The
> field of our contributions will be bound by the limits of rational
> inquiry; we will avoid questions that lie in the fields of theology
> and mystical experience.”

Matthew’s musing seems extremely plausible to me. One may note that
Matilal occupied the Spalding Chair of Eastern Religions and Ethics at
Oxford, an endowed position first held by [Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan](http://www.iep.utm.edu/radhakri/). In his day
Radhakrishnan was probably the world’s most esteemed writer on Indian
philosophy. It was startling to me to find that the [sourcebook of
readings](http://www.amazon.com/Sourcebook-Indian-Philosophy-Sarvepalli-Radhakrishnan/dp/0691019584)
in Indian philosophy he wrote in 1967 really has yet to be surpassed.
Deepak Sarma’s [more recent
sourcebook](http://www.amazon.com/Classical-Indian-Philosophy-A-Reader/dp/0231133995),
most notably, retains many of the original’s weaknesses while adding
additional weaknesses of its own, as Andrew Nicholson notes in [his
review](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.7817/jameroriesoci.133.3.0581?uid=3739448&uid=2&uid=3737720&uid=4&sid=21103819819561)
(unfortunately behind a pay wall). It seems to me that when Matilal
began to make his mark on the field of Indian philosophy, he did it in
Radhakrishnan’s shadow. And if there is anyone who exemplifies an
approach to Indian philosophy characterized by a focus on “theology and
mystical experience”, it is Radhakrishnan.

The contrasts between Radhakrishnan and Matilal could not have been
starker, with Matilal’s dry technical approach seemingly aimed at making
Indian philosophy respectable to an analytical audience. But the
criticisms of Radhakrishnan’s approach came from a less analytical
direction as well. One may note that while Paul Hacker’s [attempted
takedown of the *tat tvam asi*
ethic](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/schopenhauer-and-the-tat-tvam-asi-ethic/)
focuses on Vivekananda as the ethic’s main Indian popularizer, he spends
significant time arguing that Radhakrishnan got it even more wrong than
Vivekananda did – basically that Radhakrishnan took a mistake original
to Vivekananda and repeated it uncritically. Wilhelm Halbfass’s subtle
and detailed histories of the Indian encounter with the West – clearly
influenced by Hacker – take Radhakrishnan as a key exemplar of those who
overemphasize “mystical experience” in a way that misinterprets the
earlier texts.

The critique of Radhakrishnan was right about many things. I pursued
that line of critique myself in my [article on Ken
Wilber](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/09/precis-of-beyond-enacted-experiences/).
But it only goes so far. Matthew pointed to an excellent article by
Stephen Phillips, pointing out that while Matilal’s technical analytic
emphasis may have done justice to his own specialty of Nyāya (and
especially Navya-Nyāya), it would poorly serve traditions like
Madhyamaka and Yogācāra and Advaita, where there is an inescapable
emphasis on soteriology – the study of liberation from suffering.
(Unfortunately, the link to Phillips’s article is currently broken.)
More fundamentally, Phillips points out that there is no reason to think
(as Matlial’s programmatic statement for the journal would imply) that
“theology and mystical experience” are somehow “beyond the limits of
rational inquiry”. Thomas Aquinas would be bewildered by such a claim –
as, indeed, would be most of the Indians that Matilal studied.

I am hoping that the time has now come where we can again honour
Radhakrishnan’s approach while acknowledging its flaws – and for that
matter, honour Matilal’s approach while acknowledging *its* flaws. How
might we do that? To my mind, the most important thing is to take
apologetics seriously. We [must not
accept](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/09/precis-of-beyond-enacted-experiences/)
the perennialism that tempted Radhakrishnan (and Wilber), to think that
“all religious traditions” (or even all Indian traditions) derive from a
similar category of “mystical experience”. That cannot do justice to the
ideas found in the traditions themselves. But we must also recognize
that the Indian philosophical traditions thought deeply about the
practical importance of their ideas to the quest for liberation for
suffering. Which is to say nothing less than that those traditions
believed their ideas to *matter*. If we scholars of Indian philosophy
want our own work to matter, we should acknowledge their point.
