+++
title = "United Bengal: Greater Pakistan by Other Means"
date = "2020-11-22"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/11/22/united-bengal-greater-pakistan-by-other-means/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/11/22/united-bengal-greater-pakistan-by-other-means/).

There are many episodes in the history of a country about which people
are needed to be made aware of not just for their relevance as an
important event from the past but also for their relevance in the
present and implications for the country’s future in the event of lack
of its awareness and understanding. Today’s topic is a classic example
where the need for historical perspective is imperative.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/h_s_suhrawardy-1.jpg)

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/jinnah1945c-2.jpg)

This episode was the proposal of United Bengal in 1947. The proposal of
territories of East and West Bengal together in Union as a sovereign
nation and independent of India, this scheme was a brainchild of Huseyn
Shaheed Suhrawardy, former Prime Minister of Pakistan who at that point
in time was the Premier of the province of Bengal.

**Background**

Ever since the late nineteenth century, political activity in India had
gained momentum and all different regions of undivided India played
varying degrees of role in it but Bengal had certainly been one of the
most active provinces and in the tumultuous and divided politics of the
province of Bengal of the post-1905 era, situations never seemed to calm
down.

A major part in this stormy scenario was undoubtedly played by
demography *i*.*e*. its huge population of Muslims where they were more
than half of the province. During the anti-partition movement of
1905-1907 spearheaded by the Hindu population, methods like the call for
*Swadeshi*, the Boycott movement, the patriotic slogans like *Bande
Mataram* had given a kick start in the province to patriotic sentiments.
The movement surely had Muslim presence to an extent, but it would be
wrong to call it anything more than that for the presence was limited
and the trajectory was already clear as a day with anti-Hindu riots of
1907 in the districts of Comilla and Jamalpur¹. Willful negligence from
the British authorities and support to the cause of partition from the
Nawab of Dacca, Salimullah played their role of intensifying the
circumstances.

Separate electorates extended by the 1932 Communal Award had made things
far more clear to Hindu population of the province. After the general
election of 1945-46, Muslim League administration under the leadership
of Suhrawardy discriminated against Hindus and many of its biased
policies contributed immensely in creating a favourable opinion for the
partition of Bengal. Its rampant favouritism towards Muslim population
and disregard for the life of Hindus was for everyone to see.

The Governor of Bengal at this time was Frederick Burrows. The Premier
of Bengal had active support from the Governor. About Burrows one writer
had aptly said that he was *“less of a crook than Herbert but was in
league with Suhrawardy and was anxious to be as willing a tool for
disruption as Herbert.”²* The support from Governor himself provided
Suhrawardy with enough confidence to start one of the most gut wrenching
events of pre-partition India – the Great Calcutta Killings of 1946. It
is a popular perception that the carnage against Hindus started on
August 16, 1946 and raged for nearly four days up to August 20th but the
the truth is that the violence had erupted many a times before that year
in and around Calcutta, even all round the country and had continued
well in to the next year.³ Direct Action Day declared by Jinnah was
deliberately proclaimed a public holiday in Bengal and violence that
raged had been planned by the League “meticulously..to the last detail,
weeks in advance.”⁴

***“It has also to be remembered that this was primarily a political
manoeuvre and not the work of only the mullahs whipping up
passions.”⁵***

As to why is it necessary to understand this sequence of major events ?
Because they reveal the hypocrisy behind the argument for United Bengal
Movement. The atrocities committed under the League led government helps
us to understand the magnitude of sheer vileness and hypocrisy of
Suhrawardy and Jinnah’s campaign for United Bengal.

**Genesis of the Idea**

The plan, as has been mentioned above came from Suhrawardy but he was
not alone in this scheme. During the short period of three months from
April to June 1947 when the idea gained some traction, it was supported
by even Sarat Chandra Bose and K. S. Roy though the intentions of both
Bose and Roy were quite different from the League members which we will
discuss below.

On February 20th 1947, Prime Minister of Britain, Mr. Attlee made an
announcement in the House of Commons about the transfer of power in
Indian hands by a date not later than June 30th 1948. The result was
that the uncertainties especially in the provinces of Bengal and Punjab
multiplied overnight. If the events of 1946 had confirmed anything to a
large part of the population, it was that the partition was not a matter
of if but rather when. The March 8th announcement of the Congress
Working Committee stated that in the event of partition of India, the
partition of Bengal and Punjab would follow.⁶

The Hindu Mahasabha on its end had earlier stated *Akhand Hindustan* as
its goal but even they could foresee especially after Noakhali
anti-Hindu riots that there was no other way for security and survival
of Bengali Hindus other than partition. Gandhi had been wary of the
partition of the country but his resolve on this issue had weakened over
time and in February when Syama Prasad Mukerjee met Gandhi in his
Sodepur Ashram about partition of the province of Bengal even he could
see rationality in the scheme of Syama Prasad,⁷ albeit reluctantly. The
camps were now clearly drawn in this saga.

Through the Great Calcutta Killings, Suhrawardy had in fact tried his
best to ‘rein in’ Hindu population of the province but with the prospect
of partition looming large, he decided to shift his policy towards the
new gimmick of United Bengal. At a press conference at Delhi on 27th
April 1947, he announced his plan for ***“an independent, undivided and
sovereign Bengal in a divided India as a separate dominion.”⁸*** Though
the announcement of his plan was made in April, he had already started
thinking along these lines after the February announcement in which
Attlee had left enough room for maneuvering by saying that the transfer
of power would be there even if it meant *“in some areas to existing
Provincial Governments.”⁹* Suhrawardy could now see a way to get a piece
for himself out of this pie.

**The Hoax**

A cloak of an economic necessity was used by the Bengal Premier to cover
the plan of having an entire Bengal to himself after the British. As per
him, Bengal was economically backward because of the presence of a large
number of non-Bengali businessmen who exploited the hapless Bengalis and
grew their business at their cost. The plan was quite ingenious
actually. Such clever use of ethno-cultural differences, of pitting one
Indian group against the other and using language as a dividing force
had been a time tested stunt. The same was being applied in this case.

There is no denying that the large business groups had many a times
exploited its labourers. But instead of making sure that it doesn’t
happen by creating an environment where businessmen and labourers both
could flourish, argument was as usual made against the very existence of
large businesses themselves, something that even the Indian State after
1947 can be accused of. The deliberate targeting of ethnicity was not
because of Suhrawardy’s sympathy for the hapless Bengali, after all it
was the same Bengali that he had no problem getting gutted in the
streets of Calcutta few months back, but as mentioned before, he was
playing divide and rule of his own. Bengalis against the others, the
capitalist against the labourer, the classic toxic cocktail of anarchy
that is still used time and again while conveniently forgetting the
other major difference *i.e.* religion which had been the basis of all
major violent clashes of the region in its past.

**Response from the** **Business Class**

Another important personality who understood this duplicity was G. D.
Birla, one of the most prominent businessmen of India whose connections
to the Indian National Congress are very well known. He could foresee
the charade for what it was. And that’s why he had been in support of
partition of Bengal from the very start. Though it can be argued that he
was able to see the net positive results that his business would get by
remaining as part of India with access to rest of the large Indian
markets, but it cannot be denied that he was also certainly going to
lose huge share of business with great losses in Eastern Bengal. It is
therefore to his credit that he saw the demand of united Bengal for what
it really was – a hoax. But, he wasn’t the only one. Other businessmen
like *“B. M. Birla and B. L. Jalan, Bir Badridas Goenka, N. R. Sarkar
and other industrialists considered Indian Union as one economic unit
and therefore were determined to keep West Bengal within this union.”*

> ***“G. D. Birla in his letter to AICC insisted on partition because
> the Suhrawardy -sponsored united Bengal campaign was a ploy to create
> a greater Pakistan.”***
>
> **Bidyut Chakrabarty, The Partition of Bengal and Assam , 1932-47,
> Contour of Freedom.**

**Scrambling for Allies**

Suhrawardy therefore started collecting allies for his cause. One of the
most vocal ally for the cause of United Bengal was Sarat Chandra Bose,
brother of Subhash Chandra Bose, and a member of the Forward Bloc along
with the Bengali Congress member Kiran Shankar Roy. Though Roy was
brought back to the Congress line after some serious advice from Sardar
Patel in May 1947, it is interesting to note that Roy had even
threatened to resign if his demands were not met with which was promptly
ignored by the Congress High Command. Sarat Chandra Bose had been
imprisoned during the course of the second world war and during this
time, he seemed to have come to the conclusion that the future of India
was as “*a Union of Socialist Republics – an immense melting pot in
which the character of all races and nationalities comprised in it will
be mixed and out of which a new worldism will arise which will
recognize, no frontiers, no races and no classes.”¹⁰* He was also of the
view that partitioning of the provinces would make them “*happy hunting
grounds, for imperialists, communalists and reactionaries”* and that it
would *“dissolve the linguistic bonds”.¹¹*

As one can see from these arguments, there is significant
Marxist-Communist influence which seemed to have been accentuated during
his prison time. There is no doubt that he made these arguments for the
betterment of the Bengali people in a way that he considered appropriate
but there is also no denying the redundancy of this line of thought
which looks more apparent in today’s time as I am sure it must have
looked to many even in those times. Despite the fact that his intentions
were anti-Pakistan, they were quite myopic. Seeing the opportunity for
gaining an influential ally, Suhrawardy started negotiating with the
Bose camp for deciding the formal agenda of United Bengal. This also
incensed Sardar Patel because both Bose and Roy had negotiated with
Suhrawardy without the approval of its provincial Congress unit.

By the month of May, Suhrawardy’s United Bengal camp formally involved
Bose and another Leaguer, Abul Hashim. Together they had even tried to
enlist the support of Gandhi and had met him to sought his
suggestions.¹² They did receive some positive assurance from Gandhi for
United Bengal scheme because theoretically, it meant going against
Jinnah’s “two-nations” demand and Gandhi wanted to oppose two nations
theory at any cost. It is amply clear that for anyone concerned about
not only the territorial integrity of India that was to emerge out of
the chaos of 1947 but also worried about the plight of Hindus of Bengal,
the entire scheme looked like political Russian roulette.

Now, all Suhrawardy had to do was to get the assent of Jinnah for this
scheme. Earlier Jinnah had not been in support of a sovereign Bengal.
From the very start, he wanted the entire provinces of both Punjab and
Bengal to be part of his proposed Pakistan. Realising with time that the
partition of these provinces seemed real, Jinnah was perplexed. Pakistan
with Eastern Bengal but without the crown jewel Calcutta was not a
welcoming prospect for him. It was not that hard to convince Jinnah as
one of very close confidants of his, M. A. H. Ispahani (Ispahanis were
one of the most prominent business houses of Bengal), seemed to be
pulling the strings and even loosing the strings of his purse for this
campaign. He “*persuaded Jinnah to discuss the matter with the
Viceroy.”¹³*

Amongst other reasons, Ispahani’s motives were financial. The jute
industry of west Bengal which hitherto had been controlled by the
“*British business houses and the members of the Indian Chamber of
Commerce”* would be available for Ispahanis if the United Bengal scheme
fructified. The fact that Calcutta would be part of West Bengal had
caused serious alarm. It meant huge losses to the Ispahani business. The
need thus to keep Calcutta within the ambit of Pakistan prompted both
Jinnah and Ispahani to support the demand of United Bengal. Jinnah had
stated : *“If Bengal remains united, … I should be delighted. What is
the use of Bengal without Calcutta\[?\];* *They had much better to
remain united and independent ; I am sure that they would be on friendly
terms with us”. ¹⁴* But what exactly he meant by the term ‘friendly’
will be discussed later in this write up.

**The Contradiction**

But there was one hiccup. What about the Lahore Resolution for Pakistan
of 1940 that had been the bedrock of Muslim League’s growing popularity
in India? Wouldn’t the demand of an independent nation be contrary to
it? The United Bengal demand thus ruffled good amount of feathers within
the League. Some Leaguers like the Khwaja Nazimuddin group raised their
voices against this plan. Unsurprisingly, this schism had history. The
Khwaja group had been sort of a rival within the Bengal Provincial
Muslim League (BMPL) to the Suhrawardy group. After the departure of
Fazlul Haq from active politics, Suhrawardy had been the principal
opponent of the Khwaja group. The difference between them ranged from
class to culture. Suhrawardy though financially very strong had
cultivated an image of representing the Bengali Muslim middle class
while the Khwaja group represented the non-Bengali Muslim landed
aristocracy. The ascent of Suhrawardy with tacit support from Jinnah to
the Premiership of Bengal cemented a lot of differences.

The answer to the Lahore Resolution question vis-à-vis United Bengal was
promptly provided from Suhrawardy group by Abul Hashim. It was now
stated by them that the Lahore Resolution was never about *Akhand*
*Pakistan* anyways. As per Abul Hashim –

***“It stipulated that the areas in which the Muslims are numerically in
a majority as in the North Western and the Eastern Zones of India should
be grouped to constitute ‘Independent States’ in which the constituent
Unit shall be autonomous and sovereign……In Akhand Pakistan they would be
under the domination of west Pakistanis and Urdu would be the state
language. They could not expect a better position than becoming peons
under Urdu speaking judges and*** ***magistrates.”_(¹⁵)***

As one can see, this argument was quite a prophecy in regard to
intra-Muslim politics that culminated in a battle royale in 1971 with
deciding role played by the Indian State. But the arguments against
United Bengal within the League died soon after it was confirmed that
Suhrawardy’s demand had Jinnah’s support. The Khwaja group had to back
off from their opposition and support the United Bengal scheme.

**The Bengali Hindus**

As for the Hindu minority of the province, the cultural differences and
sentiments of Bengali Hindus were being provoked and pitted against
other Indian groups as a red herring to make the scheme of United Bengal
possible. But did they find any traction. Not exactly. There is no
denying of the fact that some Bengali Hindus did seem to support the
idea of a United Bengal as can be gleamed from Sarat Chandra Bose’s
involvement and Kishan Chandra Roy’s short entertaining of this idea.
But even within these united Bengal supporting Hindus, majority was
towards a united Bengal but as part of the Indian Union.

Some did seem to have a romantic view towards the earlier days of 1905
anti-partition movement and thus were reluctant to go against the very
goal which had served as a sort of their initiation ceremony in
politics. An example of this line of thought can be gleamed from
writings of Nares Chandra Sen Gupta’s *An appeal to Sons and Daughters
of Bengal* in which he stated that *“the continuance of a United Bengal
freed from the canker of communal electorates and communal ministry,
continuing as a member of the Indian Union…”* was the need of the hour
and he then went on to urge his fellow Bengalis to *“strive and toil and
fight for that rather than to seek a partition of the province which but
forty years ago people considered to be an intolerable calamity.”¹⁶*
Some others supported due to their concern for the trouble they thought
the partition would cause to numerous Hindus who will be left in Eastern
Bengal after the partition and various other practical difficulties that
the idea of a population exchange might generate for both rich and poor
Bengali Hindus of Eastern Bengal. In the hindsight, we can see that
these concerns were very genuine and valid.

But the overwhelming majority of Bengali Hindus were in strong support
of the partition of province. To elaborate, many of them though very
much attached to the cause of Bengali territorial integrity, could see
the reality behind the romanticism of 1905 anti-partition movement. They
knew that if the Bengali Hindus were to be part of United Bengal scheme,
their entire existence would be in jeopardy. Many of them realized early
on that if their lives and property, culture and religion had to
survive, partition was the only answer. Example of this line of thought
is a letter that was sent to *Amrita Bazar Patrika* as early as mid
January 1947 in a section started by the newspaper called “Homeland for
Bengal Hindus”. It stated –

***“Bengali Hindus must face the grim reality before them. If they do
then they will see how the good deeds done by patriotic Bengalis in an
earlier day are gradually being nullified by the Muslim dominated
administration of the province… The Bengali Hindus must have a home
where they will be able to preserve their culture and adjust their
administration to their needs.”¹⁷***

It is clear that even if some section of Bengali Hindus entertained the
thought of a united Bengal, they clearly did it as United Bengal which
continues to be a part of the Indian Union and unsurprisingly, Hindus
who supported a sovereign United Bengal were in very small minority. The
result was that by the end of April, almost all of the Bengali Hindus
wanted a separate province of their own with a Hindu majority and wanted
their province to be an integral part of the Indian Union. For example,
a poll was conducted in *Amrita Bazar Patrika* whose results published
on 23 April 1947 removed any doubts if they still existed. The question
asked by the newspaper in the poll was – *“Do you want a separate
homeland for Bengali Hindus?”* 98.3% voted in favour and 0.6% voted
against the division and as per the newspaper 99.6% Hindus & 0.4%
Muslims had replied to the poll. ¹⁸

**The Opposite Effect**

There was another problem if only Eastern Bengal was to be a part of
Pakistan without its western part. At that time, a large part of the
industry of Bengal was situated in the western part of the province.
Having only Eastern Bengal would create serious economic deficiencies
for the future Pakistan. Its food security would be another matter of
concern in future and Jinnah knew it. Hence as mentioned above, he
supported Suhrawardy in his campaign for United and sovereign Bengal.
But these arguments started having the opposite effect of strengthening
the resolve of people in favour of partition. Finally, Jinnah quite
expectedly I must say, brought out the Scheduled Caste card and stated
that in the event of partition, Scheduled Castes would be at the *“mercy
of the caste Hindus* *in western and the other at the mercy of the
Muslims in Eastern Pakistan.”* His hopes though were dashed when it was
pointed out to him that various Scheduled Castes groups in Bengal had
submitted memorandum in favour of partition.¹⁹

**A Subsidiary Pakistan**

The fact that there was an inherent contradiction in Jinnah’s arguments
was not lost on the Viceroy Mountbatten. Jinnah supported ‘two-nation
theory’ in India but did not follow the same logic in the provinces of
Punjab and Bengal. Mountbatten had stated that if he accepted Jinnah’s
logic for the whole of India, he can’t just *stop short at provinces*
(emphasis mine). But to Jinnah’s credit, he still was able to persuade
Mountbatten despite his reservations, to lobby for the United Bengal
scheme. Mountbatten had even tried to convince the upper authorities to
give exemptions to Bengal and allow it to become an independent state
but his efforts were thwarted when Congress high command remained
resolute on having partition. Jinnah expected the proposed sovereign
United Bengal to remain ‘friendly’ as mentioned earlier but in reality
it was just a sugar coated word for the real deal which he and
Suhrawardy had in mind. He reportedly stated his intentions to the
Viceroy as well. His words were:

***“with its Muslim majority, an independent Bengal would be sort of
subsidiary Pakistan.”²⁰***

But there was a major roadblock in this United Bengal plan. Sarat
Chandra Bose had stated in his agenda that the United Bengal would have
joint electorate, but Suhrawardy was obviously not forthcoming on this.
He knew that agreeing for joint electorates would nullify the very
argument of two nation theory and thus refused to give his approval for
it. The result was that Bose disassociated himself from the scheme
completely. But another interesting point is that Sarat Bose never till
his death gave up the idea of two provinces of Bengal together in union.
²¹

Apparently the Bengal Provincial Muslim League had already started
distributing pamphlets which depicted United Bengal as *Azad Pakistan.
²²* They wanted all of it, at any cost but when none of it seemed
possible, at last Jinnah as a last resort, tried to get Calcutta for
Eastern Pakistan but even that seemed impossible so by the end his only
hope was to get Calcutta declared a Free Port. We all now how that
turned out. While it is a fact that finally Bengal was divided but it is
also a fact that this is not at all what the Suhrawardy and Jinnah had
in mind.

**Much Needed Clarity**

The contradiction was apparent between the demand of United Bengal at
one end and two nation theory at other but the Muslim League wanted to
use them simultaneously for furthering its own needs. This fact was
brought out aptly by the Hindu Mahasabha leader Dr. Syama Prasad
Mukherjee who made a great contribution in making the pro-partition
movement a driving force in the province of Bengal. B. Chakrabarty
mentions that *“the success of the agitation for partition was
attributed to a large extent to the preponderant Mahasabha and its
leader S. P. Mookerjee, who spearheaded a fierce attack on the united
Bengal scheme.”* Mookerjee’s statement provides a lot of clarity:

> ***“..according to Jinnah, ‘Hindus and Muslims are two separate
> nations and Muslims must have their homeland and their own state.’
> Therefore Hindus in Bengal who constituted almost half of Bengal’s
> population, ‘may well demand that they must not be compelled to live
> within the Muslim state.”***
>
> ***B. Chakrabarty, The Partition of Bengal and Assam, 1932-1947
> Contour of Freedom.  
> ***

**The Long Memory**

Any hopes which were still lingering for the United Bengal scheme died
after the June 3rd 1947 announcement by the British Government in which
the partition plan was finalized and later the provincial assemblies
also voted in favour of partition.

Though these events took place in the span of merely two months, the
results were very far reaching. In the long memory of majority of the
Hindus in Bengal, the Islamic rule of the province had always been
remembered as that period of barbarism which no Hindu wanted to go back
to. The threat that their lives would be just as second rate as they had
been in the past many centuries was never so real as it had been in
those final years before independence.

Had the Muslim League led government given a civilized administration
after coming to power in 1945, than that would have been a welcome
surprise and may even had augmented the support for a United Bengal.
Though the support even then would have been for a United Bengal which
would remain part of the Indian Union as has been discussed above. But
the League behaved like it was expected to behave. The carnage of
anti-Hindu Calcutta Killings of 1946 proved beyond doubt that the fears
of every Hindu were as legitimate as they had been for the last many
centuries.

League’s blatant disregard and conscious persecution of Hindus made sure
that the Hindu public of Bengal saw the hoax behind the constant
hammering of ‘Bengaliness uniting different religions’ that Suhrawardy
was trying to sell. United and sovereign Bengal was always going to be a
subsidiary Pakistan as Jinnah had said.

The plight of Hindus in Eastern Pakistan after 1947 and in Bangladesh
after 1971 has vindicated every fear of those times. Ever since the
decision of partition was announced, it is a rather shameful fact that
the Indian State had disappointed in providing a sense of security and
soothing the wounds of Hindu minority in its both eastern and western
neighbourhood. The welcome change in this policy through CAA is just
scratching the surface. There is a very long road ahead. The state of
West Bengal itself has to fight its long and bloody history of communist
rule. Even the current West Bengal government with its open support to
Islamists has created a plethora of challenges for the Bengali Hindus.
And when it comes to their treatment of minorities, the current Islamic
states of Pakistan and Bangladesh, no matter their chequered history and
huge differences in economy, are still what we can say – different sides
of the same coin.

**Conclusion**

In these rocky times, we therefore as aware citizens of this nation have
to understand why and how we reached here. Why the demand for united and
sovereign Bengal was so vehemently rejected. And if this idea is again
propped up by vested interests, then its history has to be etched in
minds of every concerned Indian, Bengali or not, that this United Bengal
scheme even at that time was nothing but a stratagem of creating a
Greater Pakistan by other means.

**References:**

1.  *[History and Culture of the Indian People (Struggle for Freedom),
    Volume XI.](https://archive.org/details/struggleforfreed00bhar/page/55/mode/2up)*
2.  Mitra, A. (1990). The Great Calcutta Killings of 1946: What Went
    before and After.*Economic and Political Weekly,**25*(5), 273-285.
    Retrieved November 13, 2020, from
    [http://www.jstor.org/stable/4395903](http://www.jstor.org/stable/4395903 )
3.  *ibid*.
4.  *ibid*.
5.  *ibid*.
6.  Roy, H. (2009). A Partition of Contingency? Public Discourse in
    Bengal, 1946-1947.*Modern Asian Studies,**43*(6), 1355-1384.
    Retrieved November 13, 2020, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/40285016>
7.  Chhanda Chatterjee, *Syama Prasad Mukerjee, the Hindu Dissent and
    the Partition of Bengal 1932-1947.*
8.  Bidyut Chakrabarty, *The Partition of Bengal and Assam, 1932-1947
    Contour of Freedom.*
9.  *ibid*.
10. De, A. (1976). SARAT CHANDRA BOSE ON INDIAN NATIONAL QUESTION : A
    PLEA FOR SOVEREIGN BENGAL.*Proceedings of the Indian History
    Congress,**37*, 389-395. Retrieved November 13, 2020, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44138998> .
11. *ibid*.
12. *ibid*.
13. B. Chakrabarty, *Contour of Freedom..*
14. *ibid.*
15. *ibid.*
16. Roy, H. *A Partition of Contingency?..*
17. *ibid.*
18. *ibid*.
19. B*.* Chakrabarty*, *Contour of Freedom..**
20. *ibid.*
21. *De, Amalendu. *Sarat Chandra Bose on Indian National Question…**
22. B*.* Chakrabarty*, Contour of Freedom..*

This article has also been published on [Indic
Today.](https://www.indictoday.com/long-reads/united-bengal-greater-pakistan-by-other-means/)

