+++
title = "INDIAN INDIC AND"
full_title = "INDIAN INDIC AND SAMSKRIT"
date = "2019-09-21"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VG1wck1rOVVVVFJQVkUwMFRYYzlQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VG1wck1rOVVVVFJQVkUwMFRYYzlQUT09).

INDIAN  INDIC AND SAMSKRIT 



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1582625456bharat.jpg)

India, Indica, Indian, Indic are some of the words which are in use for
a long time. Hence Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS), Indic Knowledge
Systems (IKS), Ancient Indian Knowledge Systems, Traditional Indian
Knowledge, Indic Knowledge, etc. are widely used today in academic and
intellectual debates and writings. It is well known that European
scholars used the words Indic, Indica, India, etc. to denote Bharat and
anything and everything that is Bharatiya. The fact that the words India
and Indic have become part and parcel of the English educated elite’s
collective consciousness is a classic example for our Aatmavismriti.  
  
The term Bharatiya Knowledge Systems (BKS) may be used if the knowledge
treasure hidden in all the Indian languages has to be conveyed. But when
you talk in the context of Samskrit language, literature, Shastras,
Vedas etc. when you mean the knowledge treasure nurtured and carried on
through Samskrit literature, why don’t you use Samskrit Knowledge
Systems (SKS) instead of IKS? If you use IKS, Samskrit language doesn’t
benefit from it, Samskrit doesn’t come into focus, only the content gets
highlighted, not the container. Knowledge treasure is the content and
Samskrit language is the container. Both content and container are
important. But when one is highlighted and the other is neglected, it is
the duty of the responsible citizens to bring the other one also to the
attention of the nation. Without container, content cannot be passed on
to the future generation and it could not be nurtured further.  
  
Samskrit language has been the principal, though not the only, vehicle
of Bharatiya Knowledge Systems from the time immemorial. Sanskrit was
the medium of communication, education, justice, administration, trade,
commerce, art, entertainment, research and of all modes of intellectual
debates till a few centuries ago. In fact it has been the pan-Asian
common cultural and educational language for a few millennia. Bharat was
never a monolingual country. Samskrit coexisted with and complemented
all the Bharatiya languages and their literature. It has been the
primary source of inspiration, vocabulary, thought and knowledge
resource for most of the Bharatiya languages. Samskrit is not just a
language, it is a Jeevan Darshan. It is the voice of Bharat’s soul and
wisdom. Samskrit is the link between our past and present. If you set
aside a few aberrations, omissions and out-dated customs either found in
Samskrit literature or wrongly interpreted or falsely attributed to
Samskrit, this language is the strongest underlying force of unity and
harmony of Bharat as a nation. One of the greatest contributions of
Samskrit is the inclusive knowledge tradition and inclusive culture of
this land. Without Samskrit, Bharat would not have been there. Sans
Samskrit, Bharat would not remain Bharat. Hence the significance of this
container and the necessity of its continuity need to be highlighted.  
  
When you say Traditional Indian Knowledge, it includes tribal and
indigenous knowledge. Using the term Samskrit Knowledge Systems (SKS)
emphasizes the knowledge, science, technology, wisdom, etc. treasured in
Samskrit literature including Yoga, Ayurveda etc. SKS underlines the
uniqueness of Samskrit since majority or most of the knowledge streams
of ancient Bharat are the contribution of Samskrit. It is true that many
languages like Pali, Prakrit, Tamil, etc. are also great repositories of
ancient knowledge and everyone need to support unearthing and promoting
those knowledge systems as well. PKS or TKS could also be used where
ever necessary and to convey all of them together the term BKS could be
used as mentioned above. But those who are concerned and engaged in
popularization of Samskrit need to popularize the term Samskrit
Knowledge Systems or SKS.  
  
Many important Samskrit works were translated into other languages with
the hope that once people know and appreciate the meaning of Samskrit
works through translations, they would study Samskrit language and read
the originals in Samskrit. But alas! Even after a few centuries of
translations, people still read the translation of Bhagadvadgita and not
the Bhagavadgita in Samskrit. In the same way, Samskrit or Bharat would
never replace Indic or India automatically unless you start using it
assertively. Aatmajaagriti would be better possible by using Atmeeya
words in Samskritam.  
  
By using ‘SKS’, in the long run, you can impress upon the people the
relevance of Samskrit, you can promote a stronger theme ‘Samskrit for
Knowledge’, which would result in opening up of new avenues to bridge
the gap between ancient and modern streams of knowledge, and Samskrit
could eventually find a better and meaningful place in education and in
the national life.  
  
People have to come out of the colonial mindset. Time has come to change
the present narratives and to create new debates. Till now you were
engaged in defensive mode, in negating the invading concepts and in
countering the imported ideologies. Here after Samskrit scholars need to
be more active and should lead the discourses and set the agenda. Sri
Rajiv Malhotra’s books, articles and interviews uploaded in
YouTube,www.rajivmalhotra.com, @RajivMessage (Twitter), Writings of Dr
Koenraad Elst- koenraadelst.blogspot.com, @Koenraad_Elst (Twitter),
koenraadelst.bharatvani.org, Indic Academy www.indicacademy.org,
@IndicAcademy (Twitter), Bharatiya Vidwat Parishad, Prof Balagangadhar’s
writings, @True Indology (Twitter), etc. are some of the best sources in
this regard. Every patriot, Samskrit scholar in particular, should look
into these resources.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 3367 \| 21-09-2019 10:40
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

