+++
title = "KNOW THE PATANJALI’S IDEAL! "
date = "2019-09-15"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFdwamVVNTZaelJQVkdNMFRXYzlQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFdwamVVNTZaelJQVkdNMFRXYzlQUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1582625030patanjalis_ideal.jpg)

**Vidwan Sri Janardana Hegde** is a rare living example of Maharshi
Patanjali’s description of “Shishtah”. The dictionary meaning of word
Shishtah is eminent person, distinguished person or wise man. But when a
question is raised in the context of different words being used in
different places or by different people for the same meaning and which
word should be considered as appropriate, the great Acharya of three
Shastras i.e. Yoga, Vyakarana and Ayurveda, Patanjali in his Vyakarana
Mahabhashya says that words used by Shishtas should be considered as
right words. Further he explains who the Shishtas are – कुम्भीधान्याः,
अलोलुपाः, कारणम् अन्तरा शास्त्रपारगाः शिष्टाः. Here he says three
qualities of a Shishta. 1) Kumbhidhaanya – If you go inside his house
you will find only one pot full of food grain’s stock which would be
sufficient to live for a few days or for a few weeks. It means that he
is not interested in unnecessary accumulation of wealth. 2) Alolupaah –
Not greedy. Happy with whatever God gives. 3) Kaaranam antaraa
shaastra-paaragaah – One who studies many Shaastraas without looking
into what material benefit he will get by studying that Shaastra, but
studying it for the sake of knowledge only. One who possesses all the
above three qualities is called a Shishta.  
  
Janardana Hegde after his Vidwan and Shiksha Shastri courses became
Sevavrati of Samskrit Vibhag of Hindu Seva Pratishthana in 1981. (That
Samskrita Vibhag of HSP later transformed into Samskrita Bharati) We
together conducted the first 10 Days Samskrita Sambhashana Shibir in two
batches simultaneously. Since then he has been tirelessly working for
the popularization of Samskrit language, doing research in Samskrit
language usage, writing books for students, translating books from other
languages to Samskrit, doing creative writing in Samskrit, editing books
and articles of other authors and mentoring junior Karyakartas. He has
been Editor of Sambhashana Sandesha, the most popular Samskrit monthly,
from its inception, though with a break in between. His commitment and
dedication to the cause of Samskrit is total and unparalleled. He did
not see or seek anything else in life, except Samskrit. I still remember
the beginning days of our ‘Speak Samskrit Movement’ when we used to
discuss our dreams, aspirations and the future programs together. I was
always in a hurry and ambitious, he was ideal and practical. I was a
dreamer, he was an executor. I was a speaker, he was a writer. I spent
most of the time outside the office he spent it inside the office giving
every type of logistic support to the movement. I still remember those
initial days when we were living hand to mouth, Janardana Mahodaya with
his witty one liner used to raise our spirits. He remained simple to the
core all his life, in every aspect of life and excelled rest of us in
knowledge and ideals, in work and contribution. His wife Smt Nagaratna
Hegde, a Samskrit scholar and volunteer, too lived and breathed
Samskrit, made her home ‘Samskrit Home’ and Sri Udayana Hegde became the
first Samskrit mother tongue child of our times.  
  
![spf](article_img/CHAMUKS-1582625030CHAMU-1582625030patanjalis_ideal.jpg)
See the volume of literature he has produced. He has penned 15 books on
Vyakarana, 15 books of Creative writing, 10 books translated from other
languages into Samskrit, 17 Co-authored books, 9 books edited by him.
Moreover, it is the quality of literature he has produced rather than
the quantity, which is par excellence. His books are the guiding spirit
of Samskrit language use in Samskrit Bharati. Many of the inspiring
songs sung in Samskrita Bharati, which have been motivating lakhs of
Karyakartas everyday all over the world, are penned by Janardana
Mahodaya. Those songs did not come out from his intellect but blossomed
out from his heart.  
It is unusual for us to publicly extol our co-worker. But this is a
special occasion. Sri Janardana Mahodaya has been selected for the
coveted ‘President’s Certificate of Honor’ award of 2019. Till now he
has been awarded with 12 prestigious awards. Kalidasa says in
Kumarasambhavam (5-45) – “न रत्नमन्विष्यति मृग्यते हि तत्” The gem does
not search, it gets searched. This quote is the apt description of
Janardana Mahodaya. As far as the Samskrit language usage is concerned
he is the authority in the world today. He is a Shishta as per
Patanjali, but for us he is Vishishta!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 5951 \| 15-09-2019 12:10
AM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

