+++
title = "THE MAKING OF PRIYAVRATA"
full_title = "THE MAKING OF PRIYAVRATA"
date = "2019-09-11"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VDBSUk5FNUVTVFZQVkVVMVRWRTlQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VDBSUk5FNUVTVFZQVkVVMVRWRTlQUT09).

THE MAKING OF PRIYAVRATA 



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1582624465the_making_of_priyavrata.jpeg)

Buildings are built brick by brick. Priyavrata’s life is being built day
by day and hour by hour for the last fifteen years and ten months.
Passing out Tenali Maha Pariksha is only a beginning of a new chapter in
his life story, a story of purpose, perseverance and performance.  
  
When Sri Devadatta Patil, in search of a real Guru, went to Kanchi and
requested 78 years’ old Sri Goda Subrahmanya Shastri to teach him Nyaya
Shastra, after much pursuance, Shastrigal who all his life lived for the
purpose of Shastra Shiksha and Shastra Raksha, made Devadatta Patil take
three vows, one of which was that Devadatta should not go for any
University job until he creates a few scholars like him. Devadatta Patil
got a purpose in life and created many firsts in the history of Shastra
learning and Tenali Maha Pariksha. Later Aparna also became his
Sahadharmini in that purpose. Purposeful life made their lives more
meaningful and colorful though full of challenges. Same is the story of
Sri Mohan Lal Sharma, Priyavrata’s Vyakarana Guru, who was accompanying
a Sant as his cook. The Sant stayed in Devadatta Patil’s Pathashala for
a week. Before leaving, young Mohan had made up his mind to come back
and study under Devadatta Patil. He not only came back within a week but
studied Nyaya initially under Devadatta Patil, later Vyakarana in Andhra
under Sri Kompella Satyanarayana Shastri as planned by Devadatta Patil,
passed Tenali Maha Pariksha with distinction and came back as Guru of
Priyavrata. Though Mohan Lal Sharma got an offer of Asst. Professorship
in a reputed Samskrit University due to his scholarship, by then he had
found the purpose of his life and hence the attractive pay scale did not
distract him from his life mission. That purpose in his life created a
wonder called Priyavrata. Purpose determines the performance. Priyavrata
is the fourth generation inheritor of that great Shastra Tradition in
our life time.  
  
Tenali Pariksha, Rajamandri Pariksha, Nagar Pariksha etc are the
existing reputed exams in the traditional Shastra field on the lines of
ancient system of examination. There is also a method called Shalaka
Pariksha. All of them are text based learning and text based exams very
unique in the world. The most important and highly scholarly fourteen
Granthas (texts) are prescribed for exams in every branch of Shastra.
Students are supposed to memorize every Grantha completely, thoroughly
understand the important commentary of that Grantha and be able to
answer any question on any page of the text randomly asked by the
examiner on both the aspects i.e. memorization and understanding of the
commentary. Usually it takes six months to complete one text in this
manner. But the time varies depending upon three aspects i.e. the Guru
and his/her teaching method, the student and his/her qualities and the
daily time spent in the learning process. The most important two
qualities expected of a student are grasping power and the power to
retain it in memory. The process of teaching and learning has three
parts –1) पाठः (Paathah) teaching 2) चिन्तनम् (Chintanam) students
individually or collectively think, discuss, argue, question and ponder
over the lessons taught that day 3) अनुवादः (Anuvaadah) Reproducing the
previous day’s teaching in front of the Guru by each student till his
satisfaction as a prerequisite for the beginning of next lesson. All
three steps are mandatory part of everyday learning. The whole process
is completely student centered. These three steps help every student in
understanding the lesson, having clarity, registering it in memory and
in articulating or explaining it to others. This three stepped teaching
learning process is one of the unique features of the traditional
learning of Shastras and this makes all the difference. Process
determines the Product.  
  
The parents spoke only in Samskrit with Priyavrata till the age of four.
Hence his mother tongue is Samskrit. Then he started acquiring Marathi
from people around him and later started learning Hindi and English in
school up to 2nd Std. Experience showed that the knowledge of Samskrit
language helped him in learning other languages easily. By then he had
memorized entire Bhagavadgita at home and took test in Sri Sharada
Peetham at Sringeri. Anyone who, of any age, cast or gender, learns the
Bhagavadgita by heart completely and passes the oral test, which is
conducted every month, is rewarded with a certificate and a cash prize
of Rs 21000/- by Sri Sharada Peetham. Priyavrata at the age of 7 not
only passed it as the youngest to pass it but also stood first in the
batch and got special blessings from His Holiness Jagadguru Sri Bharati
Teertha Maha Swamiji.  
  
It is very difficult for me to give even a brief account of what and how
Priyavrata has studied till now. He had home schooling from 2nd Std.
onwards. Passed 8th Std exam as a private candidate. Will be writing
10th exam next year and the modern stream education would continue in
the following years in the same way. He can speak and write in 4
languages. He learns Rigveda every day and 5 out of 8 Ashtakas of it are
over. He learnt Ashtadhyayi, Bhagavadgita, Niruktam etc. by heart before
he was 8. During the last 8 years, apart from the above, Priyavrata has
completed the study of 9 Nyaya Shastra Granthas and 14 Vyakarana Shastra
Granthas, passed 14 exams and final Maha Pariksha of Tenali and 10 exams
of Nagar Pariksha like Tenali and has started learning Mimamsa Shastra
from his father. His daily routine starts at 5:30 in the morning and
ends at 10:30 in the night. Every day is so hectic and tedious that we
can’t even imagine. 2 hrs Shastra Patha, 2 hrs its Anuvaada, 2 hrs
Chintanam, 3 hrs Veda Patha and its repeating practice, half an hour
Pranayama, 1 hr Surya Namaskar and playing in the field and 1hr for two
times Sandhyavandanam each half an hour. Apart from these he also
teaches a Grantha to 3 students and helps other students in Chintanam in
the Gurukulam. In spite of all these, helping his mother in her works is
his passion. In between he has to find time for his personal daily
routine works like bathing, washing clothes, eating food etc., reading
stories and general books, writing practice and studying modern
subjects. One day is holiday in a fortnight on every Pratipada Tithi.
Use of mobile is permitted for only 4 hours duration on the holiday. Yet
he is up to date in GK and contemporary developments. His perseverance
is an inspiration to all, particularly to every student who has a
longing to achieve something great in life. Perseverance too determines
the performance.  
  
Passing Tenali Maha Pariksha and being felicitated and blessed by Sri
Shankara Vijayendra Saraswati Maha Swami ji of Kanchi Mutt recently is a
beginning of a new journey for Priyavrata. His next mission is to study
all the 80 Aahnikas of Vyakarana Mahabhashya and take Maha Pariksha on
the same. People study only the first 9 Aahnikas in their life time
where as Priyavrata is venturing to study 80 Aahnikas in next three
years which no one has done till now. After that, following the
footsteps of his father, he would venture to take Maha Pariksha in other
Shastras also. His story is a story of excellent performance at every
level of every pursuit. Priyavrata’s extraordinary feat of learning is a
story of height ascended day by day and depth attained hour by hour. You
may tell it to any student who you want to climb the unclimbed and to
any youth who you want to make the impossible possible!  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 4980 \| 11-09-2019 11:40
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

