+++
title = "The death of narasa"
full_title = "The death of narasa nAyaka – another lesson forgotten by us"
date = "2013-04-24"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/04/24/the-death-of-narasa-nayaka-another-lesson-forgotten-by-us/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/04/24/the-death-of-narasa-nayaka-another-lesson-forgotten-by-us/).

The death of narasa nAyaka – another lesson forgotten by us



Narasa nAyaka, the trusted commander in chief of sAluva narasimha, had
taken control of the administration of the vijayanagar empire after the
death of the emperor. Saluva’s son was a young boy and narasa was ruling
in the name of the boy-emperor. The greatness of narasa can be seen from
the fact that he conquered raichur doab from adil khan, repulsed the
gajapati army and brought the rebelling governors of his southern
territories under his firm control. When adil khan tried to recover
raichur and mudgal, he was routed at the battles. He took refuge in a
fort to the north of tungabhadrA. He feigned a desire to surrender and
called for a dialogue with narasa. When narasa went to the fort to
conduct diplomatic negotiations, he was attacked and killed along with
his seventy retainers.

Such treachery is not uncommon in the history of the mahAmada mata. But
this lesson was time and again forgotten by us. The last hindu ruler of
madurai-tirucirApalli, rAnii miinAks.ii, tried to make a pact with
chanda sahib. Once again, chanda sahib proved that treachery against
kAfir-s is the norm of the mahAmada mata. The followers of the unmatta
mata are supposed to tread on the path of their founder whom they call
the last prophet. Said prophet used such treachery with impunity. He had
a pact of non-aggression with the meccans. It was due to this pact that
meccans allowed him and his party to retire without butchering them when
they had the chance. The founder of mahAmada cult paid the meccans back
with treachery. He attacked them without any warning. They never
expected an attack from him due to the pact and were thus, unprepared.
To break a solemn vow, to use treachery against kAfir-s is not a sin as
per their unmatta founder. Hindus have failed to learn this lesson. Even
as late as 1972, the woman ruling india made the same mistake as ranii
miinAks.ii. She believed that the rulers of our neighborhood unmatta
nation will remain true to their word and gave them a generous deal
under s’imlA agreement. We gained nothing out of it. Once again, the
mahAmada unmatta-s have proven that they have no sanctity for words when
dealing with kAfir-s. This is not a question of mere territorial
conquests but a war of annihilation. Not able to understand the enemy’s
psychological status is a path to self destruction. Kr.s.n.a used every
method of trick to win the war of mahAbhArata after it became clear that
kaurava-s were not abiding to the rules of a dhArmika war. When
abhimanyu was killed, pAn.d.ava-s stopped following the rules and
started using various treacherous methods themselves. It is the most
sensible approach. When your enemy is not following the rules, to abide
by the rules is to bound oneself (thus giving advantage to your
opponent). Even more ridiculous is to expect your opponent to abide by
the rules in future when they have exhibited their unwillingness several
times. Hindus seem to be making a very stupid mistake. Unless we correct
it in the near future, we might be forced to pay another huge price for
this colossal mistake which is being repeated due to an unwillingness to
learn from history.

