+++
title = "First thoughts on"
full_title = "First thoughts on omniscience in Indian thought"
date = "2017-07-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/14/first-thoughts-on-omniscience-in-indian-thought/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/14/first-thoughts-on-omniscience-in-indian-thought/).

First thoughts on omniscience in Indian thought

“Omniscience” (*sārvajñya*) assumes many different meanings in the
various Indian philosophies. The understanding possibly most common in
European and Anglo-American thought, which sees omniscience as including
the knowledge of any possible thing in the past, present and future, is
neither the only, nor the most common interpretation of omniscience.

**Range of application of the “omni” in omniscience**  
Jaina authors tend to construe omniscience in the above way, namely as
the knowledge of all possible states of affairs, attribute it to the
Jinas and stress the innate potentiality of omniscience as being open to
everybody (apart from God, given that they don’t believe in an absolute
ultimate God).

Different Buddhist authors held widely different opinions about this
topic. The Theravāda commentator Buddhaghosa (who lived in Śrī Laṅka in
the 5th c. and wrote or systematised commentaries on the Buddhist Pāli
canon) describes the Buddha’s omniscience not as the simultaneous
knowledge of all things at the same time, but as his possibility to know
without any obstacle whatever he fixed his attention on. In other words,
the Buddha would know everything about person X as soon as he tried, but
he would not know at the same time anything about all possible people
and states of affairs. Buddhaghosa could in this way avoid paradoxes
such as way would an omniscient Buddha try to beg for food at houses
where no one is home (as it happens in some Suttas of the Canon).

Later Buddhist authors such as Dharmakīrti would suggest that the Buddha
does not know any possible thing, including irrelevant things. He rather
knows whatever is relevant. In this sense, the “omni” in omniscience (in
Sanskrit: the *sarva* in *sarvajña*) is understood in a selective way,
just like the “omni” in omnivore, which does not mean that one eats
books or musical tunes.

Similarly, Advaita Vedānta authors stressed the identity of omniscience
with complete knowledge of what is relevant, namely the only reality
which is not illusory, the brahman. In this sense, omniscience has a
very limited range of application, and yet covers whatever is not
illusory.

**Can human beings achieve omniscience?**  
Most schools accepting omniscience deem that human beings could achieve
it, although only with much effort. In this sense, omniscience is
usually considered the result of yogipratyakṣa \`intellectual
intuition’, the immediate grasp of whatever content. It needs to be
direct, since inference and the other instruments of knowledge are known
to ultimately depend on perceptual data and perception cannot grasp
neither past nor future things (nor any other thing which is remote in
space or remote because of other hindering conditions, for instance
other people’s minds), so that omniscience needs to be based on a direct
and independent access to such things.

It is not by chance that yogipratyakṣa literally means \`the perception
of the yogin’, since it was often first mentioned in connection with the
special powers which yogin alone are said to be able to grasp. However,
yogins are, unlike ṛṣis, not beyond human reach. They are considered to
be a possible development among special but not anormal human beings.

Basing on the same elements, the authors of the Mīmāṃsā school
altogether deny the possibility of omniscience. They explain that
omniscience contradicts our experience, where knowledge always increases
but never stops to be expandable. Moreover, no one could judge the
omniscience of someone else. Thus, Mīmāṃsā authors say, the accounts
about the Buddha’s omniscience cannot be trustworthy, since no one but
an omniscient can vouch for someone else’s omniscience.

These were my first thoughts on the topic of omniscience. I will
certainly add more about God’s omniscience in the next weeks. **What
strikes *you* about omniscience in India?**

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
