+++
title = "Cosmopolitan Philosophy"
full_title = "Cosmopolitan Philosophy Western and Indian Philosophy in 20th century Oxford University"
date = "2017-07-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/29/cosmopolitan-philosophy-western-and-indian-philosophy-in-20th-century-oxford-university/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/29/cosmopolitan-philosophy-western-and-indian-philosophy-in-20th-century-oxford-university/).

Cosmopolitan Philosophy: Western and Indian Philosophy in 20th century Oxford University

Dear All, this is a draft of a course summary. I will be teaching it
with a Western philosopher in spring 2018. We want to focus on Indian
and Western philosophy of mind and some basics in epistemology. We’ll
also focus on Matilal and the Western philosopherswith whom he engaged.
Any thoughts would be appreciated!



**Jonathan Edelmann and Robert D’Amico**

**Spring 2018**

Today many scholarswould agree that the discipline of philosophy has
been practiced in manycultures. Thus, academics today write books on
Indian philosophers, Chinesephilosophers, Arabic philosophers and so
on, along with books on Greek, German,American, and other European
philosophers. But it was not always the case thatscholars recognized
the existence of philosophy in non-Western civilizations.While there
were many that contributed to a more cosmopolitan understanding
ofphilosophy, thiscourse focuses on Bimal Krishna Matilal (1935–1991).
In 1976Matilal became Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and
Ethics at Oxford Universityand a Fellow of All Souls College. He took
as one his intellectual aims that“India should not, indeed cannot,be
left out of any general study of thehistory of logic and
philosophy.”We focus on this rare academic convergence of two
differentphilosophical traditions roughly between 1960 and 1980. While
India and Europeboth have long and distinguishedphilosophical
traditions, they are rarelystudied comparatively or in conversation
with one another. It is understandablethat scholars tend to study
either Western or India philosophy in insolationbecause the complexity
and precision of each traditionrequires a considerableamount of time
to master. This team-taught course, however, allows us to drawupon our
individual specializations, thereby building a conversation
acrossdisciplines. You will learn the various efforts to bring Western
and Easternphilosophy together against the background of these deep
questions aboutphilosophy’s future. The readings and topics in the
course are at times demanding.Although this course does not presuppose
any background knowledge in eitherWestern or Indianphilosophy, we hope
that students will rise to this challengeand be led by the course to
think more clearly and critically about suchdiverse traditions and
their place in a genuinely cosmopolitan society.
