+++
title = "The dhamma is not a"
full_title = "The dhamma is not a transcendent law"
date = "2017-07-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/09/the-dhamma-is-not-a-transcendent-law/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/09/the-dhamma-is-not-a-transcendent-law/).

The dhamma is not a transcendent law

In his interesting recent [Buddhism and Political
Theory](https://books.google.com/books/about/Buddhism_and_Political_Theory.html?id=YN0RDAAAQBAJ),
Matthew Moore sums up current scholarly work on Buddhist ethics noting
“There are several major debates ongoing in the field, particularly
whether early Buddhist ethics are better understood as consequentialist
or a version of virtue ethics (almost no one argues for deontology)…”
(113)

My friend and fellow blogger [Justin
Whitaker](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/) is a major
part of the “almost”. I [once described
him](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/taking-back-ethics/) as a
“voice in the wilderness” for interpreting Buddhist ethics in terms of
Kantian deontology. But I was delighted to hear that he has recently
completed his dissertation, in a way that should make that voice a
little louder. And I was happy to have a chance to read it.

To say that I am delighted that the work exists is not, of course, to
say that I *agree* with it. I am not convinced by the dissertation’s
attempt to read Pali Buddhism in terms of Kantian ethics, and I will
explain.

The dissertation compares Pali Buddhism to Kant in a variety of ways,
but the ones which I find most interesting, and are probably most
central to his account, are the ones in which Buddhism is taken to
articulate some sort of *moral law* independent of human desire and
motivation – as Kant also does. Such a claim is of particular interest
to me because of its take on the question of [ethical internalism and
externalism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/02/why-should-we-do-anything/).
I have typically taken Buddhists to articulate an internalist approach –
where they appeal to our preexisting motivations and derive the value of
the path from those. A prime example is Śāntideva’s insistence that
suffering should be prevented because [“no one disputes
that!”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/the-buddhist-problem-of-value/)
– the only question then being whether we should prevent our own
suffering, or everyone’s. Justin suggests an alternative, externalist,
reading of Pali Buddhist texts – in which they posit a moral law that
human beings are obliged to follow irrespective of their motivations.

Justin pursues the idea of a moral law with respect to two key Pali
Buddhist concepts, *dhamma* and *kamma* (equivalents of the Sanskrit –
and English – words dharma and karma). On p24 he stresses these two
concepts as central to his interpretation. I’ll talk about the former
this time and the latter next time. Justin claims that the term *dhamma*
“means not only \[the Buddha’s\] teachings or doctrine, but also the
truth or nature of reality itself, toward which the teachings were
claimed to be pointing. This truth is thought to exist prior to and
apart from the Buddha’s own discovery and exposition of it.” (21) I
understand that such a claim about dharma is common in later Mahāyāna
traditions such as the Yogācāra, which identify a cosmic Dharmakāya
(dharma body of the Buddha). I was intrigued to hear that there might be
a support for it in the Pali texts that are the dissertation’s focus.
But where do these texts actually *say* this?

Justin’s key reference for this claim is the Paccaya Sutta (found at
[Saṃyutta Nikāya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samyutta_Nikaya) 12.20,
SN II.25 in the Pali Text Society edition). Later in the dissertation
(p108) he quotes Abraham Vélez de Céa in a similar vein – “It is true
that the Dharma could be interpreted as a transcendent reality with
respect to Buddhas because it can exist even when there are no Buddhas
in the universe” – but it turns out Vélez de Céa is getting it from the
very same sutta. So the claim that the dhamma exists as a transcendent
moral reality seems to stand or fall primarily, if not entirely, on the
Paccaya Sutta. Justin (pp 21-2) quotes this sutta as follows:

> Whether the Tathāgatas \[Buddhas\] arise or the Tathāgatas do not
> arise, that condition stands, the groundedness of the Dhamma, the
> lawfulness of the Dhamma, this causality. A Tathāgata gains highest
> awakening to this and understands it.

Striking, yes? It would seem that this sutta says the dhamma exists
whether or not there are buddhas around to teach it. But does it? Let us
look a little closer. Justin’s footnote to the quote notes that the
Buddha actually “is speaking specifically of dependent origination,
*paṭiccasamuppāda*, sometimes said to be equivalent to the Dhamma.” But
that is not quite right. The source Justin quotes for the “sometimes” is
the [Mahāhatthipadopama
Sutta](http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.028.than.html).
What that sutta actually says is not that dependent origination *is* the
dhamma. It says that one who *sees* the dhamma *sees* dependent
origination, and vice versa; to understand one is to understand the
other. But that doesn’t mean they’re the *same*. To understand the
nature of heat and how it works is, at some level, to understand cold –
but that doesn’t mean heat and cold are the same! And that is a
difference that really matters here, because while the dhamma (in a
Buddhist context) is unquestionably good, [dependent origination is
bad!](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/03/buddhists-against-interdependence/)
The dhamma offers you a way *out* of the cycle of dependent origination
that otherwise, normally, traps you in suffering.

So in the Paccaya Sutta, what stands irrespective of buddhas is not the
dhamma itself but dependent origination. But it might nevertheless seem
that the sutta still describes dependent origination – “that condition”,
“this causality” – as “the groundedness of the Dhamma, the lawfulness of
the Dhamma”. Such a description would at least hint that there might be
a permanent dhamma grounded in the reality of dependent origination.

But it seems to me that that too is *not* what this sutta is saying. The
terms translated as “the groundedness of the Dhamma, the lawfulness of
the Dhamma” are *dhammaṭṭhitatā dhammaniyāmatā*. And if we look to
Buddhaghosa’s *aṭṭhakathā* (commentary) on this sutta (available at the
wonderful [Pali Tipiṭaka site](http://tipitaka.org/romn/)), we find that
as Buddhaghosa parses out these words, he renders dhamma in the *plural*
(*dhammā*, *dhamme*).The groundedness and lawfulness are of *dhamma*s –
those mental states or elements to which everyday phenomena are
reducible – and not of *the Dhamma* itself. (This is itself assuming
that *niyāmatā* can be rendered “lawfulness”, which I think is itself
quite questionable; its usual meaning is more like “constraint”.) Those
*dhamma*s operate in ways grounded in the law of paṭicca samuppāda; it
is *that* groundedness, not the Buddha’s teaching, that exists
independently of the buddhas. It seems to me that Justin and Vélez de
Céa have both been misled on this point by a homophone.

Now it is possible that Buddhaghosa got the sutta wrong. Jayarava, in an
[excellent
post](http://jayarava.blogspot.com/2012/05/on-nature-of-experience.html)
on this passage, notes that the translations of both Thanissaro Bhikkhu
and Bhikkhu Bodhi render it “the dhamma”, as Justin does. But I don’t
see any reason to disagree with the canon’s most august commentator
*other* than the word of these translators. For I know of no other
passages in the Pali canon that suggest the dhamma as a cosmic reality.
(I’d be interested if anyone can find me some.) As far as I can tell,
the suggestion that it is, is a much later Yogācāra invention. Which
would suggest that if one really wanted to push this aspect of the
Kant-Buddhism comparison, one would probably want to go away from the
Pali and toward Yogācāra.

[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.](http://wp.me/pxfBj-12P)
