+++
title = "Karmic punishment is not"
full_title = "Karmic punishment is not a good thing"
date = "2017-07-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/23/karmic-punishment-is-not-a-good-thing/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/07/23/karmic-punishment-is-not-a-good-thing/).

Karmic punishment is not a good thing

I’m continuing to examine [Justin
Whitaker](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/)‘s
interpretation of Pali Buddhist ethics as Kantian moral law. I argued
[last time](http://wp.me/pxfBj-12P) that the concept of *dhamma* does
not serve in these texts as a universal, trans-human moral law. Here I
want to take a similar look at the concept of *kamma* – better known in
English as karma.

Justin claims that for Kant “the Moral Law is universal, concerned with
all (rational) beings, and is holistic in its conception of morality as
a guarantor to a just realm of ends (supported by the moral argument for
belief in God).” (47) I think this interpretation of Kant is missing
something in that Kant does not view the moral argument as demonstrating
that there actually *is* a guarantee of cosmic justice, only that we
must act *as if* there is (it is a regulative ideal). But I’ll leave
that aside here because I want to focus on the comparison to Buddhism.
Justin develops his comparison between karma and Kant’s moral law in
response to [Charles
Goodman](https://binghamton.edu/philosophy/people/faculty-goodman.html):

> Goodman argues that Kant holds the premise that ‘it is bad for the
> wicked to be happy and good for them to suffer’ whereas Buddhists are
> ‘committed to the idea that genuine great compassion motivates those
> who have it to relieve the suffering, and promote the happiness, of
> the virtuous and the wicked alike’ (199). While this is an acceptable
> assessment of Kant, it seems to conflate the Buddhist ideal of wishing
> happiness for all beings (Kant may well have wished the same), with
> the Buddhist philosophical reality of karma. For, as Keown recognised,
> both karma (with rebirth) and Kant’s God as judge of deeds in the
> afterlife guarantee the happiness of the good and the punishment of
> the wicked. (Whitaker 47)

What Justin misses here, I would argue, is this: while karma does indeed
reward the good and punish the wicked, *this is not viewed as a good
thing*. Karma is simply there, like the oceans and stars – and like old
age, disease and death. The Abrahamic God, inherited by Kant, is
righteous, omnibenevolent. Karma is not. Karma is not something that is
or should be celebrated; nobody in the Pali Canon, as far as I know,
says “let us rejoice that actions bear karmic fruit” or anything
similar. Quite the opposite: karma is an essential part of the *problem*
that is suffering. That is especially true of bad karma, but even the
karmic reward of a good rebirth in heaven is dangerous because heavenly
pleasures lead us to further attachment and make it harder to escape
suffering. So the Buddha and the *arhat*s (liberated ones) are
frequently said to be beyond *puñña* and *pāpa* ([good and bad
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/translating-pu%E1%B9%87ya-and-papa/))
– multiple times [in the Sutta
Nipāta](http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/kn/snp/snp.4.04.irel.html),
for example. That’s what we’re supposed to be aiming for – to get *out*
of the inhumane, callous causality that is karma.

It is not only karmic punishment that is suspicious. The texts make
frequent criticism of the punishment engaged in by kings, which is one
of the multiple reasons they offer for a [disengaged
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/).
The [Aggañña Sutta](link) claims that having a ruler punish wrongdoers
is necessary – *and bad*. Punishment is claimed to be *pāpaka* and
*akusala*. Similarly, in the [Mūgapakkha or Temīya
Jātaka](http://www.sacred-texts.com/bud/j6/j6004.htm) – one of the [Ten
Great Jātakas](http://www.buddha-images.com/10jatakas.asp) beloved
throughout the Buddhist world – the buddha-to-be, a prince, observes his
father punishing criminals, and thinks “Alas, because he is a king my
father is doing terrible (*atibhāriya*) things, which will take him to
hell.” So he pretends to be deaf-mute in order to avoid the awfulness
that is kingship. For us to punish wrongdoers, then, is a dangerous
thing, morally ambiguous at the very best. The universe’s way of
punishing wrongdoers, I think, is not much better.

Why is punishment such a bad thing? For one thing, it creates *more
suffering* – in the punisher as well as the recipient. Moreover, the
idea of punishment rests on the idea of *blame* – which, in turn,
requires a conception of selfhood and agency that Buddhist tradition
takes as suspect. Kant’s practical postulates – the three major ideas he
claims we must assume if we are to make sense of action and morality –
include not just God and immortality but *freedom*, freedom of the will.
But this is just what many Buddhist thinkers deny. Chapter VI of
Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra includes an explicit argument against free
will – and Śāntideva makes it clear that this argument is in there in
order to stop us from *blaming* others for their actions. We have no
more reason to put moral blame on them for their bad actions, than we
have reason to put moral blame on our stomach acid for a stomach ache –
because they have no more free will, no more agency, than the stomach
acid. (For this reason I have argued that on at least one interpretation
of “morality”, [Śāntideva is *opposed* to
morality](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/ethics-without-morality/).)

In this regard Justin goes terribly awry by citing one of the most
problematic passages in [*The Nature of Buddhist
Ethics*](https://www.amazon.com/Nature-Buddhist-Ethics-Damien-Keown/dp/0333913094),
by his teacher Damien Keown: “The discipline of ethics requires only
that one individual can be distinguished from another: to pursue the
issue of the ultimate ontological constitution of individual natures in
this context is to confuse ethics with metaphysics, and does not make
for a fruitful enquiry.” (19) In response let us first remember that
“ethics” and “metaphysics” are modern English terms, not classical
Buddhist ones. A separation made between the two is ours, not theirs; a
“confusion” between the two is one we are attributing to them.

But more importantly, Keown’s claim of unfruitfulness is asserted rather
than argued. I showed in my [2015 JBE
article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/)
why, with respect to Śāntideva at least, it is false: Buddhist thinkers
can and do explicitly derive ethical claims from metaphysical premises,
and we will misunderstand them if we ignore that fact in the way that
Keown tells us to do. Indeed, I suspect it is Keown’s disregard of
metaphysics that leads him eventually to proclaim, incorrectly, that
“although Buddhism has normative teachings, it does not have normative
ethics.” (See his article in the [festschrift for Charles
Prebish](https://www.amazon.com/Buddhist-Studies-India-America-Routledge/dp/0415599369).)
He believes that Buddhists don’t make ethical arguments, in a way that
my JBE article demonstrates is false – and that is because so many of
those arguments come from metaphysical premises. In this context,
Śāntideva’s argument from non-agency to non-blame is a clear example.

Now Śāntideva, of course, is a Mahāyāna thinker, writing many centuries
after the Pali texts that concern Justin. But Pali texts make scarcely
more room for agency than Śāntideva does – because agency is an
attribute of a *self*, that thing which it is of the highest importance
for us to deny. Arguably the entire point of the Abhidhamma system is to
give us a truer, more accurate way of speaking about human beings that
does not require reference to the inaccurate and misleading concepts of
selves and agency. [Maria Heim’s work on
Buddhaghosa](https://www.amazon.com/Forerunner-All-Things-Buddhaghosa-Intention/dp/0199331049)
shows us how Buddhaghosa’s work is concerned to articulate an ethical
vision that excludes the idea of agency.

It seems clear to me: the aspiration and hope of the Pali suttas is
*not* for the punishment of the wicked. That is merely a fact of life,
and a troubling and problematic one. The real ideal is for nobody to be
wicked in the first place. I may as well note that, while I do not share
the traditional Buddhist view of karmic rebirth, I *do* share this view
of punishment: sometimes we, or the world, must punish the wicked, but
this is a [terrible and regrettable
thing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/05/on-celebrating-the-death-of-an-enemy/).
An ideal and just world is not one in which Osama bin Laden receives
comeuppance for his wrongdoing, but one in which he and his fellows
cease to do wrong. One could argue that Kant’s [kingdom of
ends](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingdom_of_Ends) is similar, though
that bears some tension with Justin’s claim above that for Kant it is
*good* that the wicked suffer. But whatever Kant would think of a
Buddhist ideal situation, we do not live in it, but in a dark world full
of suffering – including both the suffering caused by wrongdoing and the
suffering caused by punishment, each of which is a bad thing. I think
Justin is right that Kant’s view is very different – but so much the
worse for Kant.

[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.](http://wp.me/pxfBj-12V)
