+++
title = "The BlackWhite Mortality"
full_title = "The BlackWhite Mortality Crossover"
date = "2012-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/09/the-black-white-mortality-crossover/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/09/the-black-white-mortality-crossover/).

The Black-White Mortality Crossover

Most of social science still operates as if there were no biological
differences among human groups. This so-called “uniformitarian”
assumption is pervasive and it works in the sense that a lot of research
money falls into the social science hole. On the other hand there are
several glaring instances in which it seems to fail badly: a typical
response to these is to look embarrassed and quickly change the subject
else to social-science-talk away at them, hoping they can be made to
disappear.

A recent such instance is the [“Hispanic Health
Paradox”](http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_02/sr02_152.pdf) in
which Hispanics in North America enjoy better health and live longer
than Anglos. For example, the table on page 11 shows that Hispanic
females have 2.7 more years of expectation of life at birth than do
Anglo females, 83.1 to 80.4 years. If poverty is the cause of health
disparities, how can this be?

An older instance is the “Black-White Crossover” in mortality between US
Black and White populations. In North America death rates for Whites are
notoriously lower than death rates for Blacks, so that the expectation
of life at birth is about five years greater for Whites. This
generalization holds at every age up to 70 to 80 at which times the
hazard of death curves cross. Eighty year old Blacks live longer, on
average, that 80 year old whites. A classic treatment is the monograph
by Manton and Stallard (1984). Much effort by demographers has been
directed at wishing this away but they just can’t get rid of it. Indeed,
today a Google Scholar search of “Black White Crossover” returns a
recent paper about breast cancer: Black women have a higher annual risk
before about age 50 and a lower annual risk after that age.

A few years ago Renee Pennington and I (Pennington and Harpending 1993)
did a lot of ethnographic research among Herero, about whom I often
write in this blog. They are prosperous Bantu-speaking ranchers in the
northern Kalahari of Namibia and Botswana. Unique in Africa, they have a
system in which every year is given a name. Everyone knows not only the
name of the year of his or her birth, they know the birth year names of
their parent and grandparents and occasionally even further back. Herero
are family fanatics, and you would know the birth years of your friends
in the same way that in North America you are likely to know the middle
names of your friends. In line with other posts at this blog about
Herero, “family” has nothing much to do with marriage, and hardly anyone
knew years of marriages and divorces. Year names are known back to the
early nineteenth century.

Few Herero know how the year names map to calendar years, but there are
specialists who curate year name lists. An informant might tell me that
his grandfather was born in “onburra ojomevaomengi”, year of heavy
rains. I could look it up in my copy of the name list and find it was
1854.

North American data about the crossover come from censuses mostly. How
many 85 year olds were there in the state last year and how many deaths
of 85 year olds? We were able to take advantage of the year system to
estimate mortality statistics from family history interviews. We used
life history information from living people and patched in information
from partial lifetimes of other family members using a Kaplan-Meier kind
of procedure. Details are in the book. At any rate our information was
completely different in kind from census data from large North American
populations. Both have weaknesses, and it is interesting to compare our
estimated hazard of death curves with census results.
[Here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/5nn3l8dkxfz77ip/manstal.png) are the
estimated curves for US White and Herero males and females: The pattern,
for what it is worth, is a great exaggeration of the North American
pattern: the crossover occurs way earlier in the lifespan.

We have a brief discussion of the phenomenon in the book but we have
never looked any further into the matter. I have been meaning to put a
graduate student on the issue for years but I always forget. At any rate
we did a quick and dirty sampling of world censuses and produced this
[scatter plot](https://www.dropbox.com/s/l7n0i2n5bguwcvy/e075.png). The
horizontal axis is expectation of life at birth, longer lifespans going
east. The vertical axis plots the probability that a 75 year old will
live to 80, higher survival from 75 to 80 going north. There is a lot of
scatter but there is an interesting regularity. African populations are
the furthest north, European populations in the middle, Asian
populations at the bottom. At oldest ages African live the longest,
Europeans are intermediate, and Asians have the shortest remaining
lifespans.

This needs to be looked into. BTW the point with label “Botswana census
1981” is raw data from the census. What national censuses do in much of
the world is cook their data until they follow like a standard generic
European pattern. There are, after all, no biological differences
between populations: we all know this as a sacred truth. The data point
from the Botswana census is data before cooking: you will not see it in
the final census product.

Next, is the African pattern of aging related to late age at paternity?

### References

Manton, Kenneth G., and Eric Stallard. 1984. *Recent Trends in Mortality
Analysis*. New York: Academic Press.

Pennington, R., and H. Harpending. 1993. *The structure of an African
pastoralist community: demography, history, and ecology of the Ngamiland
Herero.* Clarendon press.

