+++
title = "Time of Isolation"
full_title = "Time of Isolation"
date = "2012-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/20/time-of-isolation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/09/20/time-of-isolation/).

Time of Isolation

Recent direct measurement of the human mutation rate strongly suggest
that it is about half as large as previously estimated. Neutral genetic
differences between groups would have taken longer to accumulate.

Therefore, estimates of population splits need to be recalibrated.
Generally, this suggests that everything in human prehistory happened
considerably earlier than previously thought. For example, using the
old value of the mutation rate, researchers had estimated that the split
between modern humans and Neanderthals/Denisovans took place
272,000-435,000 years ago – which seemed odd at the time, since Europe
has plenty of hominid fossils that look to be on their way to becoming
Neanderthals, yet are considerably older than that split estimate.
The new mutation estimates now fits the fossil evidence. Along the same
lines, the previous estimate had modern humans exiting Africa about
60,000 years ago, which meant that the fairly-modern looking
Skhul/Qafzeh, fossils found in Israel, some 80,000-120,000 years old,
must have died out without contributing to modern Eurasians. Which was
possible, of course, but not as simple and appealing as a single
Out-of-Africa expansion. The revised mutation rate, along with recent
evidence of an African middle stone age tool tradition (Nubian complex)
in South Arabia, makes for a simpler story, one in which the
Skhul/Qafzeh population eventually expanded into Eurasia.

But the story still isn’t all that simple, because we’ve never found  
anatomically modern fossils that are more than 50k years old further
out into Eurasia. Somehow, anatomically modern humans (AMH) didn’t yet
have the moxie to displace archaic humans. They apparently spent tens
of thousands years stuck in the Middle East.

Maybe that makes sense. We know that people outside sub-Saharan Africa
have lower levels of genetic variation than Africans: maybe an extended
stay in the southern Middle East could have that effect. Consider that
the area habitable by early hunter-gatherers isn’t very big, at least
during the desertification stages. The Sahara, and Neanderthals in the
Levant, could have blocked gene flow with sub-Saharan Africa. That’s
the scenario you need to reduce genetic variation: small numbers and
isolation.

Why the lag? It may help to think of AMH as an invasive species. Very
often, some new pest shows up and spends quite a while hanging around
the point of origin, not yet seeming very formidable. At some point, it
transitions into an irresistible menace, like crabgrass. Our best guess
is that the budding pest species spends that lag time responding to
selection, becoming better adapted to its new environment. Sometimes
the newcomer manages to steal useful genes from related species, which
naturally are already adapted to that environment. Starting with
potential advantages over the locals, and now prepared for local
conditions, the invasive species set forth to conquer.

You might also think of south Arabia as the wading pool, a place
different from sub-Sahara Africa, but not too different. AMH needed to
make some changes: lose expensive immunological defenses against African
zoonoses, acquire the necessary defenses against Eurasian pathogens,
begin to adjust to lower temperatures and more variation in the length
of the day, etc.. Neanderthal admixture likely helped.

AMH really needed some kind of trump card: it is not easy to displace a
competitor with similar abilities that’s already locally adapted.
Although their toolkit is not yet much different from Neanderthals, the
Skhul/Qafzeh population already showed some signs of greater cultural
capabilities, like a ritual burial with grave goods. Somehow, though,
that wasn’t enough – success against Neanderthals waited another 50,00o
years.



