+++
title = "the cards fall"
full_title = "the cards fall"
date = "2016-05-01"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/01/the-cards-fall/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/01/the-cards-fall/).

the cards fall

People are doing GWAS studies on alleles that influence educational
achievement – IQ alleles, more or less – and are finding some. Once you
find them, the natural question is how the frequencies of those vary in
different populations. Do populations that test low on IQ have fewer
plus alleles than those that test high?

This can get complicated, at least if the populations you’re comparing
are highly divergent. If they are, the set of education alleles in one
pop might be significantly different than the set in the other. Pygmies
are like this with height: they share many of the alleles that affect
height in Europeans, but also have some of their own. Of course, the
most divergent human populations, Pygmies and Bushmen, are few in number
and have no significant diasporas.

If all you want to know is the source of population differences, you can
easily get around this: look at a mixed population and see how IQ varies
with the degree of admixture.

Next question: what would be the implications of various possible
results? Suppose that GWAS hits and admixture studies suggest that
population ancestry did not matter. Every population is equal in genetic
potential for intelligence. That would be a surprise – things sure don’t
look that way. It would suggest that a potent and unknown environmental
influence(s) was responsible for observed differences. I doubt this
outcome a whole lot, but it’s a big universe.

Next possibility: the distribution of IQ alleles predicts what we
already see. Those populations that test low have correspondingly low
frequencies of plus alleles. Things are the way they look – no real
surprises.

Last: things are *mostly* the way they look, but at least one population
does a lot worse (or better) than you would expect from their measured
IQ-allele frequencies. I think if you had done this 100 years ago there
would have been some anomalies of this sort – populations with serious
iodine shortages would have had anomalously low scores. If we hadn’t
known about iodine shortages and their consequences, this kind of result
would have hinted at it.

Next question: what would the impact of such results be?

For option 1: we would start looking hard for that indumbnifying
environmental influence. We would want to be able to turn it off – or
on.

Option II and III: Much would be explained. But the results would be
almost entirely rejected. How many minds would be changed? Hardly any.
You’d have to know a fair amount about genetics to even appreciate the
evidence. No matter how sound the result, various bastards will emit a
fog of lies about it – not many people would be able to see through that
fog, and even fewer would want to. I know of a couple of cases in which
people who were disinclined to believe in the results of twin studies
came to accept them after GCTA results – extrapolating from that
example, results like II or III would change the minds of *hundreds* of
people worldwide.

This doesn’t mean that there would never be any consequences. There
would eventually be practical applications of such a result, and the
people working those applications would know and understand it.

