+++
title = "Latest issue of Synthese"
full_title = "Latest issue of Synthese"
date = "2017-02-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/02/10/latest-issue-of-synthese/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/02/10/latest-issue-of-synthese/).

Latest issue of Synthese

Readers may be interested to know that the journal
*[Synthese](http://link.springer.com/journal/11229),*which
characterizes itself as “An International Journal for Epistemology,
Methodology and Philosophy of Science”, is publishing an [article about
the *Bhagavad Gītā* and
Spinoza](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-017-1323-1),
currently available under “Online first.” The journal is typically
ranked highly as a journal of analytic philosophy, and this publication
may signal ~~new~~a revived openness to non-Western philosophy.\*

The article, for readers interested, is by [Christina
Chuang](http://research.ntu.edu.sg/expertise/academicprofile/Pages/StaffProfile.aspx?ST_EMAILID=cchuang)
of Nanyang Technological University here in Singapore, and is titled
“Rational devotion and human perfection.” It was brought to my attention
after she gave a talk on the paper here at Yale-NUS College. In the
paper she argues for a view of the three *yoga*-s which I take it is in
some ways similar to Rāmānuja, privileging *bhakti*. However, Chuang
argues that Spinoza’s concept of intuition is a useful way to understand
*bhakti*, and that understanding confluences between Sāṃkhya and Spinoza
can resolve the apparent interpretive tension among the three yogas.
(NB: I have not yet had the time to look at the paper in detail, myself,
having only heard Dr. Chuang’s talk.)

Since we’ve [talked
about](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/05/28/a-new-open-access-philosophy-journal-and-some-general-comments-thereon/)
where publishing for Indian philosophy is possible and also beneficial,
the publication of this article may be helpful for philosophers looking
for more “mainstream” journals that are open to Indian philosophy.

\*See Roy Perrett’s clarification below about *Synthese*‘s publishing
history.
