+++
title = "The Mīmāṃsā approach to"
full_title = "The Mīmāṃsā approach to the sentence meaning as something to be done"
date = "2017-02-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/02/26/the-mima%e1%b9%83sa-approach-to-the-sentence-meaning-as-something-to-be-done/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/02/26/the-mima%e1%b9%83sa-approach-to-the-sentence-meaning-as-something-to-be-done/).

The Mīmāṃsā approach to the sentence meaning as something to be done

According to Mīmāṃsā authors, and unlike Nyāya ones, Vedic sentences do
not convey the existence of something, but rather that something should
be done. This means that the entire Veda is an instrument of knowledge
only as regards duties and cannot be falsified through sense-perception,
inference, etc. No Mīmāṃsā author, for instance, could ever blame a
scientist for reaching a conclusion that clashes with data found in the
Veda.

In contrast, sense perception, inference, etc. only convey knowledge
about what exists. Therefore, since duties cannot be known through any
other instruments of knowledge but the Veda, the Veda remains
unfalsifiable. This unfalsifiability by default would not be enough for
thinkers like the Buddhist epistemologists, who claim that we need to
find solid reasons in favour of something or someone in order to believe
it or her. However, Mīmāṃsā authors claim that all cognitions are
intrinsically valid unless and until they are falsified. Therefore, the
fact that the Veda conveys knowledge which cannot be overturned makes it
into a valid instrument of knowledge.  
But how can one claim that the whole Veda only conveys duties? What
about Vedic sentences which look like descriptions of states of affairs?
Historically, the primary focus of Mīmāṃsā authors has always been the
Brāhmaṇa portion of the Veda, which entails sacrificial prescriptions.
Mīmāṃsā authors have been busy for centuries trying to make sense of the
seeming confused sum of statements relative to the various sacrifices,
and ranging from direct prescriptions to aetiologies. They learnt to put
at the centre a originative prescription (utpattividhi, the one which
first mentions that a given sacrifice has to be performed) and to link
to it all the other prescriptive and seemingly descriptive statements.
In this way, they could find out that many statements of the latter
group are in fact to be read either as prescriptions or as
prescriptions’ supplements. Among the former are statements such as
`The ladle is made of palāśa wood", which in fact means`Carve a ladle
out of palāśa wood” (a contemporary reader may recall descriptive
statements with the same purport in recipe books). As for the latter,
statements such as
`Vāyu is the swiftest deity" are re-conceived as eulogising the prescription or one of its elements, so that they convey a meaning only together with it. In the example given, the final meaning would be`Sacrifice
to Vāyu, since you will get your result promptly”. Passages out of the
Vedic saṃhitās are labelled mantras and have a role only within a
sacrifice. Thus, they too do not aim at conveying a descriptive meaning.

Prābhākara authors extend this approach to language in general, which
they explain on the basis of their explanation of Vedic language.
Accordingly, they claim that also worldly language only conveys things
to be done. This theory has been opposed by Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā and Vedānta
authors, and it may seem to be counter-intuitive, but in fact it
probably only opposes 21st c. European common-sense assumptions more
than general human intuitions. Some common examples may help to get what
is at stake with it. When, for instance, a mother tells her children “It
is nine o’clock”, her children all immediately understand that this
descriptive sentence is in fact only a supplement to an unspoken
prescription, namely “Go to bed!”. In other words, it is not at all
clear that we are really so interested in sheer facts. By contrast, many
(most?) descriptive statements seem to be mostly just accessories to an
underlying prescriptive one (“X said…/Y did…” are in fact just an
accessory to the unspoken prescription “Stop talking to X!/Do like Y!”).

The opposition from Bhāṭṭa authors centers around counter-examples such
as descriptive statements which appear to convey a meaning on their own.
The stock examples are “Your wife gave birth to a son” and “Your
unmarried daughter is pregnant”. One might imagine that, like in the
examples I made up in the paragraph above, also in those cases there are
unspoken prescriptions these statements supplement (e.g.,
`Come home to celebrate!" and`Find a solution!” respectively). However,
Prābhākara authors retort that in these cases the sentences do not
actually convey a meaning alone, but through the fact that their
speakers’ mimicry helps us understanding that we have to feel happy or
desperate.  
By contrast, Vedānta authors have deeper reasons to oppose the
Prābhākara (and also the Bhāṭṭa) theory. Vedānta authors, unlike Pūrva
Mīmāṃsā ones, historically started their inquiry by focusing on the
Upaniṣads, which contain much less prescriptive statements than the
Brāhmaṇas and many more narrative passages with seemingly descriptive
statements. Moreover, their ontology is based on the content of such
Upaniṣadic statements, since, they claim, the ultimate reality, which
they call brahman, cannot be known through perception, inference, etc.,
and can only be known through these Upaniṣadic statements. Thus, if the
Upaniṣadic statements can only be valid insofar as they supplement a
prescription, they would no longer be able to convey information about
the brahman. Vedānta authors, therefore, have to ensure that Upaniṣadic
statements can convey a descriptive meaning. Śaṅkara, the main author of
Advaita Vedānta, tries to achieve this goal by separating the destinies
of Upaniṣads and Brāhmaṇas, just like he separated Pūrva and Uttara
Mīmāṃsā (i.e., Vedānta). Rāmānuja, the main author of Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta, by contrast, aimed at considering the whole Veda as a whole and
therefore tried to construct all Vedic sentences as conveying a
descriptive meaning, which can eventually lead to action in order to
achieve the purpose they describe.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
