+++
title = "Rapid Change in"
full_title = "Rapid Change in Polygenic Traits"
date = "2018-03-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/30/rapid-change-in-polygenic-traits/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/30/rapid-change-in-polygenic-traits/).

Rapid Change in Polygenic Traits

A few people have occasionally claimed that natural selection takes a
long time to change any trait that might bother them – sometimes, they
say this of polygenic traits, ones influenced by many genes, like height
and intelligence. Kevin Mitchell has said this (“at least 100 millennia
to evolve appreciably”), so has Brad Delong (an economist at Berkeley).
David Reich mentions Joseph Graves, in a talk at Harvard, saying
something similar in a lecture in 2016. They’re all 100% wrong: it is
easy to select on polygenic quantitative traits, and we do it every day.
Dogs vary a lot in height and most of the big differences are the result
of fairly recent selection: nobody had Chihuahuas or Great Danes back in
the Ice Age.

Human populations vary in height – not just from differences in
nutrition. We know \[work from the Reich lab\] that northern Europeans
are around a standard deviation taller than southern Europeans ( given
adequate food), and we know some of the alleles behind that. Andaman
islanders are four standard deviations shorter than the Dutch , Efe
Pygmies almost five std shorter.  
Probably the total range in humans, from the tallest (Dinaric Slavs, 6
1, to Efe Pgmies, 4 8) is six standard deviations. I’m sure that David
Reich can explain to me how this is a small, even insignificant
difference.

You may ask yourself why fairly prominent people manage to say instantly
falsifiable things about human genetics. Good question. I might be
partially protected from this error by preadaptation, having spent years
and years walking past the [Morrow
Plots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morrow_Plots) on my way to the main
undergraduate library at the U of I. Delong has the excuse of not being
any kind of biologist, but then again he ought to know that. A couple of
us were trying to educate him on Twitter: he started accusing the
mathematician involved of innumeracy, so the mathenaut called him “just
another regression monkey”. Good times. As for Kevin Mitchell and Joseph
Graves – well a lot of people in biology and medicine just don’t know
much about selection. And of course in this context they don’t want to
know.

Quantitative selection is a lot easier than people think. If I kidnapped
a year’s worth of National Merit Scholars and dropped them on a deserted
but fertile island, a new race with an average IQ around 130 would
develop ( unless those little brainiacs escaped. You have to watch them
all the time). If I dropped a lot of NBA and WNBA players, you’d see the
tallest race, if we could just get them to reproduce.

But… there are some subtle points here. Great Danes exist and persist,
but they have a bundle of health problems, and they don’t live too long
(8-10 years). Wolves last around 15-16 years in captivity, with a record
of 20. If you wanted to create a new race with an average adult height
of 7 feet, I’m sure you could, but I’d bet money they’d have bad knees.

On the other hand, if they stayed 7 feet tall for a couple of million
years, they would not be particularly prone to bad knees. There would be
gradual selection for tougher knees: changes in development, changes in
bones and tendons and cartilage, eventually perhaps fundamental changes
in the architecture of the knee. There would be lots of little changes
that made development among those giants more robust, changes that
reduced the incidence of many problems that centers fall heir too.

Brain size in ancient and archaic humans was plenty big, but we don’t
really see signs of rapid innovation, art, and decent fast food until
fairly recently, 50,000 years or so. Some anthropologists says that
humans were just as smart 100 or 150k years as they are today ( which
may be true for some people) – but the notion that people managed to get
smarter without showing any practical sign of it for 50 or 100k years
is, in my opinion, just plain stupid.

So I think Kevin Mitchell ( not the other two) has a point. It’s
possible, even likely, that the populations that have relatively high
IQs today haven’t had them for very long, and that they’re not terrible
well adapted to their new mental horsepower. Susceptible to various
mental problems and illusions that would probably be a lot rarer if
natural selection had had time to iron out the bugs.

