+++
title = "Genetic Arguments"
full_title = "Genetic Arguments"
date = "2018-03-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/06/genetic-arguments/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/06/genetic-arguments/).

Genetic Arguments

Every now and then someone tries to give some genetic argument showing
that population A and population B can’t possibly be significantly
different in any trait that hurts someone’s feelings. They’re all
bullshit.

The most famous one is probably Lewontin’s Fst argument. He
[said](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/01/26/lewontins-argument/)
that since most (> 85%) genetic variation in humans is within-group,
rather than between groups, human populations can’t be very different.
Except for traits influenced by a few genes, like skin color, or a
single gene that affects many traits, like
[EDAR,](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/09/01/understanding-edar/)
or a highly polygenic trait influenced by many genes, like height. That
is, any kind of trait, with any kind of genetic architecture.

A related argument says that you only see differences in ‘superficial’
traits, like bone density, brain volume, or the shape of the skull.
That’s sarcasm.

Another says that populations just haven’t been separated long enough to
diverge much. Untrue: selection can move pretty rapidly. Amerindians
have undergone noticeable genetic
[change](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/05/04/post-columbian-evolution-holes/)
(mostly immunological) over the past five hundred years. While some
human populations been separated for much longer than that: often tens
of thousands of years, sometimes (with Bushmen for example) hundreds of
thousands of years. Plenty of time.

Lately I’ve seen a few people arguing that there can’t be big
between-population differences in highly polygenic traits, those
influenced by many alleles of small effect, because evolution of a
highly polygenic trait is for some unknown reason very slow -” at least
100 millennia to evolve appreciably”. But that isn’t the case.

They’re thinking about intelligence – but height is also polygenic. Yet
Pygmies and Tutsi exist. For that matter, natural selection over the
past few thousand years has made southern Europeans shorter and northern
Europeans taller.

I have no idea where this notion originated, because there’s nothing in
genetic theory or practice that supports the idea that polygenic traits
can’t change rapidly. Think of the Maltese elephants, isolated when sea
level rose at the end of the ice ages: 3 feet tall in just a couple of
thousand years.

While there are many counterexamples in agricultural genetics: you can
breed for almost any trait\* – appearance, conformation, size, disease
resistance, flavor, behavior – and we have done so. Many of those traits
are highly polygenic. In fact, [Fisher’s infinitesimal
model](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2016/02/15/039768.full.pdf),
fairly standard in evolutionary genetics, assumes that an *infinite*
number of alleles influence a trait.

Most of these fallacies are addressed in the tome I’m perusing. The
author correctly dismissed all of them. But then…

\* except sex ratio. That’s nearly impossible.

