+++
title = "Venona 2%"
full_title = "Venona 2%"
date = "2018-03-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/25/venona-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/03/25/venona-2/).

Venona: 2%

The Soviets send coded traffic to their embassy in Washington in WWII.
Those messages were encrypted using a one-time pad system – in principle
unbreakable, as long as you follow the rules. But the Soviet company
making the pads, under from invasion, had cut corners, had produced a
significant number of duplicate key numbers. Other methods may also have
played a part in recovering keys, such as black-bag jobs and a partially
burned codebook recovered from a battlefield in Finland.

Out of some hundreds of thousands of intercepted encrypted texts, maybe
a couple of percent were ever decrypted – quite a few of the GRU
messages in 1943, almost half of the NKVD messages in 1944, but
generally far fewer than that.

Venona exposed Soviet Espionage in the Manhattan project, the OSS, the
White House. It played a role in exposing the Cambridge Five.

But we never decrypted most of the messages. We have learned quite a bit
about Soviet espionage from other approaches and individuals, but much
is still unknown.

It strikes me that the Russians could do the US and themselves a big
favor by releasing all the messages and one-time pads used in that era.
Let it *all* hang out. No actual former spies would be endangered: all
of them must be dead by now. The US would have a better understanding of
its own history, a better understanding what kind of people can be
trusted. Worth knowing.The Russians would be hated by leftist types, but
then they are anyhow, apparently for dropping the Commie torch. The
underlying reason is that the true strategic threat to both Russia and
the United States is China (not the casbah, for God’s sake): the cowboys
and the Cossacks should be friends.

