+++
title = "Book Review of The"
full_title = "Book Review of The Bhagavad Gita A Biography, by Richard H Davis (Reviewed by Matthew R Dasti)"
date = "2015-05-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/05/04/book-review-of-the-bhagavad-gita-a-biography-by-richard-h-davis-reviewed-by-matthew-r-dasti/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/05/04/book-review-of-the-bhagavad-gita-a-biography-by-richard-h-davis-reviewed-by-matthew-r-dasti/).

Book Review of The Bhagavad Gita: A Biography, by Richard H. Davis (Reviewed by Matthew R. Dasti)

***The Bhagavad Gita: A Biography.* By Richard H. Davis. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2015. Pp. x + 243. Hardcover $24.95, ISBN
978-0-691-133996-8.**

Richard H. Davis’s [*The Bhagavad Gita: A
Biography*](http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10311.html) is a recent
offering within Princeton University Press’s series “Lives of Great
Religious Books.” Such biographies track the reception-histories of the
texts, their “lives”. It would be hard to imagine a more suitable text
for this series than the *Gītā*, which has inflamed the religious
imagination of countless individuals, while providing a conceptual
toolkit for the religious self-expression of countless thinkers.

A volume of this sort, which aspires for accessibility, cannot but be
select. Davis thus chooses to provide historical snapshots which capture
major moments of the *Gītā’s* life. Chapter 1 focuses on the *Gītā* at
the time of its composition in the ancient Indian world. Davis deftly
leads the reader through some of the major scholarly approaches to the
origins and authorship of the *Gītā*. Chapter 2 discusses medieval
India, during the rise of the bhakti traditions and as interpreted by
the great classical commentators like Śaṃkara. Here, Davis goes beyond
the major Vedāntic commentators to devote welcome attention to
Jñānadeva’s Marathi translation-retelling of the text. We next consider
the *Gītā’s* sojourn to the West in the modern age (Chapter 3), tracking
the receptions of the *Gītā* by European Indologists like Wilkins,
Herder, and Freidrich Schlegel and influential critics of Indian culture
like James Mill. Davis embeds the discussion within the colonial
politics of the time and the cultural histories that give context to
both Hegel’s reading of the *Gītā* as well as the remarkable reception
to Swami Vivekānānda at the 1893 World Parliament of Religion in
Chicago. Chapter 4 tracks the way in which modern Indian philosophers
and statesmen interpret the *Gītā* in relation to the Indian
independence movement, along with the general pressure they felt to
articulate what is distinctive about India’s spiritual tradition in the
light of modernity. Here, the lives and teachings of Gandhi and
Aurobindo come to the fore. Chapters 5 and 6 provide snapshots of the
*Gītā* in our time, respectively in the form of noteworthy translations
and within liturgical performances in both India and the United States.
The book’s epilogue briefly considers the future of the *Gītā* and
provides as a final snapshot the 2013 swearing-in of a Hindu US
Congressperson who chose to use the *Gītā* for this purpose.

*The Bhagavad Gita: A Biography* is a pleasure to read. Davis’s prose is
clean and smooth, and his framing of issues, persons, and historical
events is informative without becoming cumbersome. Indeed, his chapter
on Western receptions could be easily used for the purpose of
illustrating to undergraduates some of the complex political and
cultural factors which have driven European responses to Indian thought,
[as discussed on this
blog](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/23/relatively-recent-history-e-b-cowells-preface-to-the-kusumanjali/).
Moreover, while Davis’s selections are of necessity quite select, they
seem fair, chosen with an eye for cultural importance. As one example,
among the four examples he selects for contemporary translations, we
find a scholar (van Buitenen), a poet (Stephen Mitchell), a devotee
(Swami Prabhupāda), and a philosopher (Radhakrishnan), collectively
illustrating the range of persons who are drawn to the *Gītā* in the
modern world.

There also some features of the Davis book that illustrate the
challenges and tensions within a certain approach to a text’s “life”. If
life is merely reception-history, then it seems that there is little
room for the biographer’s sifting between more or less apt readings of
the text, helping the reader see the difference. Analogously, I would
hate for my hypothetical biographer to take at equal value the claims of
my wife and my business competitor regarding the meaning of my own
existence. Most jarring for readers of this blog is likely the inclusion
of Stephen Mitchell, a non-Sanskritist who claimed to “translate” the
*Bhagavad Gītā* as one of the four examples (out of hundreds) of modern
translations. Including his translation makes perfect sense in terms of
reception-history, and is yet problematic for many reasons. These
reasons could have perhaps been mentioned. It may have also made sense
to reflect on the ways that the New Age movement has contributed to the
success of texts like Mitchell’s.

At times, Davis moves in the direction of evaluation, allowing himself
to insinuate that certain approaches to the *Gītā* make more sense than
others. He gently suggests that Jñānadeva’s affirmation of a pluralistic
approach toward the *Gītā’s* meaning harmonizes better with the ethos of
the text than Śaṃkara’s concern with a single correct reading (71). He
also helps the reader understand clearly how profoundly uncharitable and
biased was Mill’s own response to the *Gītā* (94-99). But it is unclear
how such gestures toward the evaluative cohere with the general tenor of
the Biography.

Finally, we should note that this is the second book its kind, the first
being Eric Sharpe’s *The Universal Gītā* (Open Court, 1985), which is
focused entirely on the Western reception of the text. Davis’s Biography
neither obviates *The Universal Gītā*, nor does it fail to move beyond
it in a number of ways. Davis provides a wider, panoramic vision of the
*Gītā’s* history, while Sharpe’s *TheUniversal Gītā* provides more
depth than Davis can in a few chapters on the modern and contemporary
West (including discussions of topics like Rudolph Otto’s reading of the
*Gītā*, Theosophism, and the 60’s counterculture). They could be
profitably read together, though Davis’s Biography would better serve
one who wishes to understand the entire cultural footprint of the *Gītā*
in a single accessible volume.

Reviewed by Matthew R. Dasti, Bridgewater State University
(<mdasti@bridgew.edu>)
