+++
title = "Two different narratives"
full_title = "Two different narratives on Yoga, Mīmāṃsā, Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta etc"
date = "2015-05-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/05/30/two-or-three-different-narratives-on-yoga-mima%e1%b9%83sa-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-etc/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/05/30/two-or-three-different-narratives-on-yoga-mima%e1%b9%83sa-visi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adadvaita-vedanta-etc/).

Two (or three) different narratives on Yoga, Mīmāṃsā, Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta etc.

**Some authors** tend to think that once upon a time there was **one
Yoga** and that later this has been “altered” or has at least “evolved”
into many forms. According to their own stand, they might look at this
developments as meaningful adaptations or as soulless metamorphoseis.

**Other authors** tend to think that there were **several trends of Yoga
prior to a given point** (usually identified with the *Yogasūtra* (YS)
if you agree with Chapple, etc., or with the *Pātañjala Yogaśāstra*
(PYŚ) if you agree with Bronkhorst,
[Maas](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/01/03/is-there-really-a-single-author-of-the-yogasutra-and-yogabha%E1%B9%A3ya/),
etc.) and that they have been unified into a single system by the author
of one or the other text. A long time after that, the same authors
claim, new tendencies developed out of this unitary Yoga, much like in
the way described by the authors of the fist group.

**A minority group of authors** **contests the idea of a unitary Yoga at
all** and says that between the various things called Yoga in Classical
and Post-Classical India there are at most family resemblances and at
least nothing common at all. For these authors, it does not really make
sense to host a conference on Yoga with people discussing Buddhist
Tantric Yoga, Pāñcarātra Yoga, the Yogasūtra’s, contemporary Yoga
practices and so on.

**Who is right?** Difficult to say. The point is that what we have are
only fragments of the whole picture and that *our interpretation* of it
will make us interpret some scattered pieces as belonging to the same
puzzle or not. Accordingly, if we assume the first perspective, we will
consider a form of Yoga which is far away from Patañjali’s YS (or PYŚ)
as still somehow connected with it and detect slight similarities. If we
assume the third perspective, we will rather notice the differences
between the two.

Similar differences in approach can be detected in the case of Sāṅkhya
(where the first scenario is ruled out by the data and scholars either
subscribe to the second or to the third approach), Buddhism, the two
Mīmāṃsās (Parpola embraces the first scenario, Bronkhorst the third one,
there are no clear data in favour of the second one), the two schools of
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta and so on. In the latter case, in fact, I only
know scholars subscribing to the first scenario. Mumme (1988) is aware
of the fact that there were differences between the two schools even
before the official split, but still calls them both Śrī Vaiṣṇava and
says that they were “complementary”.

**Am I forgetting some further example or some further approach? And
which approach do you subscribe to in the cases mentioned?**
