+++
title = "National Achievement"
full_title = "National Achievement Scholarship Program"
date = "2016-08-21"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/21/national-achievement-scholarship-program/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/21/national-achievement-scholarship-program/).

National Achievement Scholarship Program

For many years, The National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC) has
given a test aimed at black students, the National Achievement
Scholarship Program, originally called the the National Achievement
Scholarship program for Outstanding Negro Students. It was a
lower-standard version of the National Merit scholarship program,
created because few blacks qualified for the National Merit
scholarships. You could have defined other groups that were
under-represented in National Merit scholarships, but they probably
weren’t as numerous or as important a voting block. And racial
favoritism was in vogue then, although not in the way it is today.

The program
[ended](https://www.jbhe.com/2015/09/national-merit-scholarship-corporation-ends-its-program-for-black-students-entering-college/)
last fall: I didn’t notice it at the time because I was under the
weather. You might guess that it’s because blacks have caught up and are
now winning the ordinary National Merit Scholarships in rough proportion
to their numbers, but that’s not the case. The NMSC is replacing it with
a program that aids students that graduate from historically black
colleges and universities – money that will help them pay off college
loans or finance graduate study.

This strikes me as an odd decision. It can’t be that the administrators
of the program have renounced racial favoritism in favor of fairness to
individuals and utility maximization: we know that decision would be
accompanied by one hundred million angels singing, which has not yet
occurred. Generally, everyone expects every affirmative action program
to last forever, or at least until this country destroys itself.

I wonder if they dropped the program because too many people were gaming
it. There was never any test of blackness: as far as I know, anyone
could claim it. I remember urging my little brother to check that box
many years ago – \[He didn’t and won anyhow\]. So for all I know people
named Magnusson were applying for and winning it, or perhaps the First
Born of Mars. Maybe too many Nigerian immigrants were receiving it,
probably after promising the administrators ten million dollars….

I guess that they figure that nobody would be crazy enough to attend
Grambling or Howard in search of this money, so the new program should
avoid the gaming.

