+++
title = "College as signaling –"
full_title = "College as signaling – exceptin’ always Steam"
date = "2016-08-27"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/27/college-as-signaling-exceptin-always-steam/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/27/college-as-signaling-exceptin-always-steam/).

College as signaling – exceptin’ always Steam

Some economists \[like Bryan Caplan\] are now arguing that the benefits
of college are almost entirely signaling – showing that you can learn
and how much crap you can swallow – rather than conferring knowledge
that makes you better at doing something people would pay you for.
Ideally, something genuinely useful.

This cannot be entirely true, at least if you consider education in the
broadest sense. Once upon a time nobody knew how to build a decent steam
engine. After James Watt developed one, other people learned about it at
some point in their lives – maybe not in college, but somewhere.
Acquiring that knowledge increased their human capital.

But it’s mostly true. If you look at college
[majors](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/11/22/majors/), it is easy
to see most college instruction is not very useful. 21% business majors,
10% social sciences and history, 7% educational majors, 6% psych majors,
5% in visual and performing arts, 5% in “communication, journalism, and
related programs”, 3% English and literature – well over half at first
cut. When I looked at a more detailed breakdown, I had a hard time
arguing that the useful fraction was as high as 20%. Even when someone
studies a subject that is potentially useful, there’s a significant
probability that they’ll end up doing something entirely different. And
then there’s forgetting – I don’t think most people retain much of what
they studied in school, unless they use it in their work or happen to
find a subject fascinating.

