+++
title = "The Jermyn Program"
full_title = "The Jermyn Program"
date = "2011-09-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/05/the-jermyn-program-part-i/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/05/the-jermyn-program-part-i/).

The Jermyn Program (Part I)

( originally in Gene Expression)

## [The Jermyn Program](http://www.gnxp.com/wp/2010/05/11/the-jermyn-program/ "The Jermyn Program")

Posted by gcochran on May 11, 2010

With the detection of Neanderthal admixture in Eurasians (Green et al),
evidence for two admixture events in an upcoming paper from Jeffrey
Long’s group (probably Neanderthals and erectus), and analysis from
Jeffrey Wall and Vincent Plagnol suggesting that some African
populations (Pygmies and Bushmen) admixed with other archaic
populations, it seems that we are on the verge of a new paradigm.\* In
the picture, anatomically modern humans arose in East Africa and then
spread globally – but mixed (to a degree) with the archaic humans that
already already occupied most of the Old World. Of course this is the
surprise-free prediction, much more plausible than total replacement,
which would have required an unlikely biological incompatibility.

Admixture at the few-percent level would have given most favorable
archaic alleles a good chance of reaching high frequency in modern human
populations, and some must have done so – alleles that conferred
regional adaptations, and perhaps some that had general advantages.
Svante Paabo thinks, or any rate says, that this Neanderthal admixture
probably didn’t have any biological significance, but he’s almost
certainly wrong. This pattern has been seen in some other invasive
species: the cosmopolitan species assimilates favorable alleles from
local sister species. Resistance is futile.

There may be more in the pipeline: The Max Planck people have that
strange finger bone from the Altai, and if it’s a good-enough sample,
they could run the same general analysis and check for admixture from
that archaic population, whoever they were. And there’s a
possibly-significant line in their Science paper, concerning Wall and
Plagnol’s high estimate (14%) of archaic admixture in Europeans: “almost
an order of magnitude greater than our estimates, suggesting that their
observations may not be entirely explained by gene flow from
Neandertals. ” Maybe from somebody else?

