+++
title = "Eebers and robbers"
full_title = "Eebers and robbers"
date = "2011-09-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/02/eebers-and-robbers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/02/eebers-and-robbers/).

Eebers and robbers

A year or so ago I was on a review committee for a department of
biology. It was a pleasant and productive department, but it soon became
apparent to us that it was in effect two departments sharing the same
building. One was *eeb* (ecology and evolutionary biology), while the
other was, in their jargon, *rob* (the rest of biology.) Relations were
cordial between the two for the most part but there was almost no
interaction nor interest across the divide.

The same divide is increasingly apparent in genetics, genomics, and
human evolution. Several years ago a colleague suggested to me that the
idea that mathematics is the language of science was no longer very
accurate. There are, he said, two languages of science, one being
mathematics and other organic chemistry. He was onto something. People
who speak mathematics and models, eebers, and people who speak organic
chemistry, robbers, are more and more out of touch with each other.

Occasional strife between eebers and robbers is an old problem in
biology. A well-known
[example](http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn17771-wilson-vs-watson-the-blessing-of-great-enemies.html)
is the antagonism between EO Wilson, the Patton of eebery, and James
Watson, the Rommel of robbery, in the Harvard University biology
department several decades ago.

I myself keep far away from the divide. Several years ago an eminent
geneticist and developmental biologist graciously sent us a note and a
manuscript which, he suggested, we should understand in order to flesh
out some suggestions we discussed in our
[book](http://the10000yearexplosion.com). I tried and tried to read that
paper. My eyes are still a bit crossed, I think, from staring at it, all
to no avail. I could never make it in robbery.

Last week John Hawks asked my opinion about Neandertals and ‘4x
coverage.’ I started to say that 4 layers of clothing were probably
adequate in their cold environment, but the context was not quite right,
so I dodged the question. I do intend to look into it and understand
what he was talking about, soon.

This is all motivated by a fascinating and well presented if not
entirely convincing
[paper](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/early/2011/08/19/science.1209202.abstract)
from Peter Parham’s group at Stanford that proposes that several rather
common alleles in the HLA system were acquired from related archaic
human species, Denisovans in the case of one and Neanderthals in the
case of the other. Among eebers in human evolution a current hot topic
is adaptive introgression of genes between related species. Much is
known about adaptive introgression in plants due in large measure to the
work of G. Ledyard
[Stebbins](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G._Ledyard_Stebbins). More
recently a
[review](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.172.5661&rep=rep1&type=pdf)
of introgression in mammals has rekindled interest in the phenomenon.

A stunning aspect of the Parham group paper is that there is not a trace
of mention of any eeb at all. It is as if the paper were written in a
theoretical vacuum. How can anyone write a paper about adaptive
introgression without mentioning Stebbins?

My comments are not really aimed at this particular paper: the
literature is full of robbers with blinders and eebers with blinders.
This can’t be good for the field. Where are younger scientists who can
handle it all, in the mold of people like James Crow and Luca
Cavalli-Sforza?

