+++
title = "How Sweeps Get Soft"
full_title = "How Sweeps Get Soft"
date = "2011-09-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/29/how-sweeps-get-soft/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/09/29/how-sweeps-get-soft/).

How Sweeps Get Soft

A puzzling finding from the search for selection in humans is the large
number of apparently selected variants versus the apparent absence of
high frequency selected regions and regions that have become fixed in
our species. If there is indeed a lot of selection, why haven’t more
sweeps completed, that is, gone to fixation? The authors of one of the
[first](http://www.pnas.org/content/103/1/135.short) of the flood of
papers told us that they could only identify about fifty regions that
were candidates for having recently fixed and they were not convinced of
any of them.

An excellent
[review](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2994553/) of this
“problem” came up with a number of scenarios that could explain the
prevalence of incomplete sweeps and the lack of hard sweeps. For example
a sweep of an advantageous new mutant could be slowed down by the
appearance of equivalent mutations in the same gene. These phenocopies
would then compete with each other and none would show evidence of
having gone to fixation. Niemann-Pick disease in Ashkenazi Jews is
caused by one of four different mutations that are all at similar
frequencies. Greg Cochran has called this the “stooge effect” after the
three stooges all trying to get through the door at the same time.

Cochran, John Hawks, and I were involved in some of this work, and we
all thought immediately without any discussion that the intermediate
frequency sweeps must reflect heterozygote advantage. This seemed so
obvious as to be hardly worth talking about, *but* no one else in the
trade seems to find it so obvious. If there would be an advantage to
modulating the effect of a locus, an easy quick fix is to break an
allele. The broken alleles would all show up in heterozygotes when they
were rare. This is the case with the classical example of heterozygote
advantage, sickling haemoglobin, but it is also the case with most of
the known and understood sweeps. The malaria defense polymorphisms all
seem to involve slightly dinged versions of the ancestral allele,
lactase persistence is a dinged regulator, the Duffy negative allele in
sub-Saharan Africa is a broken immune system receptor, EDAR is a broken
pump, and so on. We know of many similar cases in domestic animals too.
Do you want more beef from your steers or a faster whippet? Easy, give
them a copy of broken myostatin and they muscle up like Schwarzenegger.
Unfortunately, when that broken myostatin allele becomes common enough
to appear in homozygotes the outcome is not so favorable. Such useful
dinged genes could very well sweep rapidly, until homozygotes started
appearing, at which point the sweep would grind to a halt. Sickling
haemoglobin loses its advantage as it becomes common, and any sweep in
tropical Africa must have stopped long ago. Broken Duffy in Africa seems
to be a hopeful example of a sweep that has gone to fixation, but it
must do some damage to individuals. For example it is known that broken
Duffy by itself is responsible for low levels of circulating
neutrophils, as shown in
[this](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19180233) paper.

Our ideas were strengthened by [this
paper](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v451/n7181/full/nature06611.html?ref=nf),
known in the trade as “The White Man’s Burden Paper”. A careful and
elegantly done survey of “possible damaging” and “probably damaged”
alleles in sequences of 20 Europeans and 15 Africans showed that
Europeans had more, in accord with the findings from SNP surveys that
there more apparent sweeps in Europeans. On the other hand the authors,
in the spirit of the times I suppose, proposed a completely implausible
bottleneck in the history of Europeans that led to the buildup of many
deleterious mutations in the population by drift.

Hawks, Cochran, and I are hardly mainstream and so, we thought, we must
be missing something obvious. We put together a short paper laying out
our reasoning, then we all completely lost interest in it. There
followed months of a three way exchange of cajoling and threats trying
to get someone to actually write it up and submit it somewhere. Nothing
happened, even though the level of persuasion became so intense at one
point that “kneecap” was used as a verb.

Hoping that we can get interested folks to have a look at this devil’s
manuscript I have posted it on my school website at
<http://harpending.humanevo.utah.edu/Documents/fisher-geometric-11-2011.pdf>.
We would all be grateful for any comments or suggestions.

