+++
title = "Keywords Bhāvaḥ"
full_title = "Keywords Bhāvaḥ"
date = "2014-07-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/07/14/keywords-bhava%e1%b8%a5/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/07/14/keywords-bhava%e1%b8%a5/).

Keywords: Bhāvaḥ

I hope that I can start a series on “keywords” here—those
seemingly-simple terms which, although they don’t really belong to a
technical philosophical vocabulary, do a lot of heavy lifting in a wide
range of philosophical discourses. One could think of
[Williams](http://keywords.pitt.edu/williams_keywords.html); I had
something more pedestrian or propaedeutic in mind, which would set out
the philosophical contexts in which a word is used and some of the
issues surrounding its interpretation. Something like the explanation of
the differences between εἶναι and γενέσθαι which anyone interested in
Greek philosophy has gotten at some point in their education.

I’ll start with the word *bhāvaḥ*, and I’ll stick to what I know and
hope that others will fill in the rest. It’s usually translated as
“existence,” “state of being,” and so on. But it has a fundamental
ambiguity that is taken up—seemingly independently—in the traditions of
Mīmāṃsā and Alaṅkāraśāstra. It can be derived from the simple root *bhū*
“come into being” and the causative root *bhū*+*ṆiC* “cause to come into
being, bring into being”; hence it can mean both “coming into existence”
and “bringing into existence.”

Verbs are traditionally defined as *bhāvapradhānam*, “that in which
*bhāvaḥ* has primacy” (for example, in the *Nirukta* of Yāska).
Mīmāṃsakas expanded this idea into their characteristic theory of verbal
meaning, in which a verb fundamentally expresses the “bringing into
existence” of something (*bhāvanā*). In formulating this theory,
Kumārila relied upon *bhāvaḥ* as the “hinge” between the complementary
meanings of coming-into-being and bringing-into-being. One of the
interesting things about this theory is that the ontological vocabulary
of *bhāvaḥ* and *bhāvanā* comes to form the basis of a theory of
language and a theory of interpretation: language is always oriented
towards the coming-into-existence of some new thing.

Nāṭyaśāstra and Alaṅkāraśāstra use *bhāvaḥ* as a term of art for the
“emotional states” or “feelings” that serve as causal factors for an
aesthetic experience (*rasa*). The *Nāṭyaśāstra* suggests two
derivations of *bhāvaḥ* to explain this extended sense: one is that
these states simply arise (*bhavanti*), and the other is that they bring
into being the elements of the text (*kāvyārthān bhāvayanti*). The
latter derivation is preferred. As it does in Mīmāṃsā, the more common
sense of *bhāvaḥ* as static state of being is traded for a new sense as
a dynamic generative process. The tendency to gloss *bhāvaḥ* with
*bhāvayati* rather than *bhavati* reflects the distinctive focus of
these discourses on what could be or what should be rather than what is:
*bhāvaḥ*, in other words, is not a current state that can be described
(its common and common-sense meaning), but a future state that needs to
be engendered by human action (in Mīmāṃsā), or that in respect of which
a person is transformed or brought into another state (in the
*Nāṭyaśāstra*, which says that *bhāvaḥ* pervades a person’s body like
fire pervades dry wood).

These are “family resemblances” between the use of*bhāvaḥ* in Mīmāṃsā
and Nāṭyaśāstra/Alaṅkāraśāstra that predate [Bhaṭṭa
Nāyaka](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mesaas/faculty/directory/pollock_pub/pollock_What%20was%20Bhatta%20Nayaka%20Saying.pdf)’s
synthesis. Bhaṭṭa Nāyaka reintroduced *bhāvaḥ* into Sanskrit aesthetics
and explicitly drew the parallel between “bringing into being” a Vedic
injunction by performing a sacrifice and “bringing into being” the
content of a literary work by aesthetically experiencing it. These
analyses, too, lead us to think of “being” or *bhāvaḥ* in a certain way:
less as an impersonal “happening,” and more as an agentive
self-fashioning according to a specified procedure and a given textual
template.

Of course, *bhāvaḥ* also figures in discussions about “existence,” and
Halbfass summarizes some of these in [On Being and What There
Is](http://books.google.com/books?id=x7cLHPj1dj8C). But as Halbfass
noticed, non-existence (*abhāvaḥ*) has proven a more interesting and
more productive topic to premodern and modern philosophers. In these
contexts, the non-causative meaning is taken for granted.

The comments are open for interesting shades and nuances of the word
*bhāvaḥ* in these or other contexts. For more posts (by Elisa Freschi)
on *bhāvanā*, see
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/06/06/what-is-the-difference-between-nouns-and-verbs-according-to-mima%e1%b9%83sa-authors-diaconescu-vs-clooney/),
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/05/13/kumarila-on-sentence-meaning/),
and
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/10/what-did-kumarila-have-in-view-when-he-spoke-of-a-linguistic-force-and-of-an-objective-force/).
