+++
title = "Whither Indian"
full_title = "Whither Indian Philosophy?"
date = "2014-07-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/07/23/whither-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/07/23/whither-indian-philosophy/).

Whither Indian Philosophy?

In light of these recent posts about places for pursuing graduate
training in Indian philosophy, I would like to invite a different (but
related) sort of discussion: specifically, about the future of Indian
philosophy, given recent debates about [progress in
philosophy](http://consc.net/papers/progress.pdf "Progress in Philosophy").

Do specialists in Indian philosophy think there are any or even enough
resources in the Indian philosophical tradition for advancing debates in
metaphysics and epistemology about, say, things like causation,
perception, concept acquisition, and the nature of self-knowledge, given
the irreversible changes wrought by naturalism? Is progress in Indian
philosophy going to be confined exclusively to the illumination of
ancient (or even early modern) views for contemporary audiences?

Let me offer some thoughts on this issue that might (hopefully) get the
discussion going. Philosophers from Dharmottara to Gaṅgeśa to
Raghunāthahave debated at length such central epistemic notions as
‘defect’ (*doṣa*) and ‘excellence’ (*guṇa*) while pondering the issue of
whether cognition is intrinsically or extrinsically ascertained. They
noted that veridical cognitions could not be based solely on beliefs one
held intrinsically because they recognized the potential fallibility of
belief. That is why from Gaṅgeśa onwards, the tendency is to place the
burden of epistemic responsibility not on the belief itself (and how it
is held), but on its sources: that is, on belief formation itself. If I
know exactly how it is that I come to perceive a face in the mirror,
say, on account of my understanding the properties of light and surface
reflectance, then I can no longer believe there is a face in the mirror,
however mysterious these properties turn out to be. So, if epistemic
reliability is a factor of descriptive accuracy, then one can no longer
hold the view that there are such things are brute common sense facts.

There is a long lineage of Indian philosophers seeking naturalistically
respectable accounts of belief formation. But (and here is the crucial
point) one can go only so far in describing the epistemic properties of
belief formation without the benefit of cognitive science, neuroscience,
biology, neurobiology, and the like. Ditto for pondering the nature of
what there is à la Vaiśeṣika, Abhidharma, and the rest without the
benefit of modern physics.

Is there anything at the cutting edge of Indian metaphysics and
epistemology that can help advance the debate about progress in
philosophy, where such debate is not merely about achieving clarity and
understanding, or even enlightenment (in the common sense of that term)
in articulating specific philosophical views, but about knowledge?

Descartes occupies a turning point in Western philosophy because he
shows an awareness of the dangers of being so drawn into one’s own study
of the past to the point of forgetting the reasons one got into it in
the first place. If modernity ever arrived in India prior to the
colonial period, it must have done so differently, perhaps as “thinking
with the texts and beyond them” (as Ganeri has recently suggested in his
*The Lost Age of Reason*). This possible early arrival is, however, yet
to be fully assessed. Regardless, a whole generation of 20th c.
Indian-born philosophers, from Daya Krishna to Matilal and Mohanty have
expressed ambivalence about how best to do Indian philosophy in a modern
key (notwithstanding the challenges of writing it in a language,
English, shaped by a completely different philosophical culture).
Ideally, it should be read such that one neither imports too many alien
concepts into it, nor writes it merely as a chapter in the history of
something like ‘global’ philosophy. Now that there are respectable ways
of doing Indian philosophy outside of Indology, how should the question
of progress be framed? *Can* it be framed?

Can these (for the most part classical) texts point far enough beyond
them to occasion some kind of philosophical progress given that
scientific naturalism is here to stay?

Least there is any confusion, let me just add that my question (a
multi-part one, I admit) is not about whether such progress should
entail that some version of (Cārvāka-like) physicalism (or any
comparable metaphysical theory) is true, but about whether theories of
knowledge (and reality) originating in the Indian philosophical
tradition can be extended to accommodate the vast bodies of empirical
knowledge we now have.
