+++
title = "Duke Tales I see Finland"
full_title = "Duke Tales I see Finland in the strangest places"
date = "2021-06-24"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/i-see-finland-in-the-strangest-places"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/i-see-finland-in-the-strangest-places).

Duke Tales: I see Finland in the strangest places



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fa7db0ccd-d4d6-4941-a736-7f5c1f232c20_800x683.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/i-see-finland-in-the-strangest-places?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

*Even though this is an Austin story, **it’s part one in a six-part
series about the Finnish people**, their unique culture and their unique
genetics. We’ll look at the stranger-than-fiction stories the past 20
years of genetic innovation have verified about who they are, how they
got to Finland and all the other unexpected places their genes show up.*

***This piece is free; the remaining five chapters will be for [paid
subscribers](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?).***

*If anyone has ever tried to tell you Finns are weird and primitive (I’m
looking at you, other Europeans), today’s story about my friend Duke and
me is for you.*

I met “Duke” the day I moved in. He walked up to me on the street and
pulled up his shirt to show me a seeping gash. I gave him what cash I
had and called my wife in shock. Since then, I don’t want to think about
how much I’ve forked over for Duke’s emergencies. Lots of times he
urgently needed gas at the last minute to go see his daughter. Or he’s
out of propane. Or he swings by in the evenings, rattling and recounting
the coins in one palm, giving me puppy dog eyes about how he just needs
30 more cents for a beer. One year I counted and he had three birthdays.
In my absence, he buttonholed my brother who was visiting, and said I
owed him lots of money, intimating that it would be wise for my brother
to settle the debt.

There was the time he came over ashen-faced, confiding that he was
bleeding bad, ashamed for my wife to hear specifics. He needed money to
get to the VA. We worried about him for two solid days and then there he
was again, tooling down the street, looking carefree and half his age on
his ten-speed. Actually, he said, it was just that he’d swallowed some
glass while opening a beer with his teeth. He’d kinda felt it at the
time but figured it would be OK. Anyway, he was on the mend.

More than once his tent has gone up in flames and he rings the bell late
at night, in urgent need of a “loan” to go get another one. Duke grew up
in this neighborhood. The house his parents raised him and his siblings
in is boarded up, unused. I assume it’s condemned. Sometimes he grouses
about his successful siblings who are long gone, busy with their
careers. They’re in no hurry to sell the lot. They know how
gentrification works and they’re playing the long game. That property
value needs to get a lot higher before they’ll sign. Duke’s outnumbered.
So he does what he needs to do.

![Montinique Monroe / Getty
Images](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F970b0470-c80f-45b1-9466-afcbeeccbca9_760x507.jpeg)

He overcharges me to mow my tiny patch of lawn, he winsomely accosts
unprepared passersby, he does odd jobs around the neighborhood. Once he
offered to take a mess of cardboard off my hands and my wife got all
excited that the recycling markets were up again. But I hadn’t been
listening closely enough and he just wanted me to pay him to flatten all
those boxes.

Over time, I’ve developed a certain loyalty to Duke. I get mildly
affronted when an Uber driver dropping me off looks out at Duke warily,
asking are you sure it’s OK if I leave? I appreciate the way Duke keeps
an eye on the neighborhood. He calls me Rasheed, avails himself of my
tap water, and charges his collection of half-functioning cell phones at
my outlet. His animosity towards the neighborhood Tech Bros who eat out
or get all their meals delivered, in addition to receiving endless
mounds of [Amazon packages](https://www.amazon.com/shop/RazibKhan)
entertains me even though I’m more like them than I’d like. They get up
from their computers to run wind sprints together occasionally, looking
doughy and miserable. Duke ambles past, lean as hell from an honest
day’s hustle, a diet of beer (and glass) and daily trips lugging buckets
of water.

All of this to say that my boy Duke lives a pretty marginal life. The
Hobbesian phrase “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short” can feel
apt. His life looks… weird. I wouldn’t want it and it isn’t like anyone
else’s I know. And yet…

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F06d15653-8b97-4826-940c-de2e91da6f30_1000x400.jpeg)

#### **When the going gets tough, the weird...**

On Valentines Day this year, it had begun snowing and the roads were
getting icy. My wife isn’t much of a Duke benefactor, but she started
worrying about him in his tent. The completely implausible Texas lows
we’d been watching in the extended forecast were upon us. Single-degree
temperatures in a Texas tent is no joke. We don’t have much, but she
begged him to consider sleeping in our unfinished room where he could at
least have our space heater, four walls, and a sofa to sleep on. He
wasn’t interested. His back hunched against the wind, he showed us how
his bare hands were stiffening in the chill. But he didn’t need any dumb
sofa. He just needed money for propane. The usual.

We thought he was crazy. We worried about what state he’d be in the next
time we saw him. Actually, the next time we saw Duke, he was in the
exact same state as always. Chipper, talking fast, needed to “borrow”
more money for propane, his brother was going to drive out and bring him
cash once the highways were cleared.

We on the other hand were living in our driveway. Camped out in our car,
we had heat, we could charge our phones and there was space to sleep in
something approaching comfort. In the daylight, the kids spread out
their Legos, got on their tablets, drew pictures, and read. Pretty much
their usual, except that they had to bundle up to venture into the
frigid house to pee or brush their teeth. It was the middle of a
pandemic; our fridge was packed. We were lucky. We had running water and
our gas never went out, so we could brave the house to boil water and
cook simple warm meals. But I spent most of those four days with a
blanket pulled over my head, wishing myself asleep. I did enough
blizzards and cold in my childhood. I’m not into roughing it.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F3cdc53d0-95a0-4807-9866-b16ac087c98c_1200x455.jpeg)

While our neighborhood, Duke’s neighborhood languished in eerie
stillness without traffic or power into a fourth day, across the
freeway, lights were always ablaze in the high-rise hotels. The best
rates we saw were $600 and up a night. That’s where one of the Tech Bros
was returning to when we spoke to each other for the first time. He
slowed his luxury SUV and asked with feeling if we were doing OK. We had
our first conversation there in the driveway. He looked a little
wild-eyed and said something confusing about going to his office for the
first time in six months to see if there was any food to scavenge.
Just-in-time supply chains, a relatively unlimited budget, and Austin’s
robust open market in meal delivery were not seeing him through this
crisis. Was there really no food at $600+ hotels?

Duke meanwhile had just one question. He peeked his head into the car.
*You charging phones in there?* One of Duke’s phones was really fiddly
to charge. Now I understood why he always seemed to be crouched over my
outlet, fussing with a charger. It flashed text warnings about how no
charger was inserted. When we apologetically returned it, he said *oh
naw, it does that.* He narrated the process, explaining how *you plug it
in, it turns on, then it lights up with the logo, then you get this
screen, then the screen goes black and then that little red light goes
on. And that means it’s charging and you can leave it*. We protested
that the message said it wasn’t charging. He wasn’t interested: *oh it
always does that screen before the little red light goes on. And then
you good*. Whether Duke had once read that warning and found it best to
ignore or didn’t actually read text at all wasn’t clear. Either way, he
was right. It charged.

#### **A quiet life**

What could a man like Duke have to do with the genetics of Finns, one of
the world’s most technologically advanced, high-trust, literate
societies? Duke lives in a tent with a Pit Bull and a powerful propane
heater. He rides a ten-speed, cadges water from people around the
neighborhood, dries his laundry on the line, charges his phone outside
my house, is an amiable drunk, and rocks a salad-days physique (and
immaculate sneaks) in his sixth decade. He lives in a metropolitan area
in an eternal growth spurt, awash in easy tech money, with a median
household income of $80,000, but hits me up in increments of 30 cents
for beer.

But in the middle of a global pandemic, a [freak ice storm
hit](https://razib.substack.com/p/texpocalypse-now-a-postmortem), the
[electrical grid collapsed overnight](https://www.texastribune.org/2021/02/18/texas-power-outages-ercot/),
and most commerce and transport ground to a halt for a week. I weathered
this, slumped under a blanket, texting my friends about everyone’s water
and electrical status. The Tech Bros high-tailed it to a luxury hotel.
And my [prepper friend’s](https://unsupervisedlearning.libsyn.com/texpocalypse-now-a-postmortem)
carefully researched generators turned out not to be rated for 17
degrees and below and failed. We all had resources and various series of
safety nets. Where was Duke who had basically none of those things?

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fce6d4e15-e4de-4421-908a-7994558394c5_1456x819.jpeg)

Duke was walking a mile through the unplowed streets to bring us the
jerry can of gas my wife requested. The gas station minimart was cleaned
out, including of gas cans, so Duke backtracked to a friend who sensed
my wife’s cash in his pocket and required rent for the use of his
plastic gas can. After lugging the full can back and topping up our
tank, Duke trekked back to drop off the can. And then he carried on with
all the odd jobs people needed him for.

Once the sun came out again and the snow started melting, there were
still days of eerie stillness without hulking Amazon, UPS and FedEx
trucks rounding the corner throughout the day, and many fewer people
absently walking their dogs, phone in hand at all hours. Even USPS’s
zippy little trucks took an age to return to the streets. But Duke
didn’t seem to give the standstill around him another thought. Asked if
it had ever been this cold here before, he misunderstood the question
and answered absently, *Sheeee-it, people crying about no power for a
few days. Try living without power for 20 years!*

#### **Civilize this**

When we talk about the history of human civilization, we’re often
focused on the societies around the lip of the Mediterranean, the Rhine
valley, the Rhone valley, the Po Valley, etc. But Europe for one hasn’t
only been rich loess and river valleys, deep-rooted civilizations,
sophisticated literary cultures, and complex conurbations.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fd9bcd594-699f-434f-b132-26d3bac5512c_468x624.jpeg)

Europe is also Finland, a beautifully remote and marginal land raked
with thousands of lakes. It can be about as accommodating as a winter
week during a global pandemic, overlaid with a freak ice storm, no
snowplows, a [collapsed electrical grid](https://www.texastribune.org/2021/02/18/texas-power-outages-ercot/)
and commerce, and transport grinding to a halt. Finland, in other words,
has not always been ideal for the equivalent of the Tech Bros and me.
Certainly in the past, our counterparts who might have been doing very
nicely for themselves in the knowledge centers of the heart of Europe
would have been the first to be culled by what mother nature continually
meted out to her hardy Finnish subjects.

My actual friend Duke would not be remotely optimized for Finland now or
in the past, but humans as content and at ease with a spartan, unfussy,
marginal, self-reliant (or raiding!) existence clearly once were. Over
the centuries, commentators, especially skeptical fellow Europeans have
speculated, often uncharitably, about the marked weirdness of the
Finnish people and whether their apparent lack of refinement reflected a
primitive, unimproved state. The truth is quite a bit more interesting.
Finnish blends of ancient ancestry don’t suggest some archaically
primitive relict group at all; in fact, a tell-tale tranche of their
ancestry is startlingly recent, the last triumphant arrivals to an
inhospitable land. And among many other interesting stories, Finnish
genomes can now show us that where the prehistoric Finnish equivalent of
Tex-pocalypse Tech Bros and Razibs tried and failed to make their fancy
ways stick, it was some kindred spirits of Duke with their weird,
dark-horse toolkit who ambled in, stole their women, supplanted their
culture and thrived.+++(4)+++

-   **[Part
    two](https://razib.substack.com/p/weirdness-as-a-national-pastime)**:
    I look at weirdness as a surprisingly adaptive national pastime, two
    millennia of other Europeans giving Finns side-eye, plus linguistic
    clues in the early quest for Finnish origin stories.

-   **[Part
    three](https://razib.substack.com/p/go-west-young-siberian)**: Go
    west, young Siberian: deep dive into Finnish genetics discoveries

-   **[Part
    four](https://razib.substack.com/p/from-deepest-siberia-to-europes-edge)**:
    From deepest Siberia to Europe’s edge: more genetics

-   **Part five**: on frontier life, Finns in America, genetic
    bottlenecks and weirdness

***This piece is free; the remaining five chapters are for [paid
subscribers](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?).***

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/i-see-finland-in-the-strangest-places?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

