+++
title = "Double Star"
full_title = "Double Star"
date = "2017-06-27"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/06/27/double-star/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/06/27/double-star/).

Double Star

I was not surprised by the recent Congressional baseball shooting. The
threat is ongoing. This means that we may need enhanced security for
political figures – which raises the question of using doubles.
Obviously, the more doppelgangers running around kissing babies and
cutting ribbons, the less likely that a shooter will hit the actual
President or Chief Justice or whatever.

But once you’re using doubles, there’s always the temptation to get more
mileage out of them. Why not hire a double that can pull off a decent
stump speech? Of course, you have to be careful: it has to look as if
the true original *could* have been there, *could* have made that
speech.

But there’s always that temptation… so when the Prez gives a speech in
New York followed by one in LA three hours later – well, he’s the POTUS.
He could have taken a supersonic military jet. It’s possible. And when
you notice that he’s tweeting 20 hours a day – well, Edison didn’t need
much sleep.

Eventually he doesn’t bother: a speech in London is followed an hour
later by one in Washington. Even with an SR-71, that’s undoable. Next,
simultaneous appearance in two places. Three places. Five places.
Tweeting 24/7. Eventually, speeches in stereo, all the while denying
that anything unusual is happening. in much the same way that McDonald’s
official position is that there is (and can be) only one Ronald
McDonald.

The doppelgangers are sharing real-time experiences thru WI-FI: rather
like [Tines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Fire_Upon_the_Deep). And
like Tines, there’s no reason that the presidential swarm can’t continue
indefinitely, even as members age and are occasionally shot. The show
must go on, rather like Menudo.

For Trump, this scheme has the added benefit of subjecting many of his
least favorite people to death by adrenal exhaustion.

