+++
title = "The Śrīvaiṣṇava"
full_title = "The Śrīvaiṣṇava hagiography and the Other Śaivas, Jains, Buddhists, “Turks”"
upstream_url = "https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/09/28/the-srivaisnava-hagiography-and-the-other/"
date = "2021-09-28"

+++
Source: [here](https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/09/28/the-srivaisnava-hagiography-and-the-other/).

The Śrīvaiṣṇava hagiography and the Other: Śaivas, Jains, Buddhists, “Turks”

We’ve had the occasion recently to discuss the Other in the Śrīvaiṣṇava texts. Theological works mention them, of course. The *Īṭu* begins with a list of 17 other belief systems, classified as *bāhya* (‘outside the Vedic fold’) and *kudṛṣṭi*s (‘with a wrong view’ of the Vedas), which it dismisses as useless (See [this post](https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/07/23/what-are-the-bahya-and-kudṛṣṭi-matas/) for more details). For a long time, I believed that the Śaivas were the intimate others, since they worship a Vedic god, and do not deny the authority of the Vedas (well, depending on which school). But it turns out that no, they are also total Others: I have recently been pointed out that it is the Bhāṭṭa, Prābhākara, Māyāvādin, Bhāskarīya, Yādavaprakāśa and Ekāyana (apparently dvaitins) who are considered *kudṛṣṭi*s, and everyone else is *bāhya*! One way or other, they are all considered as being wrong: I think it’s Parāśara Bhaṭṭa (or maybe his father Kūreśa) who speaks of two thirsty deer: while the first one dies running after a mirage, the other dies killed by a tiger a few steps away from a real pond. Which one’s fate is better?

Anyway, in a Vaiṣṇava book club meeting a month or two ago, we discussed how the Śrīvaiṣṇavas dealt with the Others, did they treat them differently, did they prefer one set over another, were they harsher towards the ones rather than the others? Well, interesting questions. And they got me thinking. Here are my first impressions, not definite answers to these questions. I have based these on the *[Āṟāyirappaṭi Guruparamparāprabhāvam](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.384478/page/n3/mode/2up)* (AGPP), a 14th c. Śrīvaiṣṇava hagiographic text, which some of us have been working on for a while (More on this text [here](https://suganyasmusingsscribblings.wordpress.com/2021/01/07/the-most-fun-srivaiṣṇava-hagiographic-text/)). Let’s see what the AGPP tells us about the Others. I’m writing this post out of intellectual curiosity, and I hope that it doesn’t offend anyone’s sensibilities, what with many of the belief systems mentioned here still being followed by thousands if not millions of people.

The Buddhists: so far as I know the AGPP (and a few other similar texts), they don’t get much coverage. They are mentioned in the first part of the AGPP, which is dedicated to the Āḻvārs. Tirumaṅkai wishes to gild the roof of the Praṇavākāravimāna in Śrīraṅgam, and for that purpose, he robs the golden statue of the Buddha from Nāgapaṭṭiṇam. Interestingly, one of the variants of the AGPP, surely a later one, suggests that he managed to access the statue by fooling the Buddhists by claiming that the “Turuṣkas” had robbed and took away that statue! The 9th century is a bit early for this kind of invasion in the South, isn’t it! Anyway, these people are presented asbeing rich and easy to fool. Oh, there’s a brief passage in the life of Rāmānuja, where he is claimed to have defeated the Buddhists and fully annihilated them. With a strong hint of violence. Hopefully only metaphorical.

The Jains: while on exile, Rāmānuja exorcized the daughter of the Jain king Viṭaladeva in Karnataka, and therefore, 12000 Jains debated with Rāmānuja, who defeated them all taking the form of a 1000-hooded Śeṣa and converted a few of them. No violence anywhere here, unlike what some of the Śaiva texts like to describe.

The Śaivas: well, the enemy No 1 is the Cōḷa king known as “Kirumikaṇṭaṉ/ kṛmikaṇṭha” (who is not identified, and who may have had throat cancer according to some modern scholars). He tried to force Rāmānuja to sign the statement that claimed Śiva’s superiority. Rāmānuja had to flee, and Kūreśa (and someone else) were blinded by the king. And then there is the story of Rāmānuja’s cousin turning Śaiva and who had to be brought back to the fold. And, not sure if it’s in the AGPP, the story of *mūrti* of Govindarāja in Chidambaram being displaced by the Cōḷa king…

The Turks/ turuṣkas: they are mentioned here and there as potential threats, but I need to look closer. The story of Rāmānuja going to Delhi to bring back the *utsavamūrti* of Celvapiḷḷai to Melkote presents a decent Sultan, who welcomes him courteously, and almost like any other affable “Hindu” king. One reason why I believe the AGPP belongs to the 14th c. (since a scholar is about to publish a book in which she dates it to around the 17th c.), is that there is no mention of the trauma of the sack of Śrīraṅgam that the later hagiographic texts mention. Piḷḷai Lokācārya and Vedānta Deśika are said to have witnessed that particularly violent event (oh, I’m not getting into the historicity of the event here).

So my impressions are that the Other is an Other, however different s/he is – meaning, just because a group is alien and thoroughly different from anything they knew, did not make the Ācāryas vilify them more than necessary. I now wonder if they refrained from making comments that are too harsh against groups that held political and military power during the time when the AGPP was written? Is that why they didn’t mention the sack? But some other works do, and I need to look at them too. Anyway, the Śaivas are represented as evil here, I think, more than the others. Which can take us to the topic of religious leaders fighting for financial and political powers at the kingly courts.

Oh, and then there are the *kudṛṣṭi*s (who are supposed to be more like the intimate othes): the AGPP mentions Yādavaprakāśa, Rāmāṇuja’s teacher (and later, disciple), who tries to kill him. And an unnamed person who tries to poison him, probably not an “Other”, as Rāmānuja received poisoned food from that man’s reluctant wife. So hey, it’s not just the Others who are bad, right?

Image credits: copyrights @krishnafortoday.com and Keshav
