+++
title = "The Brus Crisis: How and why it originated?"
date = "2020-02-13"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/13/the-brus-reangs/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/13/the-brus-reangs/).

The Brus were in the news recently because the central government of
India finally reached a settlement with the aggrieved tribe. There was a
quadripartite agreement between the government of India, state
government of Tripura, state government of Mizoram and MBDPF (Mizoram
Bru Displaced People’s Forum) and some other groups representing the
Brus. But, what exactly was the conflict? Who are the Brus? The root
lies in the ethnic and religious tensions amongst the tribes of north
east of India of which the Brus ore one.

The tribes in north east India have had a chequered history with each
other. For example, the Chakma Buddhist and Hajong Hindus who were
displaced from Bangladesh in the 1960s were violently targeted by the
Arunachalese after the consolidation of Arunachalese identity. The Naga
and Kuki tribes in Manipur have had a history of violence and counter
violence. Though this is not always the case but, mostly religion plays
an important role.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/bru-1.jpg?w=1024)

The Reangs (as they are known in Tripura) or the Brus (as they are known
in Mizoram) are one of the Scheduled Tribes of Tripura. They came to
India in the 1950s from Chittagong Hills in Bangladesh in the aftermath
of violence they faced there. They are spread across Tripura, Mizoram
and southern Assam. But the tensions arose in Mizoram where Brus had
significant population. Mizoram is majority christian and Brus are
majority Hindus and here in lies the tension. Brus have been facing
severe persecution from christian majority in Mizoram for a long time
but, things heated up in the 1980s and 1990s. There were even demands to
remove the Brus from electoral rolls saying that they are not indigenous
to Mizoram. The chances of having a peaceful and negotiated settlement
were becoming slim and it created an uncertain atmosphere.

The dissatisfied young people formed an outfit branding itself as BNLF
(Bru National Liberation Front) and this outfit came into a tacit
agreement with NLFT (National Liberation Front of Tripura). Presence of
an armed outfit was not known to everybody. They waged raids in
unguarded areas to send messages to the government that they were active
for their cause. After alleged killling of a Mizo wildlife game watcher
of Forest Department of Mizoram on October 21 1997, situation took a
drastic turn. The murder was used by the ethnic organisations of Mizoram
like YMA (Young Mizo Association) and MZP (Mizo Zirlai Pawl/ Mizo
students association) with the connivance of church, to finish off Brus
from Mizoram. They went on rampant ethnic cleansing in 1997. This led to
a huge population of Brus taking refuge in neighbouring Tripura. They
took shelter in six different camps in Kanchanpur sub-division of
Tripura namely Naisingpara (Kashiiampur), Ashapara, Khasithai, Kainskau,
Khakchangpara and lastly Hamsapara. The main camp is located at
Naisingpara where they established their office, the Mizoram Bru
Displaced People’s Forum (MBDPF).

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/bru-reang.jpg?w=1024)

The situation in refugee camps has been abysmal. Most of them in the
camps work as daily labourers or rely on forests for their livelihood.
They do not even have proper identification cards like Aadhar and voter
id. The number of displaced refugees was originally 50,000 but came down
to 29,000 after some of them went back to their villages in Mizorum.
But, the exact number keeps dwindling. Worst affected are children. Some
of them are not even aware of what schools are. According to a survey
conducted by **[NCPCR (National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights)](https://ncpcr.gov.in/)**, kids in refugee camps have never been
to school. There they lack basic facilities of health and hygiene. This
has caused drastic reduction in birth rates and high death rates in the
Bru refugee camps of Tripura. They have been helped by some
organisations especially, Akhil Bhartiya Vanbasi Kalyan Ashram, an RSS
affiliate, but the situation remains dire.

Meanwhile, any effort to resolve the situation have been spoiled by the
ethnic organisations of Mizoram. The Presbyterian church which is
extremely active in Mizoram has shown a very lukewarm response towards
problems faced by Hindu Reangs or Brus. Their response becomes even more
questionable when we know how important church is in a Mizo’s life. It
is basically a state within a state. From actively meddling in the
political scene of Mizoram, asking people to vote in the name of Christ,
deciding what clothes should a woman wear, they have even sometimes
helped the government in settling disputes amongst other tribes. Their
range is exhaustive. So, when they are conspicuously absent in resolving
this situation, it says a lot.

Central government had been trying to resolve this since 2010 but not
much came out of it. A tripartite agreement between government of India
and state governments of Mizoram and Tripura on repatriation of
displaced Brus was reached but the Mizoram government got cold feet and
they declined to get them back for fear of further ethnic cleansing.
Brus demanded ADC (Autonomous District Council) for Bru inhabited areas
of Mizoram as the other tribes of Mizoram already have this arrangement.
But, the demand was rejected by Mizoram Government under pressure from
ethnic organisations. 17000 names of Brus were even deleted from voters
rolls. Election Commission of India even conducted voting in Bru
settlement areas of Tripura for Mizoram assembly election in 2013 under
direction of supreme court. But, the move was vehemently opposed in
Mizoram.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/amit-shah-tripura-780x470-1.jpg?w=780)

Finally an agreement has been reached and Modi government needs to be
given the credit for making a way out of this quagmire. A lot has been
promised. Land rights for displaced Brus will be part of the agreement
and 600 crore rehabilitation package has been pledged by the government
of India, **[Biplab Deb](https://twitter.com/BjpBiplab)**, chief
minister of Tripura and his Mizo counterpart Zoramthanga. Other
guarantees include fixed deposits of Rs 4 lakh for each family, a
monthly sum of Rs 5,000 and free monthly ration for the first two years
and schools in all cluster villages. It is unlikely that an autonomous
development council, on the lines of the Tripura Tribal Areas Autonomous
District Council (TTAADC), will be agreed upon.

Hopefully, the agreement will not only soothe the wounds of Brus and
settle them in their homes but will also provide an example to help
solve other disputes in the north east because unless peace is
permanently established, development of that part of India will always
be incomplete.

**References**:

1.Politics and Religion in India by Narendra Kumar

2.Rethinking Economic Development in Northeast India: The Emerging
Dynamics  
by Deepak Misra and Vandana Upadhyaya

3\.
<https://www.outlookindia.com/newsscroll/living-in-camps-thousands-of-bruraeng-children-in-tripura-have-never-heard-of-school/1348536>

4\.
<https://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/92967/14/14_chapter%206.pdf>

