+++
title = "Annexation of Sindh: 1843 CE Part 1"
date = "2020-02-05"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/05/annexation-of-sindh-1843-ce-part-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/05/annexation-of-sindh-1843-ce-part-1/).

There are always certain incidents in history which are remembered and
talked about more than the others. Same is the case with various
incidents and events of the British colonialist expansion in India. We
have frequently learnt and discussed annexation of Jhansi in 1854,
especially due to heroic resistance by Rani Laxmibai, annexation of
Awadh in 1856 etc. But, how Sindh came under complete control of British
is not something that is discussed. So, today I want to talk about that,
not only because it’s less discussed but also because it’s so
interesting, it gives us an insight of ruthless diplomacy of British and
despite trying, utter helplessness of the rulers of Sindh. This is part
one of a two part series.

Ever since the invasion of Sindh by Muhammad bin Qasim in 711 CE, except
for certain areas, it’s been mostly under the Islamic invaders until its
occupation by the British in 1843. It was under the Mughals, then
submitted to Nadir Shah and then was included in the empire of Ahmed
Shah Abdali/Durrani in the eighteenth century. It was ruled by the
Kallora chiefs but they were ousted by the Baluchi tribe of Talpura
which had descended from hills and settled in Sindh in 1771. Mir Fateh
Ali Khan became its ruler and was confirmed as such by Durranis in 1784.
After his death in 1800, Sindh was divided amongst his brothers known as
‘char yar’. They called themselves Amirs of Sindh. Later, they occupied
some more territories like Karachi, Amarkot, Shaikarpur and Bukkar. The
chiefs were seated at Hyderabad, Khairpur and Mirpur.

![**Mir Rustam Khan
Talpur**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/mir-rustam-khan-talpur.jpg?w=315)

The East India Company had established a factory at Thatta which was an
important commercial town at that time. But, they abandoned it in 1792.
The British were concerned about the French actions in Sindh hence, they
made a treaty of ‘eternal friendship’ with the chiefs in 1809 and the
treaty was renewed in 1820. The British were now successful in keeping
French out. Apart from French another power whose presence and actions
or just the possibility of it kept British on their toes was Russia.
They wanted a place which can be a counteracting influence over the
Afghans. It wasn’t possible to use Punjab as Maharaja Ranjit Singh was
too powerful. Hence, Sindh.

Ranjit Singh himself wanted to expand Sikh power to Sindh as natural
progression of Sikh Empire. He had even suggested to divide Sindh
between the Sikh and the British in 1831 but, Lord Bentinck didn’t agree
to this. In fact the British had decided to use the looming fear of Sikh
attack over Sindh to threaten the Amirs and bring Sindh under the
Company rule.

![**Maharaja Ranjit
Singh**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/maharaj_ranjit_singh.jpg?w=679)

In 1831, British sent Sir Alexander Burnes to explore the Indus area for
commercial reasons. They pretended that they were just carrying presents
for Ranjit Singh at Lahore and were just passing along the way. The
Baluchis knew that Company had other motives and it was only a matter of
time before Sindh would be under their rule. When Burnes arrived at the
Indus, a Baluchi soldier said; “the mischief is done, you have seen our
country”. In 1832, another treaty was concluded between the British and
the chiefs of Sindh for opening rivers and roads of Sindh for commerce
but not for military vessels and stores. Amirs though signed the treaty,
were still apprehensive. The treaty was renewed in 1834. Their
apprehension of British actions proved correct by what happened
subsequently. What is interesting to me is that from the very start the
Amirs knew what was to happen and yet they fought, though they were
helpless and incompetent against the British might.

To be continued…

Read this article on
[MyVoiceOpIndia](https://myvoice.opindia.com/2020/02/annexation-of-sindh-1843-ce/)
as well.

