+++
title = "Annexation of Sindh: 1843 CE Part 2"
date = "2020-02-05"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/05/annexation-of-sindh-1843-ce-part-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/05/annexation-of-sindh-1843-ce-part-2/).

As much as one abhors the British practices, one can also learn from
sheer connivance and ruthlessness of their diplomacy in this whole saga.
They knew that Maharaja Ranjit Singh wanted to incorporate Sindh into
his empire, so they warned him of such actions saying that Amirs of
Sindh were now connected with the British Empire and Lord Auckland used
this threat to conduct another treaty with the Amirs in 1838 and sent a
British resident there.

Highhanded attitude of the British made them break the treaty of 1832
when they took armed forces through Sindh during the first Anglo –
Afghan war. Everything was going as per the whims of the British. When
they decided, they concluded a treaty. When they decided, they broke it.
Other such odd demands included a very heavy price for mediating between
the Amirs and Shah Shuja (the Afghan ruler) in commuting his pecuniary
demands on Sindh, despite the fact that Shah Shuja himself had granted
an exemption to the Amirs. Then there was the demand of three lakh
rupees for maintaining British force in their territories. Sindh was now
a formal British protectorate.

Final nail in the coffin was Sir Charles Napier as a representative of
the Governor -General with full military and civil powers in 1842. He
was a very hot headed and impulsive office. He replaced Major James
Outram who was better liked by the Amirs. Napier believed the theory
that “annexation of Sindh would be a very beneficent piece of rascality
for which it was his business to find an excuse – a robbery to be
plausibly effected”.

![**Sir Charles
Napier**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/charles-napier.png?w=212)

He held the Amirs accountable for vague charges of going against the
British during Anglo Afghan war, wanted some new territory in lieu of
three lakh rupees tribute and the right of minting coinage completely
under British. But before this new treaty could be accepted he occupied
the demanded territory and marched on Imamgarh in 1843 January, an
important desert fortress in Sindh. By February a full blown war had
started. The Baluchis attacked the British Residency and James Outram
(he came back as a British Commissioner) found refuge in a steamer. The
Baluchi army consisted of 22,000 men but was routed by 2,800 men and 12
guns under Napier at Miani, few miles from Hyderabad. There were other
battles at Dabo, Amarkot that British won. Napier conveyed this news to
Lord Ellenborough in a pun saying, “Peccavi, I have Sind.” Napier got
70,000 euros as his prize money, Outram got 3000 euros but he gave it
back to charity.

![**Battle of
Miani**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/battle_of_miani.jpg?w=1024)

Everyone at the time, from the casual observers, to fellow officers, to
Board of Directors, to newspapers agreed that the whole affair cannot be
defended neither politically nor morally. They knew it was nothing but
continuation of another morally questionable Afghan war, yet they held
onto the newly won Sindh, for there is no such thing as a wrongly
acquired territory when it comes to the expansion of an empire.

**References**:

1.  History of India by R.C. Majumdar , H.C. Raychaudhuri, Kalinkar
    Datta
2.  History of British India by P.E. Roberts.

Read this article on
[MyVoiceOpIndia](https://myvoice.opindia.com/2020/02/annexation-of-sindh-1843-ce/)
as well.

