+++
title = "The Molotov Cocktail: How petrol bomb got this moniker?"
date = "2020-02-18"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/18/the-molotov-cocktail-how-petrol-bomb-got-this-moniker/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/18/the-molotov-cocktail-how-petrol-bomb-got-this-moniker/).

This is not something that we read about usually but, do we know how
petrol bombs got into use? How they came to be called the Molotov
Cocktail? Well, petrol bomb also called poor man’s grenade has been used
by all sorts of people for decades now. From criminals and rioters to
terrorists and even regular soldiers. The currently used design was
actually perfected in Finland in the last years of 1930s but, how it
came to be called the Molotov cocktail or the Molly? Let’s find out.

The name was given by Finns during the Winter War, a war fought between
the Soviet Union and Finland when USSR invaded Finland in November 1939,
barely three months after the start of World War II. The petrol bomb
that Finns perfected was named after the foreign minister of Soviet
Union, Vyacheslav Molotov. The naming itself sort of reminds us how even
during the grim times of war, even the darkest hours of history can
sometimes be laced with dark and sardonic humour. This is one of those
examples.

Now, Finland and Soviet Union did not have a cordial relationship at
that time, to say the least. USSR had been putting demands in front of
Finland, asking them to cede a lot of territory to Soviets in exchange
of land somewhere else. The official reason Soviets said was to protect
Leningrad which was barely 32 kms from the Finnish border. Finns had
hoped that in the event of a Soviet invasion on Finland, Nazi Germany
would help them but, their hopes had been quashed with a pact that had
been concluded in August 1939, between USSR and Nazi Germany,
represented by their respective foreign ministers Vyacheslav Molotov and
Joachim von Ribbentrop (Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact). It was a pact of non
aggression and made an agreement that neither government would aide an
enemy of the other.

![**Vyacheslav
Molotov**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/800px-vyacheslav_molotov_anefo2-1.jpg?w=220)

Soviets invaded Finland in November and war started. With no help from
Nazi Germany, Finland was on defensive. And in this war the petrol bomb
was heavily used by Finns. It was in December that the name Molotov
Cocktail emerged. A lot of propaganda was emanating from the Russian
radio called Radio Moscow, on which Molotov said that the Soviet planes
were not dropping cluster bombs but just humanitarian supplies, food
deliveries for the starving people of Finland. Finnish soldiers’
response was equally sarcastic when they dubbed these bombs as
“Molotov’s Picnic Baskets” and when these bottle bombs were developed
they were called “Molotov cocktail” as a drink to go with the food.

![**A Finnish soldier with a Molotov Cocktail during Winter
War**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/320px-talvisota_molotov_cocktail.png?w=320)

The bombs seemed to be in use for a few years before they came to be
called Molotov Cocktail. The first, generally accepted use was during
the Spanish Civil War (1936 – 1939) by Fransisco Franco’s men against
the Loyalists. They were called bottle-bombs at that time and were very
much a deciding factor in repelling the Loyalists.

But Finns perfected the design and its tactical use. As William R.
Trotter explains in his book “The Winter War: The Russo-Finnish War of
1939-1940” – “fuel for the Molotov cocktail was refined to a slightly
sticky mixture of gasoline, kerosene,tar, andpotassium chlorate.
Further refinements included the attachment of wind-proof matches or a
phial of chemicals that would ignite on breakage, thereby removing the
need to pre-ignite the bottle, and leaving the bottle about one-third
empty was found to make breaking more likely.” It was also helped by the
fact that tanks at that time ran on petrol which made it easier to set
those tanks on fire because petrol has lower kindling point compared to
diesel which has a very high kindling point. The Molotov cocktails
worked so efficiently that it blasted an estimated 40 Soviet tanks and
other tracked vehicles in one day.

After that, the petrol bomb became part of the arsenal for poorly armed
insurgents, rioters, criminals. The most famous use of the Molotov
cocktail came in during the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 when people
revolted against the communist government there. Almost 400 Soviet tanks
were destroyed by the time the uprising was crushed by the Red Army.
Though their effectiveness against contemporary tanks has reduced
drastically but it is still used by the criminals and rioters and urban
guerrillas. The story of its emergence remains interesting as ever.

