+++
title = "The chaotic beauty of Madurai in Maduraikkanchi"
date = "2020-02-10"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/10/the-chaotic-beauty-of-madurai-in-maduraikkanchi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/10/the-chaotic-beauty-of-madurai-in-maduraikkanchi/).

There have been beautiful towns and cities in India ever since the
ancient times. Some cities still live and breathe, some do not have that
luxury. From the ruins of Rakhigarhi and Mohenjodaro, to painful ruins
of once flourishing Vijaynagara in Hampi, to Kashi and Mathura, still
busy in their hustle and bustle, numerous other ancient cities dotted
the entire sacred geography of Bharatvarsha. Every ancient city has its
unique flavour. One such city is Madurai, considered the cultural
capital of Tamil Nadu and situated on the banks of river Vaigai, it has
been continuously inhabited since two thousand years at the least. There
had been many rulers of Madurai. In brief, it was the capital of the
Pandya Kingdom, then it came under the Chola Empire. For some time it
was captured by the barbaric Madurai Sultanate but then it was freed by
the Vijaynagara rulers and came under their rule. The period was
followed by the Nayaks, followed by the rule of nawabs of Arcot and
finally by the British.

During its long history, lot of people had described its beauty – poets,
travellers, inhabitants etc. but one of the most beautiful description
comes from an early classic Tamil poem Maduraikkanchi of the Sangam
literature. Part of the Pattupattu anthology, the poem was written in
honour of the second century Pandyan king Nedunjeliyan, though it is
generally dated a couple centuries later in 3rd to 4th century CE. The
following description which the poet gives of Madurai forms the
concluding part of the Maduraikkanchi. The realistic portrayal makes the
city come to life in front of the reader and one can enjoy the beauty of
the lifestyle of an ancient Indian city unfolding in front of their
eyes.

***“The poet enters the city by its great gate, the posts of which are
carved with images of goddess Lakshmi, and which is grimy with ghee,
poured in oblation upon it to bring safety and prosperity to the city it
guards.”***

![(Image Credit: Natesh Ramasamy -Flickr
)](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/02/meenakshi-amman-temple.jpg?w=1024)

When the poet arrives, the city is busy in celebration of a festival.
The streets and the market places are filled with rivers of people of
every race. One can see the royal procession lead by the elephants
walking to the sound of conchs on the street. The procession is followed
by majestic chariots and fierce looking footmen.

The stall keepers are selling sweet cakes, garlands of flowers, scented
powder and betel quids. Old women go from house to house to sell
jewelry. Noblemen pass through streets flashing their gold-sheathed
swords in their chariots. Women are watching the festival from their
balcony. Their ornaments are flashing in the golden hue of sunlight.

The temples are abuzz with the sound of music, with devotees offering
flowers to the gods and honouring the holy sages. There are all sorts of
craftsmen, from bangle-makers, goldsmiths, coppersmiths and cloth
dealers to painters and weavers and sandalwood vendors. People are
buying greens, jack fruit, mangoes and sugar candy. The evening comes
and the city dancers entertain their patrons by singing and dancing to
the sound of lute. Music is filling the atmosphere. Some drunken men are
tumbling in the roadways. The evening is made even more beautiful when
women, along with their children and friends, make haste to the temple
carrying diyas. They dance and sing in the temple courts.

In the night, the city finally sleeps except, the bold housebreakers who
are ready with their roped ladders. But, the night passes in peace due
to the ever vigilant watchmen. This beautiful chaos of the ancient
Indian city comes to a halt until the crack of dawn.

***“Morning comes with the sound of Brahmans intoning their sacred
verses. Wandering bards renew their singing, and the shopkeepers busy
themselves opening their booths”.***

People welcome the new morning and one can hear the sound of opening
doors all over the city. “Women sweep the faded flowers of the festival
from their courtyards. Thus the busy everyday life of the city is
resumed”. This lively description not only provides us a glimpse of
chaotic beauty of ancient Madurai but it also gives readers some ideas
about the other ancient cities of India.

\* References and excerpts are from The Wonder that was India by A L
Basham.

Read this article on
[MyVoiceOpIndia](https://myvoice.opindia.com/2020/02/the-chaotic-beauty-of-madurai-in-maduraikkanchi/)
as well.

