+++
title = "The Indian Left and what they ‘feel’"
date = "2020-02-07"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/07/the-indian-left-and-what-they-feel/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/02/07/the-indian-left-and-what-they-feel/).

There is a show that I was watching and it had a line that said ‘you can
not agree or disagree with some one’s feelings’. I found it very
interesting. Feelings are emotions. You might like them or not like
them, that is a different matter. I do not know how but I ended up
thinking that the Left in our country ‘feels’ a lot, the problem is that
they want their feelings to be treated as facts and if that isn’t
problematic enough, they want state policies to be dictated by those
feelings.

The recent hue and cry over CAA by the Left in India is a classic
example. They feel that it is anti-minority and anti-Muslim to be
specific. Farhan Akhtar embodies the phenomenon perfectly. When he went
to the anti-CAA protests in Mumbai and was asked about why he was
protesting, there came the ever so explanatory reply that we think/feel
that something is about to happen (humein aisa lagta hai, kuchh hone
wala hai), whatever that means!

# An error occurred.

[Try watching this video on
www.youtube.com](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyoEOTahjZk), or enable
JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser.

What rattles them is that their feelings are not only far from facts but
also that now they are publicly called out on them. CAA has nothing to
do with Muslims of India, that is a fact. Pakistan, Bangladesh and
Afghanistan are officially Islamic states, that is a fact. Hindus and
other minorities like Sikhs, Christians, Buddhists, Parsis are
systematically persecuted and discriminated against in these countries,
that is a fact. What is not a fact is that Muslims in these countries
face discrimination because of their religion.

What also amazes me is that they are so used to lying and having what
they feel at the moment to be treated as facts, that they do not see the
contradiction in their own arguments. Arguments that have holes big
enough to be seen from space. According to them, pre-CAA India which was
dangerous for any community other than the majority Hindus becomes in
the post-CAA the beacon of hopes and aspirations for every person living
in our Islamic neighbourhood including the Muslims, the perpetual
victims of this planet. This has become a habit, probably because the
left has controlled the narrative in India for so long that they are
aghast at not being treated as the first citizens of the country. How
dare the plebeians question the patricians. The sheer gall of it!

It also does not help that after wanting your feelings to be treated as
facts when you know that they are not, there is no resolve to follow
their feelings with some tangible actions at the least. Remember Amir
Khan who was so afraid of the rising ‘intolerance’ that he wanted to to
leave the country with family. Well we are still waiting on it. The fact
is, today Left in India is so unoriginal that they just can’t decide on
a single topic topics worthy of some genuine opposition in India.

They are so used to copy pasting from the western Left, that they cannot
see the duplicity of their actions, even if it hits them in their face.
At least the minority in the west has some legitimate concerns towards
the majority, however debatable that might be in the current times. But
the situation is completely opposite in our country. The majority in
India was persecuted by its minority. The Hindus were literally Jaziya
paying second class citizens. Their Marxism infested brain can’t see the
difference or they see it but royally ignore it. Either way, it’s all
right if they cannot see that they are on a path of self destruction,
because looks like their hopes of winning the General Elections in near
future will not see the light of day as well.

