+++
title = "Book Notice Asian"
full_title = "Book Notice Asian Perspectives on Animal Ethics Rethinking the NonHuman"
date = "2014-04-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/04/21/book-notice-asian-perspectives-on-animal-ethics-rethinking-the-non-human/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/04/21/book-notice-asian-perspectives-on-animal-ethics-rethinking-the-non-human/).

Book Notice: Asian Perspectives on Animal Ethics: Rethinking the Non-Human

#### A new collection of essays on Animal Ethics in Asian Traditions, many of which deal with Buddhist and Hindu material. Description and contents below.

Dalal, Neil and Taylor, Chloe. 2014. *Asian Perspectives on Animal
Ethics: Rethinking the Non-Human* (London: Routledge).

Website: http://www.tandfindia.com/books/details/9780415729864/

Description:

To date, philosophical discussions of animal ethics and Critical Animal
Studies have been dominated by Western perspectives and Western
thinkers. This book makes a novel contribution to animal ethics in
showing the range and richness of ideas offered to these fields by
diverse Asian traditions.

*Asian Perspectives on Animal Ethics* is the first of its kind to
include the intersection of Asian and European traditions with respect
to human and nonhuman relations. Presenting a series of studies focusing
on specific Asian traditions, as well as studies that put those
traditions in dialogue with Western thinkers, this book looks at Asian
philosophical doctrines concerning compassion and nonviolence as these
apply to nonhuman animals, as well as the moral rights and status of
nonhuman animals in Asian traditions. Using Asian perspectives to
explore ontological, ethical and political questions, contributors
analyze humanism and post-humanism in Asian and comparative traditions
and offer insight into the special ethical relations between humans and
other particular species of animals.

This book will be of interest to students and scholars of Asian religion
and philosophy, as well as to those interested in animal ethics and
Critical Animal Studies.

Contents:

Introduction *Neil Dalal* **Part 1: Compassion and Nonviolence** 1.
Being Sentiently with Others: The Shared Existential Trajectory among
Humans and Nonhumans in Jainism *Anne Vallely* 2. Animal Compassion:
What the Jatakas Teach Levinas About Giving ‘the Bread from One’s Own
Mouth’ *Katharine Loevy* **Part 2: Humanism and Posthumanism** 3.
China’s Confucian Horses: The Place of Nonhuman Animals in a Confucian
World Order *Bao-Er* 4. Heidegger and Zhuangzi on the Nonhuman: Towards
a Transcultural Critique of (Post)humanism *Mario Wenning* **Part 3:
Moral Rights and Status of Nonhuman Animals** 5. The Argument for Ahiṃsā
in the Anuśāsanaparvan of the Mahābhārata *Christopher Framarin* 6.
Cutting the Cat in One: Zen Master Dōgen on the Moral Status of
Non-Human Animals *James McRae* 7. Non-human animals and the Question of
Rights from Asian Perspectives *Christopher Key Chapple* **Part 4:
Special Relations—Bovine Dharma and Snake Worship** 8. Bovine Dharma:
Non-human animals in the Swadhyaya Parivar *Pankaj Jain* 9. Snakes in
the Dark Age: Human Action, Karmic Retribution, and the Possibilities
for Hindu Animal Ethics *Amy Allocco*


