+++
title = "Welcome to the Machine"
full_title = "Welcome to the Machine"
date = "2014-04-15"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/04/15/welcome-to-the-machine/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/04/15/welcome-to-the-machine/).

Welcome to the Machine

*I was raised up believing I was somehow unique*  
*Like a snowflake distinct among snowflakes, unique in each way you can
see.*  
*And now after some thinking I’d say I’d rather be*  
*A functioning cog in some great machinery, serving something beyond
me.*  
— Fleet Foxes, “[Helplessness
Blues](http://www.last.fm/music/Fleet+Foxes/_/Helplessness+Blues?ac=helplessness%20blues)“[  
](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6mR8Z-gmK1g)

In the first chapter of a text I recently translated, [*Lord Śiva’s
Song: The Īśvara
Gītā*](http://www.amazon.com/Lord-Sivas-Song-Isvara-Gita/dp/1438451016),
the god Śiva is described as the “impeller of the world-machine”
(*jagad-yantra-pravartaka*). Also in the Bhagavad Gītā, the text that
the Īśvara Gītā is modeled after, we find in verse 18.61 the suggestion
that all beings are mounted on a machine (*yantra*) operated by god, who
makes them spin through his wondrous power. In his commentary on BhG
18.61, Madhusūdana Sarasvatī likens the situation to a magician who uses
a rope to cause wooden puppets seated on a machine to revolve. Rāmānuja
says that this *yantra* is material nature (*prakṛti*), and that giving
up the false sense of our own independence from *prakṛti* and from God’s
will allows us to become free.

Perhaps those who are not very familiar with Indian history will be
surprised by these metaphors, but they abound in classical Indian
philosophy and literature. Though there is a popular image of Indian
philosophers as hermits living in caves and subsisting on nuts and
berries, in fact philosophy was more often a village, urban, or courtly
enterprise. These philosophers were fully aware of the technology of
their times, such as the loom, water-wheel, and potter’s wheel, which
are reflected in the examples (*udāharaṇas*) they use.

It may also be surprising how often Mahātmā Gandhi, [in his own comments
on the Bhagavad
Gītā](https://books.google.com/books?id=HUbUcXcXES8C&pg=PA64&lpg=PA64&dq=We+are+caught+in+the+motion+of+the+wheel+of+this+world.+Our+duty+is+to+work+ceaselessly+as+a+part+of+this+machine.+We+should+spend+every+minute+of+our+waking+life+in+doing+work+which+has+fallen+to+our+lot,+and+do+it+as+if+we+are+impatient+over+it+and+yet+not+be+so,+be+calm+in+fact.+The+bullock+that+keeps+the+water-wheel+in+motion+goes+round+and+round,+but+no+bucket+falls+from+its+place.+If+it+were+not+a+bucket+but+our+heart+in+that+place,+it+might+fall+off.+The+bucket,+however,+does+not+fall+off,+it+remains+in+its+place,+calm.+We+should+be+filled+with+such+calm.&source=bl&ots=8cjMt35iRC&sig=ACfU3U2HOp44WffwjfcCe_kWrfTusOmwvA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwic6f_FgsLmAhXvhOAKHVTlBAgQ6AEwCnoECAgQAQ#v=onepage&q&f=false),
describes the world as a machine and the proper human detachment to
fruits of actions as “mechanical.” In Gandhi’s commentary on BhG chapter
four we find such themes combined, I think, with a hint of the
Protestant Work Ethic: “We are caught in the motion of the wheel of this
world. Our duty is to work ceaselessly as a part of this machine. We
should spend every minute of our waking life in doing work which has
fallen to our lot, and do it as if we are impatient over it and yet not
be so, be calm in fact. The bullock that keeps the water-wheel in motion
goes round and round, but no bucket falls from its place. If it were not
a bucket but our heart in that place, it might fall off. The bucket,
however, does not fall off, it remains in its place, calm. We should be
filled with such calm.”

These themes got me thinking about the philosophical uses for the
metaphor of being a machine, and how different these uses can be. For
instance, in certain scientific circles it has become common to think of
human beings, or at least our brains, as “meat machines.” How is this
modern metaphor different than the *yantra* metaphors in classical
Indian texts? One clear difference is that this particular metaphor
focuses on the individual, rather than the collective, perhaps a
reflection of American computer scientists’ individualist tendencies.
Both metaphors can, of course, be used to question free will. But
according to the Bhagavad Gītā, Īśvara Gītā, and Gandhi, by surrendering
the illusion of our own individual agency we are able to recognize the
higher logic of the entire system, and even to recognize the divine
agency at work in the world.

The “meat machine” metaphor certainly destabilizes common intuitions
about the nature of self and consciousness. Yet I am not sure that there
are clear ethical or political ramifications here: we may go on behaving
in more or less the same ways we did before, whether selfish or
altruistic, when we accept that our brains are nothing more than
machines made of meat. The “world-machine” metaphor too disorients our
normal egocentric understanding of the special value of our own
individual thoughts and desires. But it also re-orients us toward a true
understanding of the larger system.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, the ethics of the Bhagavad Gītā and the
Mahābhārata are not anti-consequentialist. The sage Kauśika, for
instance, takes a vow of truthfulness, and as a result tells a group of
murderous bandits where to find their victims, leading to their death.
The Mahābhārata tells us that for this he receives karmic punishment,
not reward. Likewise, in the episode where Yudhiṣṭhira deceives Drona
about the death of his son Aśvatthāman, Kṛṣṇa assures Yudhiṣṭhira that
in this situation, deception is the correct action when understood in
larger perspective. The point is not that we should not care about
consequences. Rather, it is that a person should not focus on the
consequences that his actions will have for himself as an individual,
but instead coolly (mechanically?) examine the wider consequences his
actions will have for the functioning of the world-machine.

What are your favorite “machine” metaphors in the history of philosophy?
I would especially enjoy hearing how other traditions, such as the
Chinese and Islamic, employ such metaphors.
