+++
title = "Sexual selection vs job"
full_title = "Sexual selection vs job specialization"
date = "2017-10-02"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/10/02/sexual-selection-vs-job-specialization/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/10/02/sexual-selection-vs-job-specialization/).

Sexual selection vs job specialization

Pretty much every species is subject to sexual selection: heritable
characteristics that lead to more mates or better mates can be favored
by natural selection. Typically, sexual selection favors different
strategies in males and females. Generally, males can gain fitness with
increased mating opportunities, while females gain more from
high-quality mates or mates that confer resources. Since the variance in
reproduction is usually greater in males than females, sexual selection
is usually stronger in males, although it exists and is significant in
both sexes.

Usually, though, males and females of a given species have very similar
ways of making a living. A male deer and a female deer both eat grass or
arugula or whatever. Sexual selection may drive them to evolve in
different directions, but finding something to eat mostly drives them in
the same direction.

Humans are an exception. In the long past, men hunted and women
gathered. The mix varied: in Arctic regions, men produce almost all the
food (while women made and repaired gear, as well as raising children).
In groups like the Bushmen, women produced most of the calories, but
done rightly you would count more than calories: if most of the local
plants had low protein or low-quality protein (wrong amino acid mix),
meat from hunting could be important out of proportion to its caloric
value.

This has been going for a long time, so there must have been selection
for traits that aided provisioning ability in each sex. Those
job-related selective pressures probably changed with time. For example,
male strength may have become less valuable when the Bushmen developed
poison arrows.

I was looking for an intelligent discussion of this question – but I ran
into this and couldn’t force myself to read further: ” It should not
simply be assumed that the exclusion of women from hunting rests upon
“natural” physiological differences. ”

God give me strength.

