+++
title = "Biopolitics"
full_title = "Biopolitics"
date = "2017-10-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/10/08/biopolitics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/10/08/biopolitics/).

Biopolitics

I have said
[before](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/08/11/genetics-and-hr/)
that no currently popular ideology acknowledges well-established results
of behavioral genetics, quantitative genetics, or psychometrics. Or
evolutionary psychology.

What if some ideology or political tradition did? what could they do?
What problems could they solve, what capabilities would they have?

Various past societies knew a few things along these lines. They knew
that there were significant physical and behavioral differences between
the sexes, which is forbidden knowledge in modern academia. Some knew
that close inbreeding had negative consequences, which knowledge is on
its way to the forbidden zone as I speak. Some cultures with wide enough
geographical experience had realistic notions of average cognitive
differences between populations. Some people had a rough idea about
regression to the mean \[ in dynasties\], and the Ottomans came up with
a highly unpleasant solution – the [law of
fratricide](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/08/04/there-can-only-be-one/).
The Romans, during the Principate, dealt with the same problem through
imperial adoption. The Chinese exam system is in part aimed at the same
problem.

Every society, then and now, selects for *something*, but it’s hard to
believe that selection pressures were deliberate choices, part of some
long-term plan. Many past societies would have understood the notion of
deliberately breeding people for certain qualities, but I don’t see much
sign that anyone ever actually did it, not least because it would take
longer than a human lifetime. Now today we could do a much better job:
we have a quantitative theory of selection, buttressed with a detailed
understanding of genetics, both routinely used in animal and pant
breeding. At the same time all the powers that be plotz at the mere
mention of selection on humans. Cause they’re nuts.

At least some past societies avoided the social patterns leading to the
nasty dysgenic trends we are experiencing today, but for the most part
that is due to the anthropic principle: if they’d done something else
you wouldn’t be reading this. Also to between-group competition: if you
fuck your self up when others don’t, you may be well be replaced. Which
is still the case.

If you were designing an ideology from scratch you could make use of all
of these facts – not that thinking about genetics and selection hands
you the solution to every problem, but you’d have more strings to your
bow. And, off the top of your head, you’d understand certain trends that
are behind the mountains of Estcarp, for our current ruling classes :
invisible and unthinkable, That Which Must Not Be Named. .

