+++
title = "“Indian philosophy” vs"
full_title = "“Indian philosophy” vs “Buddhist ethics”"
date = "2018-09-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/09/16/indian-philosophy-vs-buddhist-ethics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/09/16/indian-philosophy-vs-buddhist-ethics/).

“Indian philosophy” vs. “Buddhist ethics”

It is not especially controversial to say that ethics is a branch of
philosophy. I’ve occasionally heard people dispute that claim, but
mostly on the grounds that ethics extends beyond philosophy *per se*, to
narrative and the like; few would say that ethical reflection is in
general *not* a philosophical activity. Likewise it is not controversial
at all to say that Buddhism began in India, or that Buddhism played a
central role in the development of Indian philosphy.

So why is there so little overlap between “Indian philosophy” and
“Buddhist ethics”?

The quotation marks are there because there was and is plenty of overlap
between what Indian philosophy actually was and is, and what Buddhist
ethics were and are. But there is strikingly little overlap between the
*disciplines*, between “the study of Indian philosophy” and “the study
of Buddhist ethics” as we now understand the two. This is even though
both have grown into large and relatively flourishing fields of inquiry
(insofar as any humanities field can said to be flourishing in the age
of the career-focused corporate academy).

Most visibly, each of these fields has its own journal, the [Journal of
Indian
Philosophy](https://www.springer.com/philosophy/philosophical+traditions/journal/10781)
(JIP) and the [Journal of Buddhist
Ethics](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/) (JBE) – but precious
few articles in JBE cite JIP, or vice versa. “Buddhist ethics” reads
Pali and Theravāda texts as much as anything Sanskrit or Mahāyāna;
“Indian philosophy” focuses almost exclusively on thinkers composing in
Sanskrit, most of whom are considered Mahāyāna. (I am not actually sure
whether Dignāga and Dharmakīrti – key Buddhist thinkers in “Indian
philosophy” – are Mahāyāna thinkers, and that fact may itself tell you
something. Identifying a Buddhist thinker as Mahāyāna or not can be of
great ethical importance – how much does the thinker foreground
altruism? – but with respect to Dignāga and Dharmakīrti I have yet to
see the question even *asked*. Somebody must have written about it, but
I haven’t seen it in anything I’ve read on them.) And few seem to have
observed just how *weird* this state of affairs is – that “Buddhist
ethics” and “Indian philosophy” proceed more or less in isolation from
each other even though a great deal of Buddhist ethics *is* Indian
philosophy, and vice versa.

So how did this all come about? The Journal of Indian Philosophy was
founded in 1970 by B.K. Matilal, who
[proclaimed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/06/matilal-vs-radhakrishnan/),
in reaction against Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan’s mystical approach, that
“The field of our contributions will be bound by the limits of rational
inquiry; we will avoid questions that lie in the fields of theology and
mystical experience.” There is nothing in this phrase that should
exclude ethics, but it set a tone of aiming for respectability in the
analytical tradition, where theoretical questions of epistemology and
philosophy of language were always treated as the core of the
discipline, especially in 1970 before the arrival of John Rawls. This
approach found a comfortable home in European universities, long
accustomed to philological inquiries that felt no need to articulate any
practical upshot. As a result, the approach has continued to be
prominent in the study of Indian philosophy, leading to the dire current
situtation where a Dan Arnold can look with deep interest and respect at
the epistemological chapters of Candrakīrti’s Catuḥśatakaṭīkā but
[dismiss the ethical
chapters](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/06/dont-exclude-ethics-from-philosophy/)
as “more *psychological* than philosophical” because they are “working
on the reader’s *affect*“. Because we all know none of that girly
emotion stuff could have anything to do with philosophy.

Authors in the Journal of Buddhist Ethics, on the other hand, have often
been motivated by prevalent contemporary concerns, especially political
ones. It is their variety of work that has been [taken up as a
second-order object of
study](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/)
by Christopher Gowans and David Chapman, and led Chapman to make the
provocative claims that it is [not really
Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/is-buddhist-ethics-buddhist/).
“Buddhist ethics” as a field has been most prominent in the USA, the
centre for Engaged Buddhism – and so it is no coincidence that “Buddhist
ethics” takes a primarily Engaged perspective. So in JBE’s [tag
cloud](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/) we find human rights,
economics, war and the environment taking prominent places, but no
reference to dukkha/suffering, anger, or karma. These authors are often
religionists, and can sometimes wind up doing [ethics
studies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/04/ethics-vs-ethics-studies/):
studying the given norms of particular groups of people without saying
anything about the reasons or logic underlying those norms, and portray
themselves as doing ethics. As a result I think a lot of work in
“Buddhist ethics” doesn’t go very deep into reasons, and especially
doesn’t explore metaphysics, in a way that is very much to its
detriment. (I’ve [noted
before](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/files/2015/07/JBE-Lele-final1.pdf)
how I think it is a neglect of metaphysics that led Damien Keown to
throw up his hands in despair and say there was no such thing as
Buddhist normative ethics.)

The discrepancy between the two schools is particularly visible in the
study of Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra. The ninth chapter of this text
deals with technical metaphysical questions from a Madhyamaka
perspective; the other chapters contain exhortations and arguments about
how one should live. The text views itself as a unity – chapter nine
begins by saying the rest of the work is there for the sake of the
wisdom (*prajñā*) it addresses. But at least until recently, it has been
quite rare to find scholarly works that treat it as such. Rather, one
either takes the “Indian philosophy” approach and takes chapter IX in
isolation, or takes the “Buddhist ethics” approach and ignores chapter
IX entirely. I tried to remedy this gap in my [2015
article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/files/2015/07/JBE-Lele-final1.pdf),
and was very pleasantly surprised to hear from JBE that it was their
most viewed article since the journal began collecting statistics.
Perhaps I am not the only one who has realized the wall between “Indian
philosophy” and “Buddhist ethics” needs to come down.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/09/indian-philosophy-vs-buddhist-ethics)
