+++
title = "Bhavanātha and the move"
full_title = "Bhavanātha and the move towards theistic Mīmāṃsā"
date = "2018-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/09/20/bhavanatha-and-the-move-towards-theistic-mima%e1%b9%83sa/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/09/20/bhavanatha-and-the-move-towards-theistic-mima%e1%b9%83sa/).

Bhavanātha and the move towards theistic Mīmāṃsā

The Mīmāṃsā school of Indian philosophy started as an atheist school
since its first extant text, Jaimini’s *Mīmāṃsā Sūtra*. At a certain
point in its history, however, it reinterpreted its atheist arguments as
aiming only at a certain conception of god(s). In other words, it
reinterpreted its atheism as being not a global atheism, but a form of
local atheism, denying a certain specific form of god(s) and not any
form whatsoever.

This transformation occurred in parallel within the Mīmāṃsā school
itself and within the theist Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta school, which since
its beginnings with Rāmānuja (11th c) came gradually closer to Mīmāṃsā
until, in the 14th c., its great proponent Veṅkaṭanātha declared
Viśişṭādvaita Vedānta and Mīmāṃsā to be a single school (*aikaśāstrya*).

Who are the key authors of this transition from global to local atheism
and towards a reconceptualised theism? The answer is not completely
clear, especially because it requires a close examination of both
schools. Within Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta, one witnesses a gradual, though
not linear, progression towards Mīmāṃsā and towards a more
*bhagavat*-like conception of God from Rāmānuja to Ātreya Rāmānuja and
culminating in Veṅkaṭanātha. Within Mīmāṃsā, there might be an important
distinction between the Bhāṭṭa and the Prābhākara subschool. Within the
first, Pārthasārathi (11–12th c. CE) appears to have been a global
atheist, for instance when he comments upon the opening of Kumārila’s
*Ślokavārttika*. The Prābhākara school might have been more inclined to
move towards theism. The main figure here could have been the Prābhākara
author Bhavanātha, whose *Nayaviveka* has been repeatedly commented upon
in South India and seems to have been extremely influential at the
beginning of the second millennium CE. It is in fact quoted and
discussed by Veṅkaṭanātha and by later authors (like Rāmānujācārya) who
recognise him as a theist. Moreover, Bhavanātha’s theistic move could be
part of the reasons for the great significance of Prābhākara philosophy
in (South) India at the beginning of the second millennium, as attested
by Gaṅgeśa’s *Tattvacintāmaṇi*, a game-changing work of the Nyāya
school, composed in the 13th c. CE. The *Nayaviveka* is a commentary on
the *Mīmāṃsā Sūtra*. While discussing the inference to the existence of
a Lord (*īśvara*), Bhavanātha concludes:

> evam īśvare paroktam eva anumānaṃ nirastam, na tv īśvaro ‘pi.
>
> In this way I have refuted the inference to the existence of the Lord
> said by other scholars, but I have not refuted the Lord Himself. (NV,
> tarkapāda, end of sambandhākṣepaparihāra)

**Do readers know other theistic passages in the *Nayaviveka*?**
