+++
title = "Hive Mind"
full_title = "Hive Mind"
date = "2015-11-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/22/hive-mind/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/22/hive-mind/).

Hive Mind

Garrett Jones has a new book out: *Hive Mind*. He argues that “while
individual IQ scores predict our independent success moderately well, a
country’s average score is a remarkable bellwether of its general
prosperity.” Makes sense. I might even call it obvious.

More on that later.

Of course there are other general factors that create differences in
national prosperity – the biggest are valuable natural resources (oil in
Saudi Arabia) and being currently or recently under a Communist\*
government. But average national IQ has the largest effect. I didn’t see
much direct discussion of this, but this general trend was a lot less
true at points in the past. The Communism ref is a hint: there used to
be a lot of Communism, now there’s not – this makes the relative
importance of IQ differences larger than it was in 1970. Generally, you
could say that most of the world has signed on to roughly the same form
of economic organization, just as statesmen everywhere wear suits, so
that differences in national prosperity have more to do with differences
in biological capital than they used to – just as differences in
individual height are more driven by genetics today, in the US (where we
are fat), than they were in England in 1800 (where the poor were hungry
and five inches shorter). Not than biological difference were ever
*un*important.

Jones talks about IQ – what it is, what it predicts. He knows his
psychometrics, which is damned unusual for an economist. You would
almost think that he’s spent a lot of time (sub rosa) conferring,
conversing, and otherwise hobnobbing with devotees of the Dark Arts. He
talks about how nice it would be if we could raise national IQs (then
Indonesia could do what Germany does – and did) – but of course we don’t
really know how, except with iodine supplementation.

He talks about the ways in which a higher national IQ pays off – more
patience (low time preference), higher savings rates, more cooperation,
more ability to form teams suited to complex tasks with little room for
error, less incompetent government. I’d also mention differences in
inventiveness, a higher fraction of people that exceed required
thresholds for complex tasks, more people believing in and practicing
basic maintenance (zero or crappy maintenance is the bane of the Third
World), more effective deterrence of crime, fewer accidents, etc etc. If
you’re ever watched a decent but dumb guy confidently fire a nail gun
into the palm of his own hand, you will know what I mean.

Of course, he doesn’t mention how higher IQ increases susceptibility to
various kinds of nuttiness, which can have substantial economic costs.
Just to make it clear, I have no doubt that the average Ivy League
graduate would be less likely than the average graduate of State U to
agree with the major thesis of this book. Probably if you stated the
conclusions sufficiently trenchantly (Haiti is fucked-up because
Haitians are *dumb*!) they would violently reject his thesis. Not
literally violently, because I doubt if the average Harvard graduate
actually knows how to tar and feather anyone, but they would try to hurt
his feelings. And get him fired, of course.

The icing on the cake is the policy prescription: since we know that
higher average IQ is a good thing for a country, it behooves us to let
in lots and of low-IQ immigrants – which will leave us more prosperous!
Jones stomps on the dick of his own argument with hobnail boots, in a
fashion I have only seen matched by Jared Diamond’s claim that every
population on Earth has the same average IQ, except for Melanesians in
PNG, who are smarter, presumably because of their Denisovan admixture.

Does he worry about the fact that we live in a welfare state, and that
low-income immigrants (on average) soak up a lot more money over a
lifetime than they will ever contribute to the Federal coffers? Not one
bit. This is just as true for England and France and Sweden. Reminds me
of the scramble for Africa, in which every colony was a money-loser, but
no European country could do without some. He worries a little about
furriners bring along their noxious political traditions – but Bryan
Caplan assures him that they’ll pick up our political notions, in the
same way that Bryan Caplan thinks and talks about politics just like an
old Midwestern farmer.

Think of it this way: some of the products of an advanced technological
civilization are generally valuable and cheap. They can and are used by
poor countries as well. I’m thinking things like vaccines, and
penicillin, and right turn on red. But they can’t be used unless someone
invents them, and that happens less as the national IQ drops. Maybe we
need to leave at least one major advanced country alone, not fucking it
up any more than it already is, so that on those odd occasions where
actually getting something right matters, humanity has at least a
Chinaman’s chance.

I said earlier that the general conclusion was obvious, but I’m using
that word with no meaning again. If you have a reasonably detailed
picture of the world – sure it’s obvious. If you talked to a smart,
fair-minded guy in 1900, one with wide experience, and asked which
countries would do well if native ability were the main determinant of
national success – I think he would have predicted something roughly
like what we see today. It’s highly correlated with peoples that managed
fairly high levels of sophistication since the Bronze Age\*\*.

If it’s all that obvious, why haven’t other economists come to similar
conclusions? Because they didn’t like these conclusions, of course –
because of professional risk – because they don’t have a reasonably
detailed picture of the world – because they never bothered to learn
anything about psychometrics. Look at the reaction of the economists to
Lynn and Vanhanen’s work: puerile.

\* Mainstream economists weren’t any too good at noticing that Communism
fucks you up , although I think they saw that living over an ocean of
oil paid off. Only one out of the three major factors understood – not
good even by Meatloaf’s standard.

\*\* Which Jared Diamond noticed, and which makes no sense in his
explanatory framework. “The nations rising to new power are still ones
were incorporated thousands of years ago into the old centers of
dominance based on food production, or that have been repopulated by
peoples from those centers.”

