+++
title = "Degenerate Neanderthals"
full_title = "Degenerate Neanderthals"
date = "2015-11-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/03/degenerate-neanderthals/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/03/degenerate-neanderthals/).

Degenerate Neanderthals

There are a couple of new papers out on how utterly fucked-up
Neanderthals must have been, [The Genetic Cost of Neanderthal
Introgression](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/10/31/030387) by
Kelley Harris and Rasmus Nielsen, and [The Strength of Selection Against
Neanderthal
Introgression](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/10/30/030148), by
Ivan Juric, Simon Aeschbacher, and Graham Coop. The basic idea is the
same in both: the effective population size of Neanderthals was
considerably lower than that of anatomically modern humans (which makes
sense, considering glaciation), and this had negative consequences.
Theory says that selection is less effective in small populations:
mutations with small negative effects (s \< 1/2N) are not much noticed
by selection and accumulate. Judging from the Neanderthal genomes we
have sequenced, their effective (neutral) population size was about a
tenth of modern humans. The first paper concludes that Neanderthals must
have had much lower fitness than AMH: They say "Under an additive model,
a recessive model, or anything in between, the severe reduction in
fitness of Neanderthals would have doomed them to quick extinction if
they had been competing for the same niche with humans under conditions
of reproductive isolation. " Of course, one problem with this conclusion
is that we know it is not correct. The projected Neanderthal excess
genetic load would have accumulated over several hundred thousand years:
it wouldn't have been much smaller 120,000 years ago (the Eemian) than
it was \~50,000 years ago, when we displaced them. Modern humans in the
Levant (Qafzeh/Shkul) ran into Neanderthals back in the Eemian – but
they didn't win then : later Neanderthals seem to have reoccupied that
area, and moderns don't seem to have developed the ability to displace
Neanderthals until much later, some 50-60,000 years after their original
contact with Neanderthals. Like they imply, if Neanderthals were that
genetically screwed up, something like Florida panthers, we could have
knocked them over with a feather – but it didn't happen. Presumably we
would also see skeletal abnormalities, lots of them, in later
Neanderthals – but I don't think we do.

Part of the problem is that the model is probably too simple. There is
an argument, which makes sense to me, that suggest that small-N
populations do better than you would think, because as the average
population fitness gets farther from the optimum, strongly beneficial
compensatory mutations become more and more possible. And the effective
population size for generating those beneficial compensatory mutations
is not the same as the neutral effective population size, which is
dominated by the low points (probably glacial maxima) – it's much
larger, closer to the average population size, instead of the harmonic
mean.

In addition, I don't have much confidence in our models of the
distribution of mutational effects, or our models of the way in which
the effects of deleterious mutations add up.

Both papers talk about the likely genetic burden that Eurasians picked
up from that Neanderthal admixture. Since East Asians have a somewhat
higher level of Neanderthal admixture than people in Europe or the
Middle East (\~20% more) then they must have even more toxic Neanderthal
genes, and Africans the least. This echoes earlier papers that have
argued that population history (out-of-Africa bottleneck, Neanderthal
admixture, etc) must have increased genetic load in Eurasians.  
Evidently extra genetic load has anti-intuitive effects.

