+++
title = "Role of Samskrit Universities – Part 2 "
date = "2020-05-01"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFdwRk1VMVVSVEZQVkdNd1RXcEZQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFdwRk1VMVVSVEZQVkdNd1RXcEZQUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1588352122chamu_blog.jpg)

Vision and Road Map for Development of Samskrit – Ten Year Perspective
Plan had made about sixty recommendations for Higher Education where in
twenty three recommendations were exclusively for Samskrit Universities.
For the effective implementation of those twenty three recommendations,
two of them need policy changes at the Govt. level, five need approvals
and sanctioned teaching posts from the concerned authorities and four
may need additional grants. Rest of the twelve recommendations (50%)
need not wait for any external help in order to begin the preparatory
work at least. They are purely a matter of intense desire for change and
collective will power of Samskrit Professors community. I am not saying
nothing has been done. Many Universities have implemented many of them,
some have implemented some of them and a few have made no attempts. Yet
there is enough scope for stock taking of how much initiative the
Samskrit Universities have taken till now.  
  
One of the recommendations, and a popular demand of all the
educationists who are rooted to Bharatiya ethos, is to integrate both
traditional and modern subjects in education. Modern subjects in
traditional stream and traditional subjects in modern stream need to be
introduced where ever they are relevant. But we have not yet been able
to do much in this regard. May be the nation is looking towards Samskrit
Universities to do research in Indian Knowledge Systems, to design new
courses and to take the lead. The views expressed by Prof B Mahadevan of
IIM-B may help us to formulate our response to the current challenges.
They are as following.  
  
**Q: In ancient India the motto of education was “सा विद्या या
विमुक्तये”. But today it has become “सा विद्या या नियुक्तये”. One is for
निःश्रेयस् and the other for अभ्युदय. Can there be a road map to
integrate अभ्युदय and निःश्रेयस् in education?**  
  
A: Education plays an important role in the lives of every individual,
especially in a fiercely competitive, globalised economic setting as we
witness today. A good education, as everybody believes, is a sure
passport for a comfortable living as it guarantees a good job, perhaps
an overseas assignment or possibilities for higher studies in reputed
universities in the US. Therefore, we cannot runway from the “Niyukti”
angle in education in the first place. However, it appears to be short
sighted in nature and inadequate in developing individuals with inner
strength to deal multiple situation in life.  
  
Well-developed individuals not only get good jobs but also stay a happy
person pursuing his/her personal interests and passion even while
productively contributing in the workplace. This is the future citizen
that we need, and the type of education provided must be able to develop
such all-round individuals. The new educational programs must factor
these into consideration. It must have good inputs in some of the modern
disciplines that may enable the student fetch jobs. However, in equal
measure it must develop individual interests and provide opportunities
for testing them while graduating. There must be opportunities to
develop an open mind and critical thinking.  
  
A good understanding of our ancestral knowledge will greatly inspire the
youth and help them stay connected with their roots. This will be an
added advantage in creating young minds that believe in themselves and
develop self-confidence and pride in an informed fashion. Such an
approach to education will take us away from pure “job seeking”
dimension to “life fulfilling” aspects of education. After all good jobs
can provide material comforts but cannot make happy and satisfied
individuals.  
  
We need new type of academic programs that enable students to choose
from Ancient Indian knowledge systems, Sanskrit, comparative philosophy,
appreciation of alternative forms of art etc. even when they are
pursuing “job seeking” education such as engineering and management. In
fact, many of the foundational principles behind formation of Chinmaya
Vishwavidyapeeth of which I was a part, was based on this understanding
and the need to develop new generation of programmes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 2088 \| 01-05-2020 10:25
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

