+++
title = "A tamil verse on"
full_title = "A tamil verse on bhṛṅgīभृङ्गी"
date = "2019-10-20"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/10/20/a-tamil-verse-on/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/10/20/a-tamil-verse-on/).


					A tamil verse on bhṛṅgī-भृङ्गी				



[ October 20, 2019 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/10/20/a-tamil-verse-on/ "Permalink to A tamil verse onbhṛṅgī-भृङ्गी")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/10/20/a-tamil-verse-on/#respond)

# A tamil verse onbhṛṅgī-भृङ्गी

A तमिऴ् verse on भृण्गी that I composed in the metro while commuting to
a professional event:



உண்டு பிரிவோ உயிருடலிடையே என

उण्डु पिरिवो उयिरुडलिडैये ऎन

வண்டுருக்கொண்டு துளையில் வலஞ்செய்ய

वण्डुरुक्कॊण्डु तुळैयिल् वलञ्जॆय्य

கண்டுமை வெகுண்டு ஊனிழந்த முனிவரை

कण्डुमै वॆगुण्डु ऊनिऴन्द मुनिवरै

கண்டு முக்காலர் முக்காலராய் செய்தாரே

कण्डु मुक्कालर् मुक्कालराय् सॆय्दारे



உண்டு பிரிவோ உயிருடலிடையே என

उण्डु पिरिवो उयिरुडलिडैये ऎन

**उण्डु**:There is;**पिरिवो**: पिरिवु means separation; the last
syllable transformed to वो makes it a question; thus,
“separation?”;**उयिरुडलिडैये**: उयिर् (life, soul आत्मन् ) + उडल्
(body, देह ) + इडैये (between);**ऎन**: ऎ is the short ‘e’ sound; same
as the ‘e’ in the word, “pet” or “sell”. ऎन functions, more or less, in
the same way as इति in संस्कृतम्, meaning “thus”; here, as per the
context, it is to be rendered as, “thus thinking”;

**Translation**: “Is there separation between the soul and the body”,
thus \[thinking\]



வண்டுருக்கொண்டு துளையில் வலஞ்செய்ய

वण्डुरुक्कॊण्डु तुळैयिल् वलञ्जॆय्य

**वण्डुरुक्कॊण्डु**: वण्डु (bee) + उरु (form) + कॊण्डु (कॊ, here the ‘o’
is a short one. The word meansgetting/having. In this context, it is
appropriate to render it as “taking upon”;**तुळैयिल्**: तुळै (hole) +
इल् (A grammatical case-ending denoting the ‘locative case’-i.e. “in
the”); **वलञ्जॆय्य**: वलम् (circumbulation) + चॆय्य (the ‘che’ here has
a short ‘e’, like the word for the musical instrument, ‘cello’; चॆय्य
means, doing)

**Translation**:Taking upon a bee-form, and in the hole circumbulating;



கண்டுமை வெகுண்டு ஊனிழந்த முனிவரை

कण्डुमै वॆगुण्डु ऊनिऴन्द मुनिवरै

**कण्डुमै**: This should be split as कण्ड + उमै (கண்ட + உமை); कण्ड
(saw/seeing) + उमै (उमादेवी); **वॆगुण्डु**: (वॆ has a short ‘e’, just
like the ve in velvet; the word means, “got angry”; but it must be read
with the rest of the line; the last word of the 3rd line is the object
of the entire verse); **ऊनिऴन्द**: ऊन् (body/flesh) + इऴन्द (lost)
मुनिवरै(that मुनि-)

**Translation**: The मुनि who lost his flesh by the wrath of उमा seeing
\[him\]

**Translation in context**: The मुनि who lost his flesh by the wrath of
उमा seeing the मुनि who, thinking, “Can there be separation between soul
and body?”, take upon the form of a bee to bore a hole through
अर्धनारीश्वर and circumbulate only the right half that is शिव.



கண்டு முக்காலர் முக்காலராய் செய்தாரே

कण्डु मुक्कालर् मुक्कालराय् सॆय्दारे

**कण्डु**: Saw/seeing; **मुक्कालर्**: मु (three) + कालर् (one who abides
in time); thus, one who abides in all three times; **मुक्कालराय्**: मु
(three) + कालर् (legged one; in तमिऴ्, काल् means leg) + आय् (a
grammatical ending to indicate a transformation); **सॆय्दारे**: सॆय्दार्
(did/made) + ए (an emphatic particle used to stress).

**Translation**: Seeing \[that मुनि\], the \[great god,\] one \[who
abides\] in all three times, made him (the मुनि) a three-legged one.



**Overall Translation**: “Can there be separation between soul and
body?”, thus thinking, taking upon the form of a bee to bore a hole
through अर्धनारीश्वर and circumbulating only the right half that is शिव;
the मुनि lost his flesh as उमा saw him do that; seeing the मुनि thus,
he, the great god abiding forever in all three times, made him
three-legged.



The poem above compactly encapsulates the story of भृङ्गी, a fanatical
भक्त of महादेव, the curse on him by उमा to be emptied of his flesh & the
subsequent blessing by शिव with a 3rd leg to support himself, and, in
fact, become a teacher of dance! Here, I tried to redeem भृङ्गी by
giving his act a deeper meaning (रहस्यार्थ). He did not mean to slight
the देवी by refusing to worship her. So, what was the motive?

He (in my poetic license; may हरः & अम्बा be pleased) thought that since
she is inseparable from him as a body is from the soul, why should he
violate this truth by worshiping her separately? In the सिद्धान्त-शैव
system, the relationship of शिव and शक्ति is analogous to that of the
soul and body, respectively. And thus, to instruct him on the importance
of honouring शिव $ देवी together but distinctly, she empties his body of
all flesh & substance, in line with his understanding that honouring the
self/soul (शिव) negates the need for honouring the body (शक्ति)
separately.

Of course, due to her compassion for an exalted भक्त of शिव , she stops
short of making him completely disembodied. Nevertheless, with his body
essentially emptied, भृङ्गी has no support to stand upon. However, शिव
being the शक्तिमान्, while not undoing the effect of शक्ति’s words,
grants him a divine 3rd leg, which supports him. Not only does it
support him; but with this 3rd leg alone, भृङ्गी dances together with
the three-eyed god; just like the three-eyed god. For it is शिव, who has
शक्ति, with all her forms and names, in his eternal lordship as the
शक्तिमान्, and bestows grace upon his भक्त-s as he pleases, as the
श्रीमन्-मृगेन्द्रागम tells us.











