+++
title = "A theist caught in the"
full_title = "A theist caught in the paradoxes of free will"
date = "2014-01-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/13/a-theist-caught-in-the-paradoxes-of-free-will/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/13/a-theist-caught-in-the-paradoxes-of-free-will/).

A theist caught in the paradoxes of free will

Can a theist believe in God’s omniscience&omnipotence *and* in free
will? I have argued in other posts that one can think in a compatibilist
way ([because God wants to
be](http://elisafreschi.com/links/is-predetermination-compatible-with-the-idea-of-a-loving-god-probably-not/)
*freely* loved) and that this entails that [no punishment/ban from God’s
presence can be
eternal](http://philosopherscocoon.typepad.com/blog/2014/01/the-consequences-of-accepting-free-will-and-an-omnipotent-god.html "No eternal hell is possible").
Here I would like to test it in the case of Vedānta
Deśika/[Veṅkaṭanātha](http://elisafreschi.blogspot.co.at/2013/06/narayanarya-visistadvaita-vedanta-and.html),
a Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedāntin who also wrote Mīmāṃsā works.

From a Mīmāṃsā standpoint, free will is a fundamental presupposal, since
Vedic prescriptions are in a dialectical relation with one’s desire
(*rāga*): one always decides on the basis of the one or the other. That
*rāga* itself might lie beyond one’s free will is an idea never
discussed by Mīmāṃsā authors, possibly because they are interested in
the phenomenology of free will and not in its ontology.

Can the Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta point of view agree with this perspective?
On the one hand, one might think that the omnipotency of God as
conceived by Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta authors leads back to the initial
problem. On the other, according to Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta human beings
are nothing but specifications (*viśeṣa*s) of the only existing reality,
God Himself. In some forms of Vaiṣṇavism (e.g., in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism),
God can freely choose to self-delude Himself as part of His play
(*līlā*). Thus, the child-Kṛṣṇa can willfully forget His omnipotence in
order to enjoy His mother’s protection.

**Can one conceive the freedom enjoyed by human beings also as a case of
self-delimitation?**

Further thoughts on free will in Indian Philosophy can be read
[here](http://elisafreschi.blogspot.co.at/search/label/free%20will "free will in Indian Philosophy").




