+++
title = "Scripture, authority and"
full_title = "Scripture, authority and reason —About a new book edited by Vincent Eltschinger and Helmut Krasser"
date = "2014-01-24"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/24/scripture-authority-and-reason-about-a-new-book-edited-by-vincent-eltschinger-and-helmut-krasser/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/24/scripture-authority-and-reason-about-a-new-book-edited-by-vincent-eltschinger-and-helmut-krasser/).

Scripture, authority and reason —About a new book edited by Vincent Eltschinger and Helmut Krasser

How do reason and authority interact and trace each other’s boundaries?
Which one is the first to be allowed to delimit its territory and, by
means of that, also the other one’s one?  
  
What to write in the introductory part of an edited volume is a problem
which many of us have faced already. Shall one summarise the papers
which follow (thus risking redundancy)? Or shall one attempt one’s
interpretation of the book’s purpose (thus risking to partly contradict
its actual contents, see concerning that risk, my forthcoming review of
Franco 2013)? The same conundrum repeats itself when it comes to one’s
editorial work: Should one shape the book into one’s own one or should
one leave as much freedom as possible to the contributors? Both sides
have their advantages, insofar as shaping a book means making a strong
contribution on a given topic, whereas leaving much freedom means
embracing the possibility of receiving contributions which go beyond
one’s own understanding of the topic under examination.

This Friday, I read the *Foreword* of Vincent Eltschinger’s and Helmut
Krasser’s *Scriptural Authority, Reason and Action. Proceedings of a
Panel at the 14th World Sanskrit Conference, Kyoto, September 1st–5th
2009* (please note the unfashionable acknowledgement of the papers’
origin). They consistently opted for the first option, limiting
themselves to a summary of the papers that follow and describing how
they programmatically left as much freedom as possible to the
contributors.\*

While summarising the papers, however, they designed a chronological
(and thematic) path through them. The great protagonist of the book —so
interpreted— is the Buddhist dialectical relation of reason and
authority. Eltschinger and Krasser start by commenting on Peter
**Skilling**‘s and on Joseph **Walser**‘s articles. These discuss
pre-Pramāṇavāda material, i.e., Buddhist material related to the
question of authority but belonging to milieus in which the
philosophical problem of the authority of the Buddhist Sacred Texts had
still not become a distinct topic of investigation. Instead, both
articles discuss how the Buddha becomes an authority through physical
elements, i.e., through an external validation. This can assume the form
of the Buddha’s supernaturally long tongue (Skilling) or of the fact of
promoting Buddhist teaching from thrones and daises (Walser). Next comes
the Pramāṇavāda time, with **Eltschinger**‘s contribution working as a
bridge towards it. Four contributions focus on Pramāṇavāda (Eltschinger,
Krasser, Moriyama and McClintock). Next comes a discussion of the
controversy between Pramāṇavāda and Mīmāṃsā by Kataoka and a paper
dwelling further on (Pūrva and Uttara) Mīmāṃsā by Hugo **David**. This
is particularly interesting to me at the moment, because it highlights
Maṇḍana Miśra’s strategy of interpreting Vedic prescriptions to do X as
if they were descriptions of the fact that X is the means to achieve
some desired result. According to David, this interpretation is part of
Maṇḍana’s Vedāntic agenda, since it enables him to overcome the
difference between vidhis (Vedic prescriptions, of independent value)
and arthavādas (commendatory statements, of only subordinate value).
This distinction had been implemented by Pūrva Mīmāṃsā authors to many
descriptive statements of the Upaniṣads, which were thus thought to be
subordinate to a prescription. Maṇḍana’s attempt, instead, negates the
distinction and, with it, the lower hierarchical status of the
Upaniṣads.  
After Buddhism, Jainism is introduced by Eltschinger and Krasser as the
other target of Mīmāṃsā critics and in fact **Balcerowicz**‘
contribution deals with Jaina attempts to establish the omniscience of
the Jina and the validity of the Jaina canon.  
The volume is closed by two contributions (by Ratié and by Torella)
dedicated to the Śaiva Pratyabhijñā school, again seen under the
perspective of its debate with the Buddhist Pramāṇavāda. **Torella**
sees Kumārila as the main critical target of the Pratyabhijñā concept of
an all-pervasive *prasiddhi* (akin to Bhartṛhari’s *śabdatattva*).
**Ratié** shows that this omnipervasive principle is tantamount to
Śiva’s self-manifestation and that this informs of itself all Sacred
Texts. All Sacred Texts are just in some way valid, although only the
Śaiva ones are completely so, insofar as the others contain only a
partial manifestation of Śiva who instead revealed himself completely in
the Śaiva scriptures.

**What would you do while editing a book? And on a different level, what
would you add about the relation reason-authority in the schools you are
more familiar with?**

\*This also means that they refused to uniform the bibliographic style
and the conventions of the contributions, “as long as these have been
consistent”. To do so programmatically is a welcome innovation in an era
in which we risk to correct footnote positions and oversee what is
really at stake in an editorial enterprise.

Cross-posted on my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com "Elisa Freschi's blog")
