+++
title = "What did Kumārila have"
full_title = "What did Kumārila have in view when he spoke of a “linguistic force” and of an “objective force”?"
date = "2014-01-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/10/what-did-kumarila-have-in-view-when-he-spoke-of-a-linguistic-force-and-of-an-objective-force/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/10/what-did-kumarila-have-in-view-when-he-spoke-of-a-linguistic-force-and-of-an-objective-force/).

What did Kumārila have in view when he spoke of a “linguistic force” and of an “objective force”?

A short terminological excursus: *bhāvanā* is a rather common name
throughout Sanskrit philosophy (it designates, e.g., a peculiar
meditation in Buddhism and in Kashmir Śivaism, a linguistic function in
Bhāṭṭa Nāyaka’s aesthetical theory, etc.). It is also found in grammar.

Within Mīmāṃsā, it is found already in Śabara (see, e.g., his commentary
ad MS 2.1.1) as indicating the activity of a person, designated by the
verbal forms and directed towards an object. In fact, such an activity
is further specified by its requiring an object, an instrument and a
procedure (respectively answering the question “what \[does one do\]?”,
“through what?” and “how?”). In accordance to such an interpretation,
Śabara paraphrases the Vedic prescription *svargakāmo yajeta* ‘one who
desires heaven should sacrifice’ as *yāgena svargaṃ bhavati* ‘through
sacrifice, heaven occurs’. That is, an object/aim (according to the
polysemy of the Sanskrit term *artha*, noticeably within Mīmāṃsā, see MS
1.1.5 et passim) is connected to the bhāvanā, the root of the verb is
read as an instrument (*yāgena*), and the verbal action is designated by
the conjugated verbal form alone (*bhavati*). Later on, Kumārila noticed
that such an account does not make sense of the prescriptive character
of, say, *yajeta* ‘one should sacrifice’ as opposed to *yajati* ‘s/he
sacrifices’. Therefore, he introduced a further *bhāvanā*, called
*śabdabhāvanā*. This one is peculiar to prescriptive forms (that is,
*liṅ*, *loṭ*, *leṭ*, *tavya*, but also present indicative forms may do,
if the semantic of the passage requires a prescriptive meaning) and it
accounts for their faculty to make whoever listens to them feel
compelled to perform the action indicated by the verbal root. It has
still nothing to do with the actual performance of such action, it
operates purely on a linguistic niveau and therefore Kumārila has named
it “linguistic *bhāvanā*”. At that point, he had to qualify also the
other *bhāvanā*, the one meant by Śabara. In opposition to
*śabdabhāvanā* (or *śābdībhāvanā*), he called it *arthabhāvanā* (or
*ārthībhāvanā*), that is “actual *bhāvanā*”, “objective *bhāvanā*”, or
“purpose\[-oriented\] *bhāvanā*”. So, this latter designation is less
precise than the first one and is mainly devised in opposition to the
former. In fact, “*bhāvanā*” alone is commonly used to indicate the
*arthabhāvanā*.

**But what exactly does *arthabhāvanā* mean?**  
1. The objector in Rāmānujācārya’s (late) *Tantrarahasya* (chapter 3.16)
seem to interpret *arthabhāvanā* as ***puruṣārthabhāvanā***, so
“*bhāvanā* having a human end \[as its *bhāvya*\]”,
“purpose-\[oriented\] *bhāvanā*”. But is this a reinterpretation or the
initial meaning of *arthabhāvanā*? It would rather seem an innovation of
Rāmānujācārya, since he is at that point by a parallel passage by
Pārthasārathi Miśra, but emphasises the etymological understanding of
*arthabhāvanā* (whereas Pārthasārathi speaks of *arthabhāvanā* as
*puruṣārthasādhana*).  
2. To me, the innovation of Kumārila, who distinguished between *śabda*–
and *arthabhāvanā* seems to presupose the **opposition between *śabda*
(as language) and *artha* (as its object)**. Nonetheless, I could not
find a precise explanation of *arthabhāvanā* as meaning “the efficient
force directed on an external object” or the like.  
3. The *Mīmāṃsābālaprakāśa*, a late Bhāṭṭa primer, explains: *arthayata
ity arthaḥ phalakāmaḥ puruṣaḥ* ‘he desires, hence the person, who covets
a result is called *artha*‘ (MBP, II adhyāya; 74.15-16, see below), and
Kei Kataoka also suggests that Kumārila probably has in mind ***puruṣa*
‘person’ as *artha***.  
The (indeed unusual) equation *artha-puruṣa* can be justified as
follows:

-   a\. MBP’s statement, and Bhatta Śaṅkara’s explanation that, when
    interpreting *artha* as person, the meaning “person” should be
    derived from the understanding of ***artha* from the root *arth*-, X
    class, “to desire”** (hence, “a person who desires” is an *artha*,
    since –*a* is, among other meanings, a *kṛt* suffix indicating the
    agent, according to the list in Ā III and to *Kāśikā* on Ā III 4.67)
    and not from the root *arth*-, IV class, “to be an object”
    (*arthyate*). (By the way, the latter seems to be an artificially
    conceived root, not attested in the *Amarakośa*, nor in the
    *Śabdakalpadruma*, nor in the *Dhātupāṭha*, nor in modern
    dictionaries such as PW and Monier William’s.)
-   b\. T**he symmetry between *śabdabhāvanā* and *arthabhāvanā***. It
    is in fact hardly the case that Kumārila devised the two names
    without linking them to each other. Pārthasārathi Miśra proposes two
    interpretations of the compound śabdabhāvanā, as a karmadhāraya and
    as a *tatpuruṣa* respectively. If it is a *karmadhāraya*, however,
    it is hard to conceive a symmetric understanding of *arthabhāvanā*,
    which should mean “that efficient force which consists in an
    object/a purpose”. On the other hans, if *śabdabhāvanā* is
    tantamount to “an efficient force (*bhāvanā*) which has a statement
    as its locus of action” (as with Pārthasārathi Miśra’s explanation
    of *śabdabhāvanā* as a *tatpuruṣa*, see below), *arthabhāvanā* would
    mean “an efficient force which has an *artha* as its locus of
    action”. Artha in this connection cannot be the final object brought
    about by the activity, but only the locus where this activity finds
    place, that is, a person.
-   c\. The fact that *arthabhāvanā* and *śabdabhāvanā* are also called
    by Kumārila *arthātmikā bhāvanā* and *śabdātmikā bhāvanā* and those
    explanations need to be made sense of in a symmetric way.

By contrast, the understanding of *śabdabhāvanā* is made easier by
Pārthasārathimiśra’s etymological explanation, see Kataoka 2004: 167-8,
fn. 190: “*ahidhāyāḩ śabdasya bhāvanā abhidhābhāvanā* ‘the
*abhidhābhāvanā*\[a synonym of*śabdabhāvanā*\] is the *bhāvanā* of the
language, also called *abhidhā*‘(NRM VN, 77.1) and *abhidhīyata iti
abhidhā pravartanā* ‘it denotes, hence the promoting \[force\] (i.e.,
the *śabdabhāvanā*) is called *abhidhābhāvanā*‘. Hence, *śabdabhāvanā*
could be explained as a *tatpuruṣa* (the force *of* language) or as a
*karmadhāraya* (the force *consisting of* language)

**What do you think? Do you side with 1., 2. or 3.?**

(If, for whatever reasons, you want to read more about śabda- and
arthabhāvanā you can check the corresponding labels in my first blog,
[here](http://elisafreschi.blogspot.co.at/).)
