+++
title = "Mokṣa and the"
full_title = "Mokṣa and the Undergraduate Classroom"
date = "2014-01-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/10/mok%e1%b9%a3a-and-the-undergraduate-classroom/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/10/mok%e1%b9%a3a-and-the-undergraduate-classroom/).

Mokṣa and the Undergraduate Classroom

In the number of years I have been teaching both Indian and Chinese
philosophical traditions, I have found that the topic that students in
general have the most trouble engaging with is that of “release from
rebirth.” Of course, this issue is treated differently in the various
schools of Brāhmiṇical thought as well as, in somewhat distinct
vocabulary, in the Jaina and Buddhist traditions. But since I usually
begin introductory-level survey classes with pre-darśana Brāhmiṇical
texts, I will write about it here under the general notion of mokṣa. In
any event, my experience has been that, while students in intro courses
are intrigued with a number of things from early South Asian thought and
practice, what they often see as the refined psychological insights of
yoga and the concrete practicality of the early Buddhist approach to
life, for example, and while, by the time we come to early Chinese
schools, they feel even more comfortable, the notion of “release”
continues to be problematic for them, even one which provokes at least
mild intellectual hostility. It would seem important for the regular
instructor of Indian philosophy to understand why this can often be so,
as well as have some good approaches for remedying the impasse.

To some degree, of course, it is not difficult to comprehend why the
concept of mokṣa could be a potential nemesis for Western students, even
those from other religious backgrounds, and especially when they are
young. In the American context, identity, worldly achievement, the
prolongation of life, the pull of attachment to other people and
precisely the production and cultivation of desire are all quite
frequently taken to be strongly positive values. To the extent that
mokṣa represents the disassociation from and relinquishing of all these
things, it may be perceived as an ideal so strongly contrary to student
sensibilities, and even subversive of modern Western social aspirations,
that one could only expect students to react unfavorably to it. And
there are indeed times in the classroom when the profoundly contrary
nature of these differences may be emphasized to great pedagogical
benefit. I sometimes remark to students, for instance, that traditions
which ultimately ennoble aims like mokṣa and nirvāṇa pose an even
greater challenge to “typically” American ideals than Marxism.  After
all, the argument between advocates of Marxism and capitalism is
largely, though hardly entirely, focused on how best to distribute
economic resources in a society, while, in the light of mokṣa, these
concerns themselves are supposedly no longer even remotely paramount, at
least by the time they are entertained in the life of one who seeks
release. And yet, there is still the need to create not just some kind
of access to the motivation for a person to pursue mokṣa, but a
framework within which students can positively reflect on and seriously
consider it as important to relevant for their own lives.

So far, I have found that the framework that gets the farthest toward
this goal is that of “freedom.” Obviously, there is at least some
etymological justification for this association, since one of the
primary meanings of the verbal root of mokṣa, “muc,” does have the sense
of letting someone or something loose from bondage to something, as does
the Old English “freo.” There is a limit of course to how far the
merely etymological overlap between the terms mokṣa and freedom can be
pushed, given the facts that the former also often means specifically to
abandon or relinquish embodied existence in saṃsāra and the latter, to
the slight surprise of some, also comes from old German “frijaz,”
Frisian “fria” and even Sanskrit “priya,” meaning to “love” or one who
is “beloved.” And yet, there is just enough overlap, I think, to begin
a more substantive philosophical discussion about the different
dimensions and perhaps even the most profound meanings of freedom.
Freedom is of course an important topic for Western students and often
especially for young people. Talking about mokṣa in the classroom can
provoke deeper reflection about what genuine freedom is.

Of course, when one starts out by asking American students to identify
freedom, they will point to all those things one would anticipate.  For
them, freedom primarily means the “rights” of both individuals and
nations to be immune from the control of or coercion by others, the
political empowerment of citizens to choose who will represent them in
government and have a say in what laws they are to live by, or the
“choices” that one should have in believing things and expressing those
beliefs, in how to live and in one’s preferences and so on. These are
all conceptions of freedom that in and of themselves are certainly
genuinely personally, politically and philosophically important. But I
have found that what the ideas of mokṣa and niirvāṇa add to this matrix
of associations is the possibility of a kind of liberation that none of
these other senses really address.

We are also very often bound, limited, restrained from the full
potentials of our experience, more encompassing understanding and a
greater significance of our actions not by any external powers but by
ourselves, or at least what we have heretofore made of ourselves. In
thinking, that is, about real freedom, we would all do well to consider
how much our own habits (saṃskāra) of thought, preference and desires
may encumber us as well as those whom we love, how firmly our accreted
senses of identity (ahaṃkāra) bind us to damaging personal, cultural and
even political ways of doing things, and how our individual and
collective intentions and actions can perpetuate problematic
consequences for others now and in the future that may remain
long-unresolved (karmaphalaśeṣa). All of these maladies, after all,
were exactly among those suffering-causing and promulgating patterns of
conduct that mokṣa was believed to address. When mokṣa is seen in this
light, it confronts us with the possibility that one of the most crucial
challenges of freedom lies in our determination to liberate ourselves
from all-too-narrow tendencies that limit not only our own lives but the
lives of others. After all, much as it may be unpleasant to admit to
ourselves, the inclinations to control, coerce, manipulate and shape the
world according to only one set of ideals don’t emanate only from
others, but have their roots in the inherited and psychic chemistry that
constitutes each of us as embodied, living beings making our own rounds
through the world. Failing to master or transcend these can diminish
freedom just as palpably as any other “external” factors. And that in
turn means that freedom is not only to be striven for through resistance
to no-longer-wanted traditions, voting and civil protest, but also, and
maybe even most importantly, through the practice of freeing oneself
from one’s own fetters.

There is no need obviously to oversimplify and de-contextualize mokṣa in
merely these terms. We are still left, of course, to teach about the
place of mokṣa in some traditional Brāhmiṇical conceptualizations of the
stations of human life (puruṣārtha-s), the Buddhist and Jaina debates
over whether or not release from rebirth could only be pursued in an
ascetic or monastic context, the Advaita contention that mokṣa is not
really to be attained by the one true metaphysical self, which is
ever-free, but realized by the living individual (jiva) and so on. The
hermeneutics of teaching about mokṣa should not permit us to do violence
to it. We must also still remain open to the inclinations that students
may yet have to confront the ideal of mokṣa, remonstrating, as they
often do at least in my classes, that it deprives our experience of its
richness. Not only do these inclinations themselves prompt vital
philosophical discussion, but this is, after all not just a Western
reaction, but in some ways echoes the historical Chinese Confucian
critique of Buddhist praxis. Nonetheless, in the spirit of the Gitā’s
insistence that mokṣa can also be realized from within the very realm of
human action (karma), its relevance to all of us should find a way to be
live in the classroom. Bringing it into a discussion of the demands of
freedom–for freedom does demand many things of us–has been fruitful for
me.

I would be most interested to hear how you have dealt with mokṣa in your
classrooms, and welcome your own, perhaps better, ideas for how to
engage students with it as well.
