+++
title = "Coherence and"
full_title = "Coherence and intentionality Kumārila on the Kalpasūtras"
date = "2014-01-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/09/coherence-and-intentionality/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/09/coherence-and-intentionality/).

Coherence and intentionality: Kumārila on the Kalpasūtras

Recently I read a very interesting argument in Kumārila’s remarks on the
authority of ritual manuals (*Kalpasūtrādhikaraṇa*, *Tantravārtika* on
*Mīmāṃsasūtra* 1.3.11–14) which deployed a very familiar concept, the
textual coherence of the Veda, in an unexpected way. To put it briefly:
the Veda’s special status is vouchsafed by two interpretive principles
that seem contradictory at first glance.

The first is the principle of coherence: the interpreter needs to put
all of the individual passages of a text together into a coherent whole.
This is a widespread and common-sensical principle—so much so that
Quentin Skinner felt compelled to denounce it as the “mythology of
coherence” in a well-known article (see below). Skinner’s critique turns
on the fact that people aren’t always coherent, and sometimes don’t even
intend to be. This critique, of course, would have less traction for a
Mīmāṃsaka, since Mīmāṃsakas hold the Veda to be impersonal: the Veda’s
coherence is a fundamental stipulation which has nothing at all to do
with whether people are themselves coherent or not.

The second could almost be called a principle of incoherence. The
argument runs something like this: the Veda has lots of passages, such
as “Indra killed the dragon,” which in themselves are meaningless. These
passages obviously mean something—hence they’re not “senseless”—but
Mīmāṃsakas held Vedic sentences to a higher standard of meaning,
according to which a sentence needs to connect with something that we’re
being asked to do. Sentences that are meaningful in this sense are those
that provoke some response besides “so what?”. So Mīmāṃsakas go to great
lengths to construe these sentences with injunctions (*vidhi*s), the
sentences that actually tell us to do something. What if this results in
a “forced” interpretation? All the better, says Kumārila, because this
apparent incoherence is further evidence for the Veda’s impersonal
nature: what sensible person would throw apparently-meaningless
sentences into his text? Ritual manuals and similar texts aren’t
imprinted with these additional passages which would constitute evidence
of the fact that they are not factitious (*na ca tādṛśavākyaśeṣamudrāpi
kalpasūtrādigrantheṣu kācid asti yadbalenākṛtakatvam eṣām avasīyate*).

This second principle complements the first by separating the concept of
coherence from the intention, on the part of a human being, of being
coherent. We can thus distinguish “coherence by interpretation,” which
is what Mīmāṃsakas produce from the Vedas, from “coherence by
intention,” which results from the author’s will to produce a coherent
text. In many cases these two concepts coincide, but at least in the
case of the Vedas, Mīmāṃsakas point to certain aspects of the text that
speak against “coherence by intention” while keeping “coherence by
interpretation” on the table. One such aspect is straightforwardness and
simplicity: it seems that Kumārila is saying that the Veda is
authoritative—or at least we can recognize it to be so—in part because
it is so strange and difficult.

**Can you think of other examples of a disjunction between these two
concepts? Is Kumārila’s argument purely an apologetic strategy—and if
so, how successful is it?—or does it have some wider interpretive
significance?**

**References**:  
Lawrence McCrea. “The Hierarchical Organization of Language in Mīmāṃsā
Interpretive Theory.” *Journal of Indian Philosophy* 28 (2002):
429–459.  
Quentin Skinner. “Meaning and Understanding in the History of Ideas.”
Pp. 57–89 in *Visions of Politics Volume 1*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002.
