+++
title = "The languages of Indian"
full_title = "The languages of Indian philosophy"
date = "2014-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/19/the-languages-of-indian-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/19/the-languages-of-indian-philosophy/).

The languages of Indian philosophy

One facet of “Indian philosophy” that may be perfectly obvious, but is
nevertheless worth talking about at the beginning stages of a blog
dedicated to the subject, is that nearly all of the texts we’ve been
discussing or will be discussing—almost everything that Matthew Dasti’s
[overview](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/03/indian-philosophy-in-one-paragraph/)
encompasses—are composed in Sanskrit. (Matthew actually noted “the use
of Sanskrit as a *lingua franca*.”) “Indian philosophy” is strikingly
coextensive with “Sanskrit philosophy.”

There are many important exceptions, but many of these end up proving
the rule. Buddhism and Jainism, for example, initially rejected Sanskrit
both for transmitting canonical texts and for religious and
philosophical discussion. But many Buddhist communities had adopted
Sanskrit for one or both of these purposes by the mid-1st millennium CE,
and some Jains, too, came to use Sanskrit for the purposes of explaining
their own canonical texts and arguing with non-Jains.

Sanskrit was, of course, the dominant language of culture-power for a
long time in South Asia. But its dominance in philosophical discourse
was even more profound than in other areas of culture. **What was it
about Sanskrit—or philosophy—that philosophical discourse was almost
entirely conducted in Sanskrit? Where are the exceptions and what do
they mean? And when, if it all, were these strictures on language
finally relaxed, so that philosophy could speak in other languages?**
(For one answer to this last question, see Nalini Bhushan and Jay
Garfield’s anthology of [Indian Philosophy in
English](http://www.amazon.com/Indian-Philosophy-English-Renaissance-Independence/dp/0199769257).)

One factor, although perhaps just as much an effect as a cause, is a
“Sanskrit language ideology” that was formulated and promoted by
Mīmāṃsakas and seems to have been rather widely accepted. (I’ll discuss
one dissenter, the Jain scholar Prabhācandra, in a later post.) Pollock,
in a recent paper that seeks to address the “question of language”
head-on, formulates the basic postulate of this ideology thus (2011:
22): “Correct language is required for the correct communication of
reality.” Sanskrit is correct by definition; other languages can only
get at reality indirectly, that is, by causing us to infer the Sanskrit
words for the phenomenon in question. Correct, in this position, also
means “eternal”: the only way that one can talk about eternal truths is
to use a language that is itself eternal.

One of the key passages for this position is the section on ritual
manuals (*Kalpasūtrādhikaraṇa*, 1.3.6: see another
[post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/09/coherence-and-intentionality/)
on the same section) in Kumārila Bhaṭṭa’s *Tantravārttika*. The earlier
discussion on this topic had focused on what kind of authority inhered
in the “digests” of the Vedas that told Brahmin priests exactly how to
perform certain sacrifices. One reason why they weren’t considered
authoritative is that they were “improperly composed” (*nāsanniyamāt*,
1.3.12)—they lacked features such as accents that truly authoritative
Vedic texts were supposed to have. But Kumārila refocuses the argument
on the authority of Buddhist and Jain scriptures. They cannot be
considered authoritative because—and here Kumārila reinterprets
*asanniyamāt*—they are not in the correct language. Not only are they
not in Sanskrit, but they deviate sharply from standard Prakrit, which
in Kumārila’s world was the only alternative to Sanskrit if one wanted
to compose a text that people could actually read and understand.

Although Kumārila frames the question primarily in terms of eternality
and non-eternality, we might think in terms of a functional stability
and perspicuity: Sanskrit offered a standard language, which was
intelligible to educated people over a vast area, with crystal-clear
rules of derivation. There also seems to have been a widespread
consensus about how to map the syntax of Sanskrit onto philosophical
argumentation (with the *bhāva* suffixes, the use of the *hetu-pañcamī*,
etc.). **But couldn’t any language have fulfilled these functions? How
do we account for Sanskrit’s position in philosophical discourse? How do
we relate functionalist explanations to social and historical
explanations?**

**References**  
Sheldon Pollock, “The Languages of Science in Early Modern India.” Pp.
19-48 in Sheldon Pollock (ed.), *Forms of Knowledge in Early Modern
Asia: Explorations in the Intellectual History of India and Tibet,
1500-1800*. Durham: Duke University Press, 2011.
