+++
title = "Call for Papers SACP"
full_title = "Call for Papers SACP 2014"
date = "2014-01-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/17/call-for-papers-sacp-2014/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/17/call-for-papers-sacp-2014/).

Call for Papers: SACP 2014

Co-sponsored by the [Philosophy Department at
SUNY-Binghamton](http://www2.binghamton.edu/philosophy/), the 49th
Annual Conference of the [Society for Asian and Comparative
Philosophy](http://www.sacpweb.org/) will be held at SUNY-Binghamton’s
campus in the beautiful environs of upstate New York..

The conference theme, “Universality and Particularity,” is designed to
invite scholars representing Asian and cross-cultural traditions of
thought to present research on the many aspects of commonality and
specificity, from the degree to which they are found in things,
knowledge or language to cultural and political perspectives. Of course,
those who wish to participate are most welcome to submit abstracts and
presentations on the widest variety of topics that correspond to their
areas of interest as well. Our Keynote Address will be delivered by the
renowned Professor Chenyang Li of Nanyang Technical University in
Singapore, and he will speak to us about his important recent work on
the aims and potentials of cross-cultural philosophy. The conference
will also feature a special plenary panel on Buddhist philosophy, with
presentations given by Parimal Patil of Harvard University, Gordon Davis
of Carleton University and Emily McRae of the University of Oklahoma.

Presentation and panel proposal abstracts should be sent electronically
to Mary Bockover (Mary.Bockover@humboldt.edu). Abstracts for
presentations should be between 200-300 words, including a title that
begins with the presenter’s last name regardless of whatever else is
included, e.,g, ‘Bockover – SACP 2014 Presentation’. The presenter’s
name must also be stated on the abstract itself. Panel proposals should
include the title and a brief description of the panel, names and
affiliation of panelists and titles of each participant’s presentation.
The deadline for submission is March 1, 2014. Notice of acceptance of
proposals will be sent to your e-mail address sometime around mid-April,
with instructions for how to register and pay the conference fees if you
intend to participate.

To encourage student participation , the SACP has once again set up
Graduate Student Essay Contest Awards for the 2014 conference. Student
Essay Contest Prizes are: First prize: $1,000; Second prize, $750; and
Third prize, $500. The awards will be applied to the travel and
accommodation expenses for those attending the 2014 SACP conference
only. Graduate students should submit a complete essay of no more than
10 pages (or 4,000 words) and a 300 word abstract to Mary Bockover at
the above address.

Lodging opportunities will be available at both the SUNY-Binghamton
campus and at area hotels. Rooms available at the SUNY-Binghamton campus
will likely cost between $30-$35 per night depending on single or double
occupancy, and thus represent a very affordable deal, especially for
graduate student participants. Further details will be provided to those
whose papers are accepted to the conference.

2014 Conference Organizing Committee

Douglas Berger  
Robin Wang  
Mary Bockover  
Michael Barnhart  
Geoffrey Ashton  
Franklin Perkins  
Haiming Wen  
Charles Goodman

Society for Asian and Comparative Philosophy 49th Annual Conference,
June 19-22, 2014, SUNY Binghamton, New York

CONFERENCE THEME: UNIVERSALITY AND PARTICULARITY

Keynote Speaker: Chenyang Li, Nanyang Technical University, Singapore

Title of Keynote Presentation:  
“Comparative Philosophy and Cultural Patterns.”

Deadline for Abstracts and Proposals: March 1, 2014
