+++
title = "On the epistemology of"
full_title = "On the epistemology of the extraordinary Or Do we need to waste our time proving that unicorns do not exist?"
date = "2014-01-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/07/on-the-epistemology-of-the-extra-ordinary-or-do-we-need-to-waste-our-times-proving-that-unicorns-do-not-exist/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/07/on-the-epistemology-of-the-extra-ordinary-or-do-we-need-to-waste-our-times-proving-that-unicorns-do-not-exist/).

On the epistemology of the extra-ordinary. Or: Do we need to waste our time proving that unicorns do not exist?

Do we need to *prove* that unicorns, tooth fairies, hobbits and so on do
not exist? The question is not just funny, insofar as an upholder of the
existence of ghosts and the like could easily claim that —strictly
speaking— there is no evidence of their non-existence. In Indian
epistemology, this amounts to saying that there are no *bādhaka*s
‘invalidating cognitions’ telling us that the existence of ghosts, etc.
is
invalid.![](http://elisafreschi.com/wp-includes/js/tinymce/plugins/wordpress/img/trans.gif "More...")

Thus, the absence of *bādhaka*s is not enough, unless one wants to
invest an aweful amount of time looking for contrary evidences about
nearly every possible claim. A usueful tool, in this sense, might be the
Pūrva Mīmāṃsā adherence to what is usually the case. We do not see
omniscient people, nor witches, nor hobbits, nor tooth fairies, thus,
the one who argues in favour of their existence has the burden to prove
it.

Accordingly, the absence of *bādhaka*s is not enough for whatever goes
beyond the ordinary and one needs positive reasons to establish it. But
one must be careful with such positive reasons. In fact, the same
argument will be applied to more important issues, such as the existence
of God or the epistemological validity of the Sacred Texts. Thus, once
we have agreed that God and hobbits share the fact of being
extra-ordinary, then we need to apply to God the same standard we
applied to the hobbits, i.e., the asbence of evidence of the contrary is
not enough to establish His/Her existence.

Now, suppose one says that God exists not just because His/Her existence
cannot be invalidated, but also because of *consensus gentium* (or any
other form of *mahājanaparigraha* ‘acceptance by the great/by many
people’), then, what would she do if the opponent could be able to prove
that most people do in fact believe in the existence of witches (as it
might have indeed been the case)? Indian epistemologists have, thus,
asked for a majority of *qualified* people (i.e., of *mahājana* ‘great
people’ and not just *bahujana* ‘many people’). Christian theologians,
by contrast, have conceived the idea of a providential lead of the
people’s hearts, so that God Himself/Herself will incline His/Her people
in the right direction (cf. *vox populi, vox Dei*— the people’s voice is
God’s voice).

If, however one is not persuaded by these attempts (the latter relies,
again, on something extra-ordinary and has, thus, no independent
probatory value; the former relies on one’s ability to discern who the
‘great people’ are, which is far from obvious) and leaves
out*bādhakābhāva* (‘absence of invalidating cognitions’) and
*mahājanaparigraha* (‘acceptance by many/great people’), **what remains
in order to prove extra-ordinary states of affairs?**

Perhaps: 1. Inference (but you must really be very confident in order to
hope for inference to go further than direct perception). 2. Mystical
experience (but that is not communicable, or at least, its epistemic
value cannot be communicated). 3. Renunciation to any need to verify.
Can you think of other means?

(cross-posted here and on my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/01/06/do-we-need-to-waste-our-times-proving-that-unicorns-do-not-exist/ "epistemology of the extra-ordinary"))
