+++
title = "A synthesis beyond"
full_title = "A synthesis beyond Orientalism"
date = "2014-01-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/19/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/19/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/).

A synthesis beyond Orientalism

\[Cross-posted at [Love of All
Wisdom](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/01/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/%20‎).\]

I am increasingly getting the impression that the debates over
Orientalism in Asian traditions have taken a new turn, and one very much
for the better.

Few books of the twentieth century have made as much impact as Edward
Said’s 1978
[Orientalism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orientalism_(book)). It is
particularly striking that even though Said’s book was entirely about
the Middle East, it has been a major scholarly landmark in the study of
South and East Asia. Until Said, Western scholarship on Asia was rarely
viewed as having a hidden colonial agenda. The
[perennialism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/perennial-questions/)
of élitist mystical schools like
[Theosophy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theosophy) was taken seriously
by scholars. And the views of Asian traditions’ popular advocates – such
as [D.T. Suzuki](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D._T._Suzuki), [Walpola
Rahula](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walpola_Rahula), [Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sarvepalli_Radhakrishnan) –
were widely accepted as accurate portrayals of those traditions.

After Said, all that changed. Baby-boom scholars in their youth had been
caught up in the excitement of the Asiophilia of the Beatles and Jack
Kerouac. But as they became the scholarly establishment in the ’80s and
’90s, their postmodern tendencies (born out of Vietnam-era skepticism of
the establishment) grew far stronger. They turned a scolding, jaundiced
eye on the mystical enthusiasms of previous generations (and their own
youth). Perennialism and mysticism now not only looked like a
misrepresentation of Asian traditions’ history, but were implicated in
Western colonial domination.

I accept a great deal of this post-Orientalist critique. While I think
the colonial connection can be overblown, this line of reasoning very
much underlies [my article critiquing Ken
Wilber](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/09/precis-of-beyond-enacted-experiences/).
While Wilber has spent a great deal of time and effort studying
postmodern thought in the past few decades, he has, as far as I can
tell, missed this aspect of it: the idea that mystical experience is
central to most traditions is largely an invention of the nineteenth
century.

But after a while the critique does get tiresome and overblown. It leads
to sneering excrescences like the critique of [“Protestant
Buddhism”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/anti-protestant-presuppositions-in-the-study-of-buddhism/),
which in the guise of neutral scholarship proclaim, not so subtly, that
modern Buddhism isn’t really Buddhism but a repackaged Protestantism –
somehow never managing to turn that same critical eye on Chinese
traditions like
[Tiantai](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-a-defence/)
that split far more radically from early Buddhist doctrine.

I am now feeling hopeful that the tide has begun to turn away from this
critique – not back to the uncritical perennialism of the ’60s, but
toward a [genuine
synthesis](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/virtuous-and-vicious-means/).

Before *Orientalism*, scholars assumed a straightforward continuity
between the premodern and modern versions of Asian traditions – such
that the modern Hinduism of Radhakrishnan, say, could be taken to be
more or less the same idea espoused in the
[Upaniṣads](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Upanishads). Such a view is no
longer tenable. But these days, I see a new line of thinking emerging.
This new line argues that neither was there the radical *discontinuity*
often seen by the Saidians – where popular and nineteenth-century
Western conceptions of Asian thought are taken as arbitrarily invented
fictions with no significant relation to anything that preceded them.
(Said’s own method was to focus entirely on Western conceptions of “the
Orient” and ignore any study of the “real Orient” that those conceptions
aimed to represent. He has often, and rightly, been taken to task for
this. The critique of Orientalism would lose much of its punch if the
Orientalist representations turned out to be *accurate* – and Said’s
method provides no way of determining that they weren’t.)

The most exciting and polished work of scholarship I’ve seen in this new
way of thinking is Andrew Nicholson’s excellent [Unifying
Hinduism](http://www.amazon.com/Unifying-Hinduism-Philosophy-Intellectual-Disciplines/dp/0231149867).
Nicholson’s book is a study of Vedānta, the Indian philosophical
tradition that sees itself as expounding the Upaniṣads. He turns a close
and critical eye on nineteenth-century scholars like Richard Garbe and
A.E. Gough, pointing out their misrepresentations of Vedānta tradition
and how many of those misrepresentations endure today (especially with
respect to [Vijñānabhikṣu](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vijnanabhiksu),
the main subject of his study). But he also points out the continuities
of these Orientalists with the earlier tradition. They *got it from
somewhere*. Especially, their views – frequently promoting [Advaita
Vedānta](http://www.iep.utm.edu/adv-veda/) as the supreme Vedāntic
tradition and disparaging others – derived from medieval Indian
doxographies, like the [Sarva Darśana Saṅgraha of
Mādhava](https://openlibrary.org/works/OL7892418W/The_Sarva-Darsana-Samgraha)
(which Gough translated). They misrepresented Indian tradition by
emphasizing one aspect of the tradition over another, but they did so in
a way that premodern Indians themselves had done. They followed a native
Indian tradition; they were not just making stuff up. ([David McMahan’s
take on
Yavanayāna](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-story-of-buddhisms-descent/)
is similar in many ways.)

Nicholson’s approach, I think, has parallels among modern Western
practitioners of Asian traditions, a number of whom are becoming willing
to affirm that yes, their tradition is different from the traditions of
antiquity – but accept this newness and defend, in some way, its
faithfulness to older tradiion. Mark Schmanko did something like this a
while ago in his very thoughtful [defence of
Wilber](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/10/a-way-forward-for-wilber/)
to me: acknowledging that mysticism and perennialism were new and
modern, but still tying them back to older tradition. Those who have
read my own [writings on
Yavanayāna](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-a-defence/)
will know how sympathetic I am to this view: its newness does not make
it bad.
