+++
title = "Kicking away the Ladder"
full_title = "Kicking away the Ladder – in a different context"
date = "2014-10-01"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/10/01/kicking-away-the-ladder-in-a-different-context/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/10/01/kicking-away-the-ladder-in-a-different-context/).

Kicking away the Ladder – in a different context

‘Kicking Away the Ladder’ by Chang is well known to most who are
interested in economic history of the world. We agree with Chang’s
views. The colonial powers gained economic strength through
interventionist policies. But they now try to kick away the growth
ladder of third world countries by advocating a ‘liberal free market’.
Most ‘modern’ economists who advocate liberalism will not. But his
stance is supported by a great amount of facts which is never properly
countered by his adversaries.

In this post, we look at another such behavior of the western world.
While this post shall only give a couple of examples, the idea is to
impress upon the minds of the H how the Western mind works. We cannot
play and win in geo-politics unless we understand the strategies of our
adversaries. This is a small lesson which is immensely important.
Christianity is just one of the tools used by the western powers to
subjugate the third world. The use of this religion was noted by Aizawa
almost two centuries ago –

“*By trading with that nation, they learn about its geography and
defenses. If they be weak, they dispatch troops to invade the nation; if
strong, they propagate Christianity to subvert it from within. Once our
people’s hearts and minds are captivated by Christianity, they will
greet the barbarian host with open arms, and we would be powerless to
stop them. Our people would consider it an honor and a privilege to die
for this foreign god, and this willingness to die, this fearlessness,
would make them fit for battle. Our people would gladly cast their
riches into the sacrificial coffers of this foreign god, and those
riches would finance barbarian campaigns.” (see
<https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/12/03/148/>*)

But his is not the only way. Being a result of Abrahamic tradition, the
western powers also created a new race of dhimmis – whom we shall call
‘Gunga Dins (GD)’. In India, for example, Sikhs formed a major pillar of
support for the British empire. The targets were almost always some
particular community which can be molded to see the imperialist outsider
as their ally against the other community/ies in a nation. Sometimes,
entire countries have been used as GD against their enemies. It has been
the practice of the western powers to kick these GD off after they have
been used. The western world, especially the elite, has a clear
difference between them and the rest of the world. Loyalty towards an
outsider has no meaning to those barbarians. Unfortunately, H seem to
miss this lesson from history just as they have missed several others.
Even today, we hear about how we can expect Uncle Sam to intervene in
our favor, how the gora-s will wake up to the reality of terrorism (as
if they don’t know about it!!), how we shall benefit from a strong
partnership with western world – we shall be rewarded for our loyalty to
democracy etc. We shall look at a couple of examples of GD’s and how
they were treated by the western powers. A further evidence for
mleccha-marUnmattAbhisaMdhi (as put by the author of manasataramgini)
shall be seen in these examples.

Sikhs – Sikhs, by and large, were favorably disposed towards British
Raj. But at the time of partition, the Sikhs were left to fend for
themselves against the demonic brutality displayed by Muslims in West
Punjab. No step was taken by the British Raj to contain the violence
against the turban-wearers in West Punjab – which had started in earnest
as early as March 1947. Where the Sikhs were good GDs to the British
Empire, the majority of Muslims stayed away from freedom struggle.
Muslim League was not as much interested in freedom as opposing Hindus
and Congress. When the time came for the British to select one of the
two for favor, the Raj selected the Muslims over Sikhs. The loyal Sikhs
were left defenseless to satiate the Muslim hunger. We are sure that the
heathen vs abrahamic sentiment played not a small role in this decision.
After all, aren’t Hindus a beastly people with beastly religion? While
the Sikhs might love to see themselves as closer to monotheistic
Abrahamists (as most GD love to do), the master has no wish to be
compared to such low life beings.

Assyrian Christians – Pagan Assyrians had been exterminated by the
Islamic rulers centuries ago. The pretopAsaka-s survived as they were
‘Ahl-al-kitAb (people of the book). They paid jizyah and lived as
dimmi-s but were able to survive where the pagans faced only
extermination. These Christians of Iraq (descendants of the ancient
Assyrians) joined the British army and served the empire post First
World War. They had fought against the Ottoman Empire during the First
World War. Their struggle was for the establishment of a separate
independent Assyrian state. With the surrender of Russia (post Bolshevik
revolution) and the destruction of Armenian resistance, the Assyrians
were caught in a precarious situation – surrounded by enemies and lack
of supplies. Those who escaped concentrated in northern Iraq where they
were in some good numbers and expected the British to save the fellow
Christians from the other Abrahamism. The Assyrians were loyal to
British and they were used by the British to rule over Iraq. But when
the Kingdom of Iraq was given independence (along with an alliance with
British), the British left the Assyrians to fend for themselves.
Assyrians demanded an independent Assyrian state – so that they could
live in peace. Their plea went unheeded. They were made to swear fealty
to King Faisal. Encouraged by British indifference, the Arabs began a
genocide of Assyrians once again – Simele Massacre of 1933 being one of
the most notorious. The Assyrian Levies (Assyrians who were in British
Army) wanted a discharge within 30 days – so that they could go back to
their lands and defend their people. But their wishes were not granted.
Not a single Arab was convicted for the massacre.

William Saroyan notes in his ‘Seventy Thousand Assyrians’:

*“Well,” he laughed, “simply because everything is washed up over
there.” I am repeating his words precisely, putting in nothing of my
own. “We were a great people once,” he went on. “But that was yesterday,
the day before yesterday. Now we are a topic in ancient history. We had
a great civilization. They’re still admiring it. Now I am in America
learning how to cut hair. We’re washed up as a race, we’re through, it’s
all over, why should I learn to read the language? We have no writers,
we have no news- well, there is a little news: once in a while the
English encourage the Arabs to massacre us, that is all. It’s an old
story, we know all about it. The news comes over to us through the
Associated Press, anyway.”*

*  These remarks were very painful to me, an Armenian. I had always
felt badly about my own people being destroyed. I had never heard an
Assyrian speaking in English about such things. I felt great love for
this young fellow. Don’t get me wrong. There is a tendency these days to
think in terms of pansies whenever a man says that he has affection for
man. I think now that I have affection for all people, even for the
enemies of Armenia, whom I have so tactfully not named. Everyone knows
who they are. I have nothing against any of them because I think of them
as one man living one life at a time, and I know, I am positive, that
one man at a time is incapable of the monstrosities performed by mobs.
My objection is to mobs only.*

*  “Well,” I said, “it is much the same with us. We, too, are old. We
still have our church. We still have a few writers, Aharonian,
Isahakian, a few others, but it is much the same.”*

*  “Yes,” said the barber, “I know. We went in for the wrong things.
We went in for the simple things, peace and quiet and families. We
didn’t go in for machinery and conquest and militarism. We didn’t go in
for diplomacy and deceit and the invention of machine-guns and poison
gases. Well, there is no use in being disappointed. We had our day, I
suppose.”*

*  “We are hopeful,” I said. “There is no Armenian living who does not
still dream of an independent Armenia.”*

*  “Dream?” said Badal. “Well, that is something. Assyrians cannot
even dream any more. Why, do you know how many of us are left on
earth?”*

*  “Two or three million,” I suggested.*

*  “Seventy thousand,” said Badal. “That is all. Seventy thousand
Assyrians in the world, and the Arabs are still killing us. They killed
seventy of us in a little uprising last month. There was a small
paragraph in the paper. Seventy more of us destroyed. We’ll be wiped out
before long. My brother is married to an American girl and he has a son.
There is no more hope. We are trying to forget Assyria. My father still
reads a paper that comes from New York, but he is an old man. He will be
dead soon.”*

A few H might wonder about this behavior of the British towards the
Assyrians – who are Christians. But the reason is clear for all who wish
to see the truth. The powers of Western Europe have always held contempt
for the Orthodox Church as well the Eastern Europeans (let alone those
of the Middle East). This contempt was so high that the English and
French joined hands with Muslim Turkey to ensure that Jerusalem does not
pass into the hands of Orthodox Russia from Islamic Turkey. While the
majority of Assyrians are connected to the Catholic church, they are not
gora enough in the eyes of the powers that be. Thus, they can be
sacrificed for the ‘greater good’ (economic/political) of the ruling
classes of the world. Had the oppressors been heathens as in the case of
Boxer revolution, the West may have indeed taken note. But in this case,
the perpetrators were Arabs who were also followers of a different
strain of monotheism and thus, not as widely different as the heathens.
The scale of difference has always mattered a lot to the sensibilities
of the mind of the white man. As Vivekananda pointed out, to attract the
sympathies of the white man, missionaries printed posters in the US
depicting Hindu heathen woman (black in color) throwing her baby (white
in color) to the crocodiles. The revulsion towards those of different
color is heightened even more when the other is also a heathen. This
explains the discomfiture of the western powers when the Russian Empire
was defeated by the yellow-skinned Japanese heathens. Out of the Axis
powers, Japanese alone were selected for a heap of insults – even
forcing complete disarmament and lack of a military force – by thrusting
a constitution on the heathen nation. The Germans were never made to
face such ignomy.

Several more such GD can be found throughout history. In a way, even
Ukrainians and Georgians have become GD for the West – but we do not see
any Western intervention against the resurgent Rus lead by the wannabe
Emperor, Putin. In Iraq, those who supported the Americans are facing
genocides and massacres. But we do not see any major interference by
Uncle Sam. The latter is the true inheritor of Western Europe’s penchant
for global domination and hegemony. The successor state is not so
different from its predecessors.

Kicking away the ladder is true in several levels when it comes to
Western policy making. They might utilize us till we are useful to them
but they will not feel any unease in leaving us to face destruction if
they feel that they have nothing more to gain. The West is very
pragmatic in their approach to geo-politics. Only fools can expect
loyalty or true allies among those nations.

We hear some fellow H who feel that if we align ourselves alongside the
West, we can become great once again – as the West shall support us.
They feel that if we support the West, the West shall be loyal to us.
The above given examples (many more can be cited) show that the West
does not care about the fate of GD much. At most, we can expect some
romance being written about GD. H must decide whether this is their
greatest desire. We must build a more pragmatic geo-political alliance
to face the twin dangers of Abrahamic cults as well as Hans. West cannot
be trusted to support us as true allies. Are we ready toface the truth?

