+++
title = "Veṅkaṭanātha on the"
full_title = "Veṅkaṭanātha on the pedagogy of emotions"
date = "2021-11-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/11/09/ve%e1%b9%85ka%e1%b9%adanatha-on-the-pedagogy-of-emotions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/11/09/ve%e1%b9%85ka%e1%b9%adanatha-on-the-pedagogy-of-emotions/).

Veṅkaṭanātha on the pedagogy of emotions

Veṅkaṭanātha recognises two soteriological paths, namely bhakti
(restricted to only few eligible people) and prapatti (being the only
one accessible to normal people). In both cases, how can one get there?

Prapatti, to begin with, cannot be sought for independently, because one
only becomes eligible for prapatti only after having become aware of
one’s desperation because one cannot ever be eligible for bhakti (not to
speak of karma- and jñānamārga). Thus, one’s only way to reach prapatti
is by means of trying to achieve bhakti and becoming aware of one’s
inability to do so and therefore deciding to just surrender to God or
His spouse.

Bhakti, in turn, has an intellectual aspect and an emotional one. On the
one hand, it is defined by Rāmānuja as a continuous meditation on the
real nature of God, and therefore needs a preliminary ascertainment of
what this nature could be. On the other, it is based on a surplus of
loving affection, one that will never be satiated, not even in
Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore, since the time of Rāmānuja’s *Śaraṇāgatigadya*,
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta authors have engaged in a **pedagogy of
emotions**, one enhancing one’s raw emotions and transforming them into
soteriologically-relevant ones. The former are temporary and might be
about the wrong topic, the latter focus on God, and are able to last
forever and become more intense with time. Veṅkaṭanātha tries to reach
this level through his learned religious poetry, which is made to be
listened/read, re-listened/re-read and pondered upon for a long time,
since its many layers of theological meanings can only reveal themselves
through a long perusal.

For instance, the detailed descriptions from head to toe (*anubhava*) of
God’s body in various poems by Veṅkaṭanātha are meant to show how one
can train one’s sense faculties to relish always more in their object,
rather than being satiated by it. The same poems also underline the
poet’s unworthiness, possibly so that the listener/reader can get a
chance to contemplate their own unworthiness (for some beautifully
translated poems by Veṅkaṭanātha, see Hopkins 2007).

**Do you agree that emotions come at the end of one’s soteriological
journey for Veṅkaṭanātha?**
