+++
title = "There are bad Buddhists"
full_title = "There are bad Buddhists and false Buddhist claims"
date = "2021-11-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/11/07/there-are-bad-buddhists-and-false-buddhist-claims/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/11/07/there-are-bad-buddhists-and-false-buddhist-claims/).

There are bad Buddhists and false Buddhist claims

Paul Fuller’s thoughtful and well researched new [introduction to
Engaged
Buddhism](https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/introduction-to-engaged-buddhism-9781350129085/)
cites [my Disengaged Buddhism
article](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)
together with an article I hadn’t heard of before, Victor Temprano’s
2013 [“Defining engaged
Buddhism”](https://journals.equinoxpub.com/BSR/article/view/17677)
(*Buddhist Studies Review* 30.2). (Fuller has very kind words for both
Temprano and myself.) I proceeded to read Temprano’s article and was
quite struck by it – and by the fact that Fuller had listed our two
articles together, as making complementary critiques. Fuller’s putting
our two articles together is striking to me because, while Temprano and
I do both make a critique of Western engaged Buddhist scholars like
Sallie King and David Loy, we do so for entirely different reasons –
reasons that are actually opposed to one another. And indeed, I think my
differences from Temprano are *larger* than my differences from King and
Loy.

Temprano directs his critique against the kinds of claims that I made in
my article’s section on method. Temprano and I both note that engaged
Buddhist scholarship has a strong normative dimension, as for example
when King says “it is easy to take expressions of contempt and acts of
violence as criteria for discerning what is *not* a valid expression of
the Dharma” (*Socially Engaged Buddhism* 25-6, her emphasis). But
Temprano takes this normative dimension to be a *problem*, something
wrong with scholarship like King’s. I do not.

Temprano correctly claims that “Loy’s and King’s definitions are, after
all, not merely different ways of accounting for the origins of engaged
Buddhism, but ways of defining what true Buddhism really *should be.*”
Where he goes wrong in his followup:

> The resulting denunciation, judgment, and exclusion of threatening
> Buddhisms expresses the deep sense of authority that academics can
> feel in regards to their ability to concretely define *who is* and
> *who is not* a Buddhist. Yet Buddhists are practicing diverse
> traditions already; there is no need to present certain forms as
> somehow more ideal than others. (268, his emphasis)

Isn’t there, though? Consider the Burmese monk Wirathu. When lynch mobs
composed of Burmese Buddhists were killing hundreds of Muslims and
driving hundreds of thousands more from their homes, Wirathu
[called](https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/21/world/asia/extremism-rises-among-myanmar-buddhists-wary-of-muslim-minority.html)
the Muslims “troublemakers” and said “You can be full of kindness and
love, but you cannot sleep next to a mad dog.” He
[added](https://www.pri.org/stories/2013-06-21/buddhist-monk-wirathu-leads-violent-national-campaign-against-myanmars-muslims)
that “Muslims are like the African carp. They breed quickly and they are
very violent and they eat their own kind.” As riots grew worse he
[proclaimed](http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,2146000,00.html)
to his followers that “Now is the time to rise up, to make your blood
boil.”

![Wirathu preaching against Rohingya
Muslims](https://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/wirathu-1024x682.jpg)

Wirathu is a self-identified Buddhist, and one who has gone through all
the traditional and institutional requirements necessary to become a
monk. I wouldn’t go so far as to say that Wirathu is *not* a Buddhist.
(I don’t feel a strong need to take a position on whether he counts as
an *engaged* Buddhist; Fuller reasonably argues that he does.) But I
would agree with King, contra Temprano, that Wirathu is a *bad* Buddhist
– that his form of Buddhism is indeed less ideal than others. His
preaching of anger, hate and violence goes against all the normative
ideals that King and I have learned, as Buddhists, from Buddhist
tradition. We believe in Buddhist ideals that say what Wirathu is doing
is wrong, *pāpa*.

And so, we would argue, there *is* a need to present Wirathu’s Buddhism
as bad Buddhism. Temprano makes no argument for his claim that there
isn’t; it is a non sequitur to move from the existence of different
Buddhist traditions to the claim that none is better than others, unless
one is going to make the a priori assumption that nothing is ever better
than anything else. (Indeed, the way Temprano puts his argument, one
could just as easily turn it around against him: “*Buddhologists* are
practising diverse methods already, including normative ones; there is
no need to present a non-normative Buddhology as somehow more ideal than
the normative kind.”) *If* one were already committed to a position of
strict neutrality, then that would imply that one should not say one
person’s Buddhism is better than another’s. But King clearly is not so
committed, and neither am I.

Should we be? Temprano never makes a convincing case for such
neutrality. (Few ever have.) At several points in his article Temprano
recognizes that King and Loy are both scholars and practitioners, but at
other points he bifurcates these two identities such that they can or
should never meet: “The question of whether or not a practice is truly
Buddhist is largely a question for practitioners to debate, not for
scholars to determine.” (269) Or, “The condemnation of violence as not
simply bad, but as *un-Buddhist*, is a judgment that *Buddhists* must
make, not a judgment for scholars to disseminate to a global society
through the academy.” (273) Temprano has already admitted that we are
both Buddhists *and* scholars. Why should it not be the case that the
two inform each other?

Here Temprano claims:

> When scholastic and secular authority, embodied in the symbolic
> capital accrued by King and Loy upon completing Ph.Ds and becoming
> widely published, is directed towards supporting and authorizing one
> Buddhist tradition and towards denigrating and delegitimizing others,
> it is entirely a different beast than squabbles between religious
> traditions themselves. Evaluations of religious traditions end up
> relying mostly on personal prejudices, and ignore entirely the reality
> that Buddhists of different traditions legitimately practice in a vast
> variety of different, **and even opposing,** ways. (273, emphasis in
> original)

In the first sentence, Temprano says that King and Loy “delegitimize”
views and practices like Wirathu’s. In the last, he is effectively
claiming that Wirathu practices “legitimately”. Since this latter claim
directly contradicts the statement that his opponents are making, one
would expect to find an argument for it, but there is none. As far as I
can tell, Temprano’s *only* ground for believing groups like Wirathu’s
“legitimate” is that *they exist*. But anti-vaxxers and flat earthers
also *exist*. The existence of *false beliefs* is well documented. The
mere existence of such beliefs does not make them legitimate! Are we
delegitimizing Wirathu? Damn right we’re delegitimizing Wirathu. Why
aren’t you?

Among far too many religion scholars, it is an article of faith – in the
most pejorative sense of that term –that all traditions and all sides
of a tradition are legitimate; the illegitimate thing, supposedly, [is
to arbitrate between
them](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/in-defence-of-buddhist-sectarianism/).
This article of faith is self-contradicting, and the house of cards on
which it is built rapidly falls. For the claim itself delegitimizes
those of us within the tradition who *do* believe that one side of a
“squabble” is better than another and that there are good reasons to
take that side over the other. In so delegitimizing us, *it takes a
side*, and thus does exactly what it claims to reject. As a result, this
article of faith is incoherent nonsense, and should be expunged from the
field of religious studies wherever it appears (which is all too
frequently).

Temprano really gives that game away when he claims that “Evaluations of
religious traditions end up relying mostly on personal prejudices.” In
saying this, as far as I can tell, all he is doing is revealing a
personal prejudice of his own. For he provides not the slightest bit of
argument of evidence for this claim. It is a claim dripping with
implicit contempt for us Buddhist practitioners, whether Western, Asian
or otherwise: the beliefs we take as central to our traditions are so
disconnected from objective reality that objective scholarly claims
cannot even be made about them; our belief comes down to mere personal
prejudice, and must remain so. And it does not take much examination to
reveal this claim of Temprano’s to be false.

Is our consciousness reborn after death? [Ian
Stevenson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_Stevenson) provided some
empirical evidence to suggest objectively that it is. Evan Thompson
[critically examined Stevenson’s
evidence](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
and found it insufficient to prove the point. Both Stevenson’s and
Thompson’s claims are claims about the objective truth of a key Buddhist
doctrine, made with the standards of scholarly rigour that are our best
route to objective truth in any field.

Likewise, the theory of evolution, if true, logically implies that the
literal interpretation of Genesis is objectively false; fundamentalists
and biologists both rightly agree on that much, which is why the former
reject the theory. Scholarly methods establish that theory of evolution
*is* objectively true, as far as we can tell, and the literal
interpretation of Genesis therefore false. One would have to be a truly
extreme die-hard postmodern relativist to say that *that* point relies
“mostly on personal prejudices”, and Temprano provides no indication
that he swings in such a direction.

My objection to engaged Buddhist scholars is that so far their
scholarship has not adequately lived up to standards of scholarly
rigour; I wrote my article to encourage them to do so. Temprano,
however, is telling them the opposite! He is telling them to *abandon*
any attempt at objective truth and the rigour that leads to it, when it
comes to normative claims made within Buddhist tradition. Instead he
wants them to shut up and impose a radical bifurcation between their
Buddhist selves and their scholar selves – in a way that reveals a
patronizing contempt for the Buddhist part. And he does so for reasons
that lack rigour themselves. Between all that and the engaged Buddhists,
I’ll take the engaged Buddhists any day.

(As a final note on questions of authority: I would have felt bad about
writing a piece this harsh, and would therefore have toned it down, if
Temprano’s academic title was still “assistant to Arvind Sharma”, as it
appears in the article. I would not want to punch down at a junior
academic in a position that precarious. Fortunately for both of us, it
appears that in the ensuing years Temprano, like me, has [found gainful
employment](https://www.linkedin.com/in/victor-gerard-temprano-4ab72a50/?originalSubdomain=ca)
outside his academic specialty. I’m happy for him that that’s the case –
and I also think he is therefore fair game for a lateral punch.)

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](https://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/11/there-are-bad-buddhists-and-false-buddhist-claims)
