+++
title = "How sweet it is!"
full_title = "How sweet it is!"
date = "2013-05-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/07/how-sweet-it-is/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/05/07/how-sweet-it-is/).

How sweet it is!

*Apis mellifera,* the common honeybee, seems to have originated in
Africa and spread from there to Europe and Asia. Moving into temperate
climates required major behavioral change that led to honey hoarding and
ability to form a winter cluster.

European honeybees are half-tame, probably because beekeepers selected
for lower levels of aggressiveness. People collect honey from African
honey bees, but have never domesticated them, so the optimal strategy
for African honey bees is to go down fighting. Which they do: they’ll
chase you for a mile once they get their dander up.

This has probably been going on for a long, long, time. It may well go
back before anatomically modern humans. I say that because of the
greater honeyguide, which guides people to beehives in Africa. After we
take the honey, the honeyguide eats the grubs and wax. A guiding bird
attracts your attention with wavering, chattering ‘tya’ notes compounded
with peeps and pipes. It flies towards an occupied hive and then stops
and calls again. It has only been seen to guide humans.

I would not be surprised to find that this symbiotic relationship is far
older than the the domestication of dogs. But it is not domestication:
we certainly don’t control their reproduction. I wouldn’t count on it,
but if you could determine the genetic basis of this signaling behavior,
you might be able to get an idea of how old it is.

Honeyguides may be mankind’s oldest buds, but they’re nasty little
creatures: [brood
parasites](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/notrocketscience/2011/09/06/honeyguide-chicks-stab-their-foster-siblings-to-death-with-hooked-bills/#.UYiqD8rNstk),
like cuckoos.

