+++
title = "A Family Feud & An Exiled King"
date = "2021-06-26"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/06/26/a-family-feud-an-exiled-king/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/06/26/a-family-feud-an-exiled-king/).

The history of ancient Near East and its Bronze Age Empires has always
been a fascinating subject. These were one of the earliest kingdoms, the
culmination of Neolithic and subsequent Chalcolithic Age that
transformed the human civilization. The empires of late Bronze Age like
the Babylonian empire of ancient Mesopotamia, the Mitannis, the Hittite
empire and also a later addition – the Middle Assyrian Empire have for
long affected the fortunes of the middle eastern population. Though,
ancient Egypt could be considered a completely separate entity and thus
usually had separate existence *vis-à-vis* the ancient Near East, yet,
it is equally true that through out their history, these ancient
civilizations were incomplete without each other.

***Note:*** As all the events covered in the post fall under the period
before common era, therefore, the abbreviation BCE for the years would
not be separately mentioned and readers should read it as given for the
entirety of the write up.

![***The Lion’s Gate at the Ancient Hittite Capital City of
Hattusa.^(A)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/hattusa-the-ancient-capital-of-the-hittites-detail.png?w=1024)

**Introduction**

Mutual relations of these kingdoms were affected by not just the battles
that raged between them for geographical gains but also the intra-house
political intrigues of the royal palaces. The topic of this post is one
such incident – a contestation of the Hittite throne during the period
of its New Kingdom and a fallout that resulted in involvement of ancient
Egypt in the fight. This is the story of an usurpation, its
justification, the story of a slight of dethroned king, of a search of
an exiled king. This is a saga of one of the best documented ancient
family feuds between a nephew Urhi-Teshub, his uncle Hattusili and
eventual involvement of the Egyptian Pharaoh Ramesses II. In order to
understand the conflict, background information to these events is
imperative.

**Background**

***§ Physical & Political Geography***

Empire of the Hittites was centered on Anatolia (most of modern Turkey)
and while it existed between *c.* 1680-1178, boundaries of the empire
kept fluctuating. Hittites themselves called the land that they ruled as
*the land of Hatti.* This was also the name by which they were addressed
by every political power around. The Empire was vast covering entire
Anatolia, from Aegean in the west to upper Euphrates in the East, and
today’s north and western Syria in the south.¹ Except for a brief
period, the capital of the empire was city of Hattusa (current Boğazköy
in Turkey) in the basin of Kizil Irmak River (Hittite:*Marashantiya*;
Greek: *Halys*). It is important to note that the pattern of the Hittite
state was dominance over various vassals and actual hegemony was
somewhat limited. During it apogee, the empire had in its control,
western Syria with two of its cities like Aleppo and Carchemish
(Karkemiš) as its seats of vice royalty, mostly under the princes of the
royal family. The empire reached as far as Damascus. During the reign of
Suppiluliuma I (*r*. 1344-22), western Mitanni also became their vassal.

***Various southern city states like Qadesh, Ugarit and Amurru had
vassalage treaties with the Hittites and these city states many a times
became casus belli for its wars with the other major power – Egypt in
the political power play. ***

For some centuries in this period, north of the empire had been troubled
by a people called Gasga/Kaska. Kaskas were probably non-Indo-European
tribal group that lived between mountainous regions of eastern Anatolia
and Black Sea. Though, many Hittite kings had attacked them in the
empire’s defence and had limited them to the northern areas, yet, they
had even reached the capital city of Hattusa during the reign of
Muwatalli II (*c.* 1295-72). Muwatalli later transferred the capital
from Hattusa to the city of Tarhuntassa in southern Anatolia. This city
has remained unidentified for a long time. Though Singer (2006) had
suggested Kızıldağ as its possible location but recent research (Jones,
2019) suggests Hamza Zındanı Höyük as its location. As of now, it is
unclear whether this transfer of capital was cause or effect of the
Kaskan/Gasgan attack (Mieroop, 2007). The Hittites divided their empire
between what they called Upper Lands and Lower Lands *(Kur Elīti and Kur
Šaplīti*) with Tarhuntassa forming part of the lower lands (Matessi, *§*
4, 2016).²

![***The Hittite Territory during New Kingdom divided between Upper and
Lower
Lands.^(B)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/hittite-map.jpg?w=1024)

***§ Sources***

Most of the information regarding the Hittites comes from texts and
documents recovered from the capital city of Hattusa. In various
treaties that the kings of this empire conducted with other kingdoms,
they had an established practice of including an introduction of the
past relations between the two parties and therefore, historians get
lucky in getting an established chronology. The empire had during course
of its existence, many kings and many usurpers of the throne but they
all ‘*almost certainly came from a single small group of closely related
families’.**³* However, the events told in these Hittite texts/documents
could be very biased and require utmost care on part of the scholars for
understanding actual events. Then there is the problem that many Hittite
kings took same names but without any practice of assigning any
distinction that might help in their differentiation.⁴

***“Not a single moment of Hittite history can be dated without
synchronisms to Egypt, Assyria, or Babylonia.”***^(***5***)

This creates a major chronological maze which cannot be completely
solved without corroboration from similar documents of treaties and
letters of other kingdoms like the Egyptian, the Assyrians etc.
Consequently, the dates assigned to various Hittite rulers are always
approximate and susceptible to changes if new information emerges
particularly from ancient Egyptian archives.

***§ The Division***

Though many scholars have contested the method of dividing the Hittite
history in the usual Old, Middle and, New Kingdom like the division of
the other Near Eastern and Egyptian Civilization but still many for the
sake of convenience continue with the said division. The Empire as per
this accepted system had three phases: the earliest Old Kingdom (*c.*
1600-1460), the connecting Middle Kingdom (also called the Hittite *Dark
Ages* due to the paucity of documents for this phase) and lastly, New
Kingdom that started from the rule of Tudhaliya I/II (*c.* 1400) and in
due course, the Hittite Empire reached its peak by surpassing even great
powers like Egypt and Mitannis. The kingdom evidently met its end around
*c.* 1178 after which the Hittite Empire collapsed.

**Hattusili**

***§ Governor*** ***of the Upper Lands***

The period of our interest is the end of the reign of above mentioned
king Muwattalli II (*c.* 1295-1272) of the Hittite New Kingdom.
Muwattali had a brother named Hattusili. Most likely, immediately after
his accession to the throne of the empire, Muwatalli sent this brother
Hattusili as governor in the northern areas of the empire called the
Upper Lands and the king himself transferred the capital to Tarhuntassa
as earlier mentioned. The capital city Hattusa was put under the chief
scribe of the empire – Mittannamuwa who was now made administrator of
the city and the office of chief scribe was given to his son –
Purandamuwa.

What we know of Hattusili’s early career and important events of his
early life comes from a text called ***Apology*** which presents a
rather biased⁶ view of the events, though that is not surprising
considering the fact that the document has been composed to laud and
justify the achievements and actions of Hattusili himself. But this
certainly means that we have to take events described in the document
with a pinch of salt. Nonetheless, the career of Hattusili till the
reign of Muwatalli II has to be known first, so that we might understand
his reasoning for claiming the throne of the empire from his nephew and
future king Urhi-Teshub and why he was also supported by various
factions of the Hittite polity after his usurpation.

Hattusili was earlier made ***gal* *mešedi*** *i.e.* the commander of
the ***mešedi*** (personal bodyguards of the king). This certainly was
an important post. And later, he was given governorship of the northern
areas. But this decision ruffled some feathers, especially perturbed was
the displaced governor Arma-Tarhund, who was also a member of the royal
family and was not happy about the changes.⁷ Despite serious opposition
to his appointment, Hattusili seems to have distinguished himself in
various military assignments and he also successfully protected the
empire from the Kaskan attacks. He proclaimed in his *Apology:*

> ***‘To whatever land of the enemy I turned my eyes, none of the enemy
> could turn my eyes back. I conquered the lands of the enemy, one after
> the other. The favour of My Lady Ishtar was always with me. I drove
> out of the lands of Hatti whatever enemy had occupied it’ (Apol. §5, I
> 67–72).***
>
> **Trevor Bryce, Kingdom of the Hittites.**

***§ Viceroy of the Upper Lands***

With transfer of the capital to Tarhuntassa, the northern frontiers
became more vulnerable and there ensued a widespread rebellion.
Hattusili, as per his account, was left to deal with the problems alone
and apparently, with not much help from the king *(Bryce, 2005. Apol.
§7, II 34–7)*. When Hattusili proved his might by crushing the
rebellion, his brother king Muwatalli supported him and made the
northern areas under Hattusili, a viceregal territory of the empire.
Hattusili was now a de facto king with the city of Hakpis as seat of the
northern vice royalty. This seems to have given strong hint to the
instigators of the rebellion that northern areas would not be left to
themselves and that transfer of the capital to Tarhuntassa was not going
to effect defense of the frontiers.

***§ Repopulation Programme***

The town of Tiliura in the Hittite-Kaskan border had been abandoned
during the rule of Hantili II (*c.* mid 15th century) but it was
repopulated by Mursili (father of king Muwatalli and Hattusili) who
brought conquered people from other areas to the place in order to
settle it. Hattusili made sure that the town was made safe by having
truce with the ‘allied’ Kaskan population in the border areas and then
he claimed that he settled it with *remnants of its original
population.⁸ *It has to be noted that the treaty was made with the
‘allied’ Kaskans and not with the ‘enemy’ Kaskans. Hattusili also made
sure that even these allied Kaskan people will not be allowed to enter
the town, much less settling in it. However, they were allowed
*controlled access and grazing rights* in the Hittite areas.

Another damage from the past that Hattusili tried to undo during the
later part of his governorship was to reoccupy and resettle the holy
city of Nerik. Some two centuries ago, the city had suffered serious
damage due to Kaskan attacks and was abandoned but Hattusili reversed
the situation and was indeed very proud of his action. By the end of his
governorship, Hattusili was also priest of the Storm God in the city of
Nerik.

***§ Battle of Kadesh***

Policy implementation had to wait when Muwatalli recalled Hattusili to
join the imperial forces in Syria and give his invaluable assistance
against the Egyptians in the penultimate battle of Kadesh near the
Orontes river (current Syria-Lebanon border). Though the battle was
claimed by Pharaoh Ramesses II as an Egyptian victory but evidence
suggests that the Hittites ended up maintaining their territory and a
peace treaty had to be concluded between the two parties in *c*. 1275,
the world’s first of its kind!

***§ A Marriage and A Rebellion***

Hattusili after the battle was left in charge of the land of Aba but
scholar Trevor Bryce convincingly suggests that this time must have been
very worrying for him. He knew that even though he had taken some strong
steps to solidify his vice royalty in the Upper Lands, his rule was not
secure from internal and external dangers. He then quickly started on to
a journey back to Hakpis and *en route* visited Lawazantiya,⁹ the city
and religious centre of the Goddess Ishtar where he also ended up
marrying Puduhepa – daughter of the chief priest of the town and herself
its chief priestess. During the entirety of Hattusili’s life and even
after, Puduhepa commanded great influence over him and in the empire.
Hattusili has always considered Ishtar as his patron deity and believed
that he was successful in his actions because Ishtar was supporting him.
And, Ishtar was supporting him not due to his might but because his
actions were justified and that he had morality on his side. This
mindset played a major role in his future endeavours.

Thereafter, he swiftly went to the Upper Lands for his fears had proven
to be right; the Kaskans had renewed their attacks and the city of
Hakpis itself had risen in revolt. It is also possible that the revolt
had some sort of involvement of or instigation by Arma-Tarhund, the
former displaced governor of the region. Hattusili quickly brought the
situation under control and made his vice royalty secure. Arma-Tarhund
still didn’t stop his efforts and brought an indictment against
Hattusili¹⁰ but the former governor lost the indictment and was given by
the king Muwatalli to Hattusili to decide his fate. But the viceroy
seems to have taken high road. He let Arma-Tarhund and his son Sippaziti
go free and also sent Arma-Tarhind’s wife and other son to Alasiya
(ancient Cyprus). He even gave him half of his property back. But these
measures seem not to have helped him in the long run because this family
remained hostile to him.

**Urhi-Teshub/King Mursili III** **(*r.* 1272-1267)**

***§ Successor to the Hittite Throne***

King Muwatalli II did not have a son from the first-wife but he had a
son named Urhi-Teshub who was a second-rank son (*pahhurzi* in Hittite),
meaning he was the child of a secondary wife of the king. Muwatalli
declared him to be successor to the throne (*tuhkanti* *i.e.* crown
prince). As per the established Hittite law called *Proclamation of
Telenipu*, even though Urhi-Teshub was not a first-rank son, he was
still legally allowed to be successor of the Hittite throne. The law
clearly states in unambiguous terms-

***“Let only a prince of the first rank, a son, become king!  
If there is no first-rank prince, then whoever is a son of the second
rank – let this one become king! If there is no prince, no (male) heir,
then whoever is a first-rank daughter – let them take a husband for her,
and let him become king!”***^(***11***)

![***Seal of Mursili
III/Urhi-Teshub.^(C)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/mursili-iii.jpg?w=392)

***§ Hattusili’s Support***

Given Hattusili’s power base in the north, him being a brother to the
king, and despite the fact that Urhi-Teshub was a second-rank son,
Hattusili seemingly supported his nephew’s ascendance to the throne. In
fact, as Bryce points out, he tried to portray that after Muwatalli’s
reign, it was he who was doing a his nephew a favour by accepting his
claim and it was due to his acceptance and by his authority that
Urhi-Teshub was able to succeed. He proclaims this in the following
words – “Out of esteem for my brother, I did no evil against him. And
since he had left no son of the first rank, *I took Urhi-Teshub, the son
of a secondary wife (by him), and placed him on the throne of Hatti.* I
put all Hattusa into his hands, and he was Great King in the lands of
Hatti’ *(Apol. §10b, III 38’–44’)*.”¹² But there was opposition from at
least one vassal ruler – *“Masturi, Manapa-Tarhunda’s successor in the
Seha River Land, was later to refuse him his support. ‘Should I protect
a (mere) second-rank son?’ he protested.*“^(*13*)

Urhi-Teshub finally became king of the Hittite Empire and took the
throne name of Mursili III, after his grandfather. The throne name
signified a lot of the undercurrents of the state’s politics.
Urhi-Teshub was trying to prove that he was as much a legitimate heir to
the *land of the Hatti* as his illustrious ancestors and that he was
claiming this ancestry as his. However, it is interesting to note that
Hattusili, though claiming to have supported his nephew, never calls him
by his throne name. He always mentions him as Urhi-Teshub. Even if he
tried to portray normal relations with the new king Mursili III, all was
evidently not well.

***§ Calm Waters***

The initial period of Mursili III was seemingly, a period of calm
relations between the uncle and the nephew. In fact, various decisions
that the king took in this period have an imprint of Hattusili on them.
He in all probability worked closely with Urhi-Teshub and supported him
in early years of his reign.

***Hattusa Becomes the Capital Again:*** The first major decision that
the king took was to move the capital back to Hattusa from Tarhuntassa –
*“He took up the Gods from Tarhuntassa and brought them back to
Hattusa”* (Bryce, 2005). The decision was possibly made by the king to
make his position secure and judging by the lack of any obvious
opposition to this move, it probably meant that this might even have
been a popular demand. Hattusili also seems to have been in support of
this decision and the possibility that he was the encouraging force
behind the move cannot be denied. This however, does not mean that
Tarhuntassa declined, in fact, it became an important seat of regional
power within the Hittite imperium.

***Family of Mittannamuwa:*** Another decision in which Hattusili
significantly influenced Urhi-Teshub was the case of Mittannamuwa and
his family who has been briefly mentioned above. Considering the fact
that Mittannamuwa was an old loyalist of the throne, his family most
definitely had close personal relations with Hattusili. For reasons
unclear as of now, Purandamuwa, son of Mittannamuwa and successor to the
office of chief scribe, was removed from the post and the office was no
longer with this family. Hattusili influenced his nephew and the office
was given back to the family when yet another son of
Mittannamuwa-Walwaziti was made chief scribe. This shows the
considerable influence that the uncle had on the nephew. Probably
Urhi-Teshub knew that his throne was, as of now, standing on weak
foundations and having his uncle’s support would provide him with much
needed legitimacy. Both the uncle and the nephew probably were not on
the best of terms but both also knew that supporting each other was a
sound policy and need of the time.

***Reversal of Muwatalli’s Wishes:*** A lot of the actions of
Urhi-Teshub were rather blatant reversals of the wishes of his father
and former king Muwatalli. One was transferring the capital back to
Hattusa as mentioned above. Muwatalli had also banished Manap-Tarhund,
father of Masturi, vassal ruler of the Seha River Land. He was recalled
by Urhi-Teshub, though Masturi remained the vassal ruler. Not only that,
but a matrimonial alliance was also conducted between the two parties
when Masturi married Muwattalli’s sister Massanauzzi (Bryce, 2005). The
decision strikes rather odd for Masturi was the same vassal who had
denied support to Urhi-Teshub when he was announced successor to the
throne!

Other such decisions included reinstating a deposed ruler named
Benteshina of Amurru back to his state. Benteshina had allegedly
betrayed Hittite throne for Egypt. Muwatalli deposed and sent him to
Hattusili at Hakpis where Benteshina resided in comfort. A man named
Shapili had been made the ruler instead. Interestingly, Hattusili had
himself requested for Benteshina to be sent to him. And when Urhi-Teshub
reinstated him, it will not be improbable to assume that Hattusili had
influenced the decision. Benteshina would therefore be an influential
ally for Hattusili. Some scholars ascribe this decision to Hattusili
when he became king, Bryce who is a major source for this blog post is
in support of ascribing this decision to the nephew and not the uncle.
Yet another reinstatement that was to have serious consequences was that
of Sippaziti, son of Hattusili’s sworn enemy Arma-Tarhund. This could
not have had Hattusili’s support. A stone had been thrown in to the calm
waters.

**The Downfall**

***§ Assyrian Annexation of Hanigalbat***

The events to the east of the empire also weakened Urhi-Teshub’s rule. A
remnant state of erstwhile Mitanni’s called the state of Hanigalbat had
been a seemingly independent state but it had Hittite protection. The
king of Hanigalbat, Shattuara I attacked its assertive neighbour
Assyria. The move was in offence or in a defensive pre-emptive strike
cannot be said for sure but Hatti had not been consulted. Shattuara lost
the battle and the state became a vassal of Assyria. Urhi-Teshub chose
to not react to these events. Assyria and Hittites always had a very
uneasy relationship. On one hand, diplomatic communication was
maintained but messengers frequently *experienced \[…\]
aggravation*.*¹⁴* Shattuara’s son and successor Wasashatta again
revolted against the Assyrian overlordship and went to Hittites for help
but to no avail. In fact, Hittites behaved in less than honourary
fashion. Assyrian documents inform us that ***“the Hittites took his
bribes, but did not render him assistance.”*** Hanigalbat was now
completely annexed by the Assyrian state. There was now no buffer zone
between Assyria and Hatti. This could not have been a welcoming news to
a new ruler of the Hittite throne whose position was far from strong.

Assyria had even demanded recognition of their ascendance on the
political stage of Near East by writing to the Hittite king (most
probably Urhi-Teshub) to call the Assyrian king not only a *Great King*
but also *Brother* in their correspondence. One has to understand that
these were not mere words of affection and salutation. Only great powers
and their kings like that of Egypt, Hittite, earlier Mittani and
Babylonian had the authority to use *Great King* in the Near Eastern
diplomatic parlance. And using the title of *Brother* meant that the
state had support and acknowledgement of their power by the other major
players of the game. This also meant existence of other friendly
relations like exchanging gifts, matrimonial relations etc. It is then
indicative that Urhi-Teshub had grudgingly accepted the title of *Great
King* for the Assyrian monarch Adad-nirari but was not ready to call him
*Brother* as can be seen in a rather haughty response of the Hittite
king to the Assyrian demand – ***“******As my grandfather and my father
did not write to the King of Assyria about brotherhood, you shall not
keep writing to me about brotherhood and Great Kingship. It is not my
wish!******“***^(***15***)

This short account of Assyria-Hittite relations shows that the new king
certainly lacked political acumen and therefore the events that happened
afterwards do not seem to be a surprise. He was falling short in front
of a seasoned player of the political game like his uncle Hattusili.

***§*** ***Soured Relations***

Even though there had been many instances when the nephew-uncle duo had
slightly awkward relations but with Hattusili ‘helping’ or rather
influencing the new king’s actions, a certain decorum had been
maintained. On the other hand, Urhi-Teshub had by now taken many steps
that seemed to have gone against Hattusili’s advice as described above.
Urhi-Teshub decided that it was better to take the northern territories
back from his uncle and into his own hands. We do not possess any
document similar to the *Apology* of Hattusili that can give us insight
for the reasoning behind this decision of the new king at this point.
Nonetheless, we can try and understand justification for this action.
With capital now back to Hattusa, situation with regard to Kaskans in
the northern frontier under control and relations with Egypt somewhat
calm, perhaps, Urhi-Teshub might have taken this decision as an attempt
to come out of his uncle’s shadows and to signify his authority in the
empire. However, Hattusili was still allowed by the king to have
important cities like Hakpis and Nerik.¹⁶ This kept a lid on all the
pent up rage inside because for the time being, Hattusili still accepted
the king’s wishes, claiming that he was doing morally right thing and
therefore, he was just honouring his late brother’s memory. Whatever the
causes, this action deeply soured the family atmosphere. The feud was
for all to see.

***§*** ***Nail in the Proverbial Coffin***

Hattusili was keping calm because he still was in control of Hakpis and
Nerik but this at the same time was also the reason that Urhi-Teshub was
not feeling secure and in order to remove this insecurity to his throne,
he finally decided to do away with this buffer as well. The king now
took Hakpis and Nerik back from his uncle. This was the final nail in
his proverbial coffin. With the mindset that after being so patient with
his nephew, he was in the right to not be subservient anymore. The
successful actions he had taken and services he had done to the empire,
as per him, showed that the Gods were on his side, the morality was on
his side. With that mindset, Hattusili decided to take matters further.
He says in his *Apology*–

> ***For seven years I submitted. But at a divine command and with human
> urging, Urhi-Teshub sought to destroy me. He took Hakpis and Nerik
> from me. Now I submitted to him no longer. I made war upon him. But I
> committed no crime in doing so, by rising up against him with chariots
> or in the palace. In civilized manner I communicated thus with him:
> ‘You have begun hostilities with me. Now you are Great King, but I am
> king of only one fortress. That is all you have left me. Come! Ishtar
> of Samuha and the Storm God of Nerik shall decide the case for
> us!’******….*** ***(Apol. §10c, III 62–79)***
>
> ***Trevor Bryce, Kingdom of the Hittites (2005)***

***§*** ***The Usurpation***

With Hattusili openly calling out for war, Urhi-Teshub could no longer
afford to let things be and he marched on with his army to fight it out.
The king decided to go to the Upper Lands, probably to avoid having a
inter family battle within his domain and not make a spectacle for
everyone to see in the capital. But was that a good decision? There is
no denying that despite the early opposition and hostilities that
Hattusili faced for his appointment as governor of the Upper Lands, he
had showed his mettle and had in all these years gathered enough
support, particularly the Hittite nobility was with Hattusili. If that
was not enough, Hattusili was also able to get the support of the Kaska
people who had later *‘been permitted to settle in the Hittite
territories’*.*¹⁷ *But Urhi-Teshub was not alone. It has been suggested
by scholars that the king had considerable popular support and *‘many of
his subjects remained loyal to the king’.**¹⁸* Unfortunately, this did
not seem to have been enough. The king was still in comparison a novice
and still considered by many a second-rank son and thus not worthy of
the throne.

But Urhi-Teshub was not going without support. The decision of recall of
Sippaziti, son of Hattusili’s enemy Arma-Tarhund (former governor of the
Upper Lands) was to be of use now. The king asked Sippaziti to gather
support (possibly a contributory force) and join the king’s forces. The
help did not materialize. The stars were not in the nephew’s favour. A
bloody battle raged and Urhi-Teshub was defeated. To save the situation,
Urhi-Teshub now went to the city of Samuha/Šamuḫa (current []() Kayali
Pinar, northern bank of Kizil Irmak). Earlier during the Kaskan attacks,
the city had been used as a base for field operations by the Hittites.
The defeated king now tried to establish himself there but Hattusili was
not going to let go and himself laid a siege to the city, trapping
Urhi-Teshub inside (Bryce, 2005). Hattusili now successfully usurped the
Hittite throne.

***“Urhi-Teshub had left Hattusa as the king of the Hittite realm. He
now suffered the ignominy of returning to the city as his uncle’s
prisoner, probably only a few years after he had assumed the royal
power.”¹⁹***

**Hattusilli III (*r*. 1267-1237)**

It has been mentioned earlier that Urhi-Teshub had considerable support
of his subjects. Therefore, what was now necessary to safeguard and
justify his usurpation was that the divided population had to be
convinced of Hattusili’s noble intentions and then brought under his
control. In the aftermath of the battle, control was imperative for the
capital Hattusa had seen some instances of anarchy. The new king decided
to pardon those as well who had been Urhi-Teshub’s supporters in the
conflict, on the condition that they would now only support Hattusili
and that the throne was to be in possession of only his family line.

![***Rock Relief of Hattusili III
^(D)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/great-king-hattusili-offering-libation-weather-god.jpg?w=720)

***§*** ***The Banishment***

The attitude of the Hittite usurpers had been somewhat odd with regard
to the treatment of the king from whom the power had been seized.
Theoretically, it was not a sound decision to murder the lost king for
as per ancient Hittite belief, a dead person had strong effects on the
family. *“Just as the ghost of an ordinary person could cause trouble
for survivors if the physical remains had not been properly disposed of
and sufficient funerary offerings provided, so too could the unhappy
spirit of a departed king adversely affect the fortunes of all of Khatti
\[Hatti\].”²⁰* But we know that there had many assassinations in order
to usurp the throne. However, if the king though deposed, had actually
survived and especially if he was a close relative of the usurper, then
strangely, I must say, it was considered prudent to leave him alive and
only banish him out of the capital.²¹ Same was done by Hattusili who
decided to banish Urhi-Teshub to Nuhasse/Nuhashshi lands in Syria.²²
This choice was technically apt, for it was dangerous to keep his
deposed nephew in the capital where it would be easier for him to rally
his supporters. Therefore, he had to be kept close enough within the
empire so that he could be watched but far away from the capital to keep
the troubles away. Urhi-Teshub was given many cities for governorship
where he could be simultaneously watched over by the Hittite viceroys of
Aleppo and Carchemish.

***§*** ***Urhi-Teshub Renews Efforts***

If Hattusili had thought that this might be enough to keep his throne
safe then he was wrong because Urhi-Teshub had no intention to go down
quiet. Immediately after his arrival in his new residence, he started
secret correspondence and negotiations with the Babylonians representing
their king Kadashman-Turgu. Similar correspondence was also initiated
between Urhi-Teshub and Assyrian king Adad-nirari I and it seems that
the dethroned king had strong reasons to count Babylonians and Assyrians
as possible allies if he was to make a bid again for the Hittite throne.
The fact that these kings entered into correspondence seems to suggest
that they had serious reservations about accepting Hattusili as a Great
King. This letter by Hattusili to Adad-nirari suggests the same – *“Did
\[my brother?\] not send you appropriate greeting-gifts? But when I
assumed kingship, you did not send a messenger to me. It is the custom
that when kings assume kingship, the kings who are his equals in rank
send him appropriate greeting-gifts, clothing befitting kingship, and
fine oil for his anointing. But you have not yet done this.”* (Bryce,
2005)

***§*** ***Ulmi-Teshub******/Kurunta***

It now becomes important to mention a very interesting find – that of a
bronze tablet from Hattusa, only one of its kind in the Hittite
archaeological finds. Its contents are a treaty between Tudhaliya IV
(son and successor of Hattusili III) and one Kurunta. Now, this Kurunta
from other tablets had already been known to scholars as another nephew
of Hattusili. This Kurunta was apparently a brother or even a
half-brother of Urhi-Teshub and as per some scholars, Kurunta was
identical with another man named Ulmi-Teshub who was known from texts to
have been a king at Tarhuntassa. Kurunta was very early given by his
father Muwatalli to be tutored by his uncle Hattusili in the northern
territories. He grew up along with Hattusili’s son Tudhaliya and the two
became close. It seems that Kurunta remained loyal to his uncle during
the family feud and immediately after the usurpation, he was sent by the
new king, to rule at Tarhuntassa. The move was clearly also an attempt
by Hattusili to make his throne secure from any dangerous intentions by
another one of his nephew. In the bronze tablet Tudhaliya says- *‘But
when my father removed Urhi-Teshub from the kingship, thereupon my
father took Kurunta and made him king in the Land of Tarhuntassa’
\[Bronze tablet §3, i 14–15\]. (Bryce, 2005).*

***§*** ***The Flight***

Coming back to the secret correspondence between Urhi-Teshub and other
kingdoms, what would have happened can only be assumed for the plans did
not materialize further and Hattusili got the hint about what was
happening behind doors. He decided to take action promptly and banish
the deposed king to somewhere either along the sea or across the sea
*i.e.* along the Anatolian coast or the island of Alashiya/Cyprus.²³ But
even this failed to keep Urhi-Teshub quiet and he took to flight. From
the correspondence of Hattusili with various royal courts of the time
for the search of his nephew, we learn that he had reached Egypt,
seeking asylum in the court of Pharaoh Ramesses II (*r.* 1279-1213). The
family feud had now taken an international dimension.

**The Search**

***§*** ***Egypt’s Motives and Hattusili’s Demand***

The search was now on for Urhi-Teshub. As soon as Hattusili learnt that
his nephew had reached Egypt, his situation became precarious because he
was already dealing with uncertainty of his throne inside the empire and
now he had to deal with events outside the empire as well. On the
Egyptian front, for the Pharaoh Ramesses II, this could not have come at
a better time.

***“In his protracted struggle for supremacy with the Hittites, fate had
now delivered him, quite unexpectedly, the ultimate bargaining
chip.”***^(***24***)

The Battle of Kadesh (*c.* 1274) had delivered a half-hearted
non-aggression pact with the Hittites, the claims of victory by
Egyptians notwithstanding. Now was the time for the Pharaoh to have
something out of this Hittite family feud for himself. As soon as
Hattusili III sent his demand to return the absconding nephew, the
demand was met with a resounding denial. Ramesses had calculated quite
correctly, one can say, that Hattusili already had very uneasy relations
with a very ambitious and ascending Assyria, particularly after Assyrian
annexation of Hanigalbat (mentioned above). In this situation, Hattusili
would not want to have hostilities at two fronts. Given increased
Assyrian uncertainty due to ambitious Assyrian King Shalmanesar I,
Hattusili therefore would not want to start a war with the Egyptians.
But just to be safe, Ramesses put his guards on the Syrian border
alert,²⁵ in case Hittites attacked.

![***Relief of Ramesses II
^(E)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/06/220px-ramses-ii-relief-from-memphis2-1.png?w=220)

Hattusili for the time, decided to proceed in diplomatic way but the
relations had become strained. He even complained this to the
Babylonians and was successful to have King Kadashman-Turgu (*c.*
1282-1264) on his side in the Egyptian-Hittite conflict. But the king
died and he then had to persuade his son and successor to support him.
Whether he was successful at it or not cannot be said for sure. His
letter to Babylonian king Kadashman-Enlil II (*c.* 1263-1255) states
this more clearly:

***“My enemy who fled to another country went to the king of Egypt. When
I wrote to him ‘Bring my enemy’, he did not bring my enemy. Then I and
the king of Egypt became enemies of one another, and to your father
(i.e. Kadashman-Turgu) I wrote: ‘The king of Egypt went to help my
enemy.’ So your father kept the messenger of the king of Egypt at
bay.”²⁶***

Hattusili did another treaty and a matrimonial alliance with Benteshina,
ruler of Amurru (mentioned above). At this point, the more allies he
could could collect for his throne the better. It is uncertain for how
long was Urhi-Teshub was at the Egyptian court. But the period must have
been long enough for Ramesses to get all the inside information about
the Hittite affairs from him.

***§*** ***Hittite-Egyptian Peace Treaty***

There were various reasons for this peace treaty to be concluded in *c.*
1259. Hattusili knew that his claim on the Hittite throne would
certainly become strong if a king of Egypt gave approval for his rule.
And this was also the reason that he had tried to maintain cordial
relations with the Assyrian king Shalmanesar I, successor of
Adad-nirari. But, Hattusili always remained somewhat unsure of his
position *vis-à-vis* Assyria. The result was the Hittite-Egyptian Peace
Treaty, again a one of its kind. The case of Urhi-Teshub must have been
a major reason behind this decision, as can be gleamed from the fact
that an important part of the treaty was a very specific provision for
extradition. Most likely, it attained two objectives as far as Hattusili
was concerned – it gave his rule the much needed legitimacy, the fact
that Ramesses II recognised Hattusili III as the ruler of the Hittite
empire, no longer supporting the cause of Urhi-Teshub was already for
the Hittite king a plus point and it also might help Hattusili to get
Urhi-Teshub extradited. The Pharaoh emphatically recognized his kingship
and wrote to Hattusili –

***“Certainly you are the Great King of the lands of Hatti. The Sun God
has granted to you and the Storm God has granted to you, (the right) to
sit in the Land of Hatti, in the place of the father of your
father.”²⁶***

For Ramesses, this treaty provided a much needed publicity to bolster
his image at home. The fact that Hattusili had himself sought this
treaty, helped Ramesses to claim that he and therefore, Egypt were still
a major player of the Near Eastern political game. Ever since the
inconclusive Battle of Kadesh, Ramesses had not been able to achieve any
significant territorial gains for almost twenty years. This treaty
effectively counter-balanced his lack in military accomplishments with
the diplomatic ones.

In addition of this, the treaty had a one sided clause for Egypt to send
forces to support Hattusili in the event of any kind of challenge to not
only his rule but also his son’s. The result of the treaty for
Urhi-Teshub could only have been one-his stay in Egypt was coming to an
end because after the treaty it was not the question of if but rather
when Ramesses decides to give Urhi-Teshub back to Hattusili.
Urhi-Teshub, most likely without informing the Pharaoh, left his court
and his location was unknown.

**After the Fact**

***§*** ***Back in the Land of Hatti!***

What happens afterwards is as much a fascinating story as any of today’s
thriller movies. As soon as the news got out that his nephew was now
missing from the Egyptian court and most likely was somewhere in
southern Syria (Egyptian territory), Hattusili asked his Egyptian
counterpart to oblige with the terms of the treaty. He asked Ramesses to
send a force in search of Urhi-Teshub and in a rather bizarre turn of
events, did not want him back. Instead Hattusili now asked that Ramesses
should find his nephew and take him back to Egypt.²⁷

The reasoning behind this unusual demand of the Hittite king has been
explained by Hittitologist Trevor Bryce. He explains that Hattusili
might have realised that Urhi-Teshub had been far less dangerous and
effective in his measures by staying at the Egyptian court than he ever
was by staying in the Hittite territories. While in Hatti, he had been
able to garner possible support from Assyria and even had many
supporters within the population. After the peace treaty, problems with
Egypt had also been somewhat abated, though not completely. Keeping him
in Egypt now sounded far more practical.

***“The very fact that Urhi-Teshub succeeded in eluding the most
determined efforts by his pursuers, both Egyptian and Hittite, to
recapture him suggests that he did indeed have many supporters willing
to shelter him in the regions where he now sought refuge.”²⁸***

But the efforts of Ramesses to find him bore no fruit and he replied to
queries of Hattusili that the Egyptian forces had been unable to locate
him. He wrote – *“Look, I do not understand these words you have written
about this matter of Urhi-Teshub, as follows: ‘Bring him into the Land
of Egypt!’ I do not know where he is lodged. **\[He has flown like a
bird.\]**“²⁹* It has come into light that Urhi-Teshub was once taken in
the Hittite custody, probably in Hittite controlled Syrian lands but was
able to free himself after bribing his guards. A son of Hattusili –
Nerikkaili who was married to daughter of Amurru’s ruler, was possibly
at the time in that area and had been instructed to help Ramesses in the
search. It looks like he was the one who arrested Urhi-Teshub but died
before reporting the news back to Hattusili. And following this
Urhi-Teshub fled from there, bribing the guards.³⁰ Bryce again states
that the news of his nephew’s possible location inside the Hittite
territory must have been appalling for Hattusili, especially finding it
out from another ruler of what was happening inside his own kingdom.
Also it becomes obvious that Urhi-Teshub was being aided by many of his
own subjects, otherwise it was impossible to elude authorities for so
long. Hattusili in his remaining life was utterly unsuccessful to
capture his nephew whose whereabouts after this remain a mystery.

***§*** ***Possibilities***

The Konya Plain in southern Turkey has given few hints for the possible
situation of Urhi-Teshub after his escape from the Hittite guards. Some
new hieroglyphic inscription have been discovered in the remains of an
ancient city on a mountain-top sanctuary now called Karadağ, and on a
site called Kızıldağ (mentioned above as one possible location for the
unidentified Tarhuntassa).³¹ The inscription is composed by a man named
Hartapu who calls himself *Great King*. He also gives us the name of his
father-Mursili. We know that Urhi-Teshub after his coronation took the
throne name Mursili (after his grandfather), a name that Hattusili made
a point to never call his nephew with, obviously to make his rule sound
illegitimate. But it would be very natural that Urhi-Teshub continued to
use this name for himself.

Some scholars suggest that this inscription should be dated immediately
after the collapse of the Hittite empire in *c*. 1180-1178 and that this
Hartapu was a descendant of the line of Kurunta, brother of Urhi-Teshub
who had been made a ruler of Tarhuntassa in southern Anatolia. The date
of post-Hittite period is assumed because as per one section of
scholars, it would be impossible for a local southern Anatolian ruler to
use *Great King* while an actual *Great King* existed at the seat of
Hattusa. But Bryce on the authority of Singer suggests an alternative
theory. He is of the opinion that the inscription should be dated
immediately before the empire’s collapse, precisely because
Urhi-Teshub/Mursili always maintained his claim of being a *Great King*
and thus a legitimate ruler of the Hittite Empire. We also know that
Mursili/Urhi-Teshub for sure had many sons. Therefore, it is very likely
that an exiled kingdom had been established by Urhi-Teshub and his
direct descendant was ruling within the Hittite territory. We also know
that Urhi-Teshub always had internal support from a substantial section
of his former subjects who might have helped him in this endeavour. The
king who had been on the run from the might of two empires, had came
back to his own land, and very likely, set up a kingdom in exile!

**Conclusion**

Before Hartapu could further claim the throne of Hattusa, the Hittite
empire collapsed under the weight of its own internal and external
problems. Hittites had by then lost huge territories in various battles
against Assyria and whatever was left was finished by the Sea People and
the attacks from the Kaskans, the Phrygians and the Bryges.

Whatever the subsequent events had been, but it was certainly a
fascinating tale of a family feud and an equally astonishing tale of a
dethroned king who was able to elude the combined forces of Hatti and
Egypt. At the end, hunt for this king always remained incomplete.

***Notes & References***

1.  Jones, Matthew Alexander (2019). [*Searching for
    Tarhuntassa*](https://etheses.bham.ac.uk/id/eprint/8793/7/Jones2019PhD.pdf).
    (Unpublished Doctoral Thesis), University of Birmingham. p. 1
2.  Matessi, Alvise. “The Making of Hittite Imperial
    Landscapes..”*Journal of Ancient Near Eastern History*, Vol. 3, no.
    2, 2016, pp. 117-162.<https://doi.org/10.1515/janeh-2017-0004>
3.  Bryce, Trevor (2005). *The Kingdom of the Hittites*. Oxford
    University Press. p. 6
4.  Marc Van De Mieroop (2007). *[A History of the Ancient Near
    East](https://archive.org/details/AHistoryOfTheAncientNearEast/mode/1up)*
    *(ca. 3000-323 BC)*. Blackwell Publishing. p. 156
5.  *ibid.*
6.  Bryce, (2005). *The Kingdom of the Hittites*. p. 246
7.  *ibid*. p. 247
8.  *ibid*. p. 249
9.  ibid. p. 250
10. *ibid*. p. 252
11. Gary Beckman, “Royal Ideology and State Administration in Hittite
    Anatolia.” *Civilizations of the Ancient Near East, Vol. I, 1995,
    (Edited by Jack. M. Sasson).* pp. 529-544
12. Bryce, (2005). *The Kingdom of the Hittites*. p. 252
13. *ibid.*
14. *ibid*. p. 257
15. *ibid*. p. 258
16. *ibid*. p. 260
17. *ibid*. p. 262
18. Bryce, Trevor (2005). *Letters of the Great Kings of the Ancient
    Near East. (The Royal Correspondence of the Late Bronze Age).* p.
    204
19. Bryce, (2005). *The Kingdom of the Hittites*. p. 262
20. Gary Beckman, “Royal Ideology and State Administration in Hittite
    Anatolia.” *Civilizations of the Ancient Near East, Vol. I, 1995,
    (Edited by Jack. M. Sasson).* pp. 529-544
21. Bryce, Trevor (2005). *Letters of the Great Kings of the Ancient
    Near East.* p. 205
22. *ibid.*
23. ibid. pp. 205-206
24. Wilkinson, Toby (2010), *[The Rise and Fall of Ancient
    Egypt.](https://archive.org/details/theriseandfallofancientegypt_202002/mode/2up)* p.
    231
25. *ibid.*
26. Bryce, (2005). *The Kingdom of the Hittites*. p. 279
27. *ibid*. p. 280
28. *ibid.* p. 281
29. *ibid.*
30. Bryce, Trevor (2005). *Letters of the Great Kings of the Ancient
    Near East.* p. 209
31. *ibid*. p. 210

***Photo Credits***

A. [Hattusa: The Ancient Capital of
Hittites](https://goturkiye.com/blog/hattusa-the-ancient-capital-of-the-hittites)

B. [The Making of Hittite Imperial
Landscapes](https://doi.org/10.1515/janeh-2017-0004)

C. [Koç University Digital
Collection](https://libdigitalcollections.ku.edu.tr/digital/collection/GHC/id/1094/)

D. [The Great Queen Puduhepa and the Great King Hattusili
III](https://travelatelier.com/blog/queen-puduhepa-great-king-hattusili/)

E. [WkiMedia
Commons.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ramesses_II#/media/File:Ramses-ii-relief-from-memphis2.png)

