+++
title = "Genetic evidence for"
full_title = "Genetic evidence for selfdomestication in humans"
date = "2017-08-10"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/10/genetic-evidence-for-self-domestication-in-humans/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/10/genetic-evidence-for-self-domestication-in-humans/).

Genetic evidence for self-domestication in humans

There’s an interesting recent
[paper](http://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/04/09/125799) on the
genetic basis of the changes we see in domestication – and the extent to
which humans exhibit similar genetic changes. domesticated species end
to have depigmentation, floppy ears, shorter muzzles, curly tails,
smaller teeth, smaller cranial capacity, neotenous behavior, reduced
sexual dimorphism, docility, and more frequent estrous cycles: the
‘domestication syndrome’. There is reason to think that this syndrome
arises from a mild deficit of neural crest cells.

They talk about a number of loci that look to be involved in such
changes in in anatomically modern humans, and show evidence of selection
(when compared to archaic humans like Neanderthals and Denisovans). They
discuss a number of such genes and gene pathways.

I noticed something interesting about one of the genes mentioned \[
ERBB4\] & the other genes it interacts with. ERBB4 (the neuregulin
receptor) negatively regulates ERK, which plays a critical role in
neural crest development and regulates neuronal gene expression in both
the neocortex and hippocampus. Closely related is BRAF, upstream of ERK.
BRAF interacts with YWHAH (selected in dogs), PPP2CA (selected in
horses), while ERBB4 shows selection in anatomically modern humans and
cattle. Upstream of BRAF, SOSI has been selected in domesticated foxes.

ERBB4 binds with NRG1, NRG2, NRG3, NRG4, and ADAM17. NRG2 was selected
in cats, cattle, and dogs. NRG4 was selected in cattle, NRG3 in AMH.

But there’s more: there is
[evidence](http://genome.cshlp.org/content/19/5/826.full) for recent
regional selection of variants in the ERBB4 pathway \[ work from Joe
Pickrell\] . ERBB4 shows strong signals of selection in all non-African
populations, NRG3 shows strong signs of selection in West Eurasian
populations, while NRG1, NRG2, and ADAM17 show signs of selection in
East Asians.

It is not necessarily the case that all humans are *equally*
domesticated, or became domesticated in exactly the same way. We know
that some populations split off as long as a quarter of a million years
ago. Although the earliest known AMH skeletons already show signs of the
domestication syndrome ( the childlike flat face), their skulls were a
good deal more robust than those of any people today. Probably the
process has continued over time, quite possibly it even accelerated in
dense agriculture agricultural populations in the Holocene. But that
wouldn’t have taken the same course everywhere.

Members of populations that have gone further down the path of
self-domestication should be easier to enslave.

For all I know, some populations moved into new environments that
effectively reversed these selection pressures (feral humans\] .

And with rapidly improving genetic technology, we could probably create
truly feral humans.

