+++
title = "Something changed"
full_title = "Something changed"
date = "2017-08-18"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/18/something-changed/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/18/something-changed/).

Something changed

Jared Diamond notes (p 161) that the wild ancestors of domesticated
animals are spread unevenly – only two are in South America, while none
come from North America, sub-Saharan Africa, or Australia. He then
argues that only a few special species are good candidates for
domestication, and there just weren’t any in these regions.

The world’s climate was similar to today’s, back the Eemian, the last
interglacial (before this one). Every animal species that humans have
ever domesticated existed back then, along with many other now extinct.
Yet *none* were domesticated. As far as we know, no plants were
domesticated, either. Why not? I’d guess it was because people were
different back then. So that’s a possible reason. We could push this
argument further, back to earlier interglacial periods, or even back
before the Pleistocene: people must have been different.

I could believe this for Australia. Marsupials are significantly
different from placental animals – dumber, for one thing – and most of
the large ones in Australia had been wiped out a long time ago. Do I
believe Diamond’s ” no good candidates” line for North America or
Africa? No, I don’t. Zebras might have a lousy disposition, but then so
did aurochsen. While eland are easy to domesticate. Tarpans, the wild
ancestor of horses, only died out in the 19th century. We have
descriptions: they were “absolutely untameable”. Yet here we are.

Lots of domestic animals started out with difficult behavior (aurochsen,
tarpans, wild boars): domestication is always first and foremost for
tameness. Selection can change behavior just as it changes size and
speed and milk production. That’s selection on animal behavior, of
course. There’s a special principle that keeps selection from changing
behavior in humans.

