+++
title = "Not without honor"
full_title = "Not without honor"
date = "2017-08-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/29/not-without-honor/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/29/not-without-honor/).

Not without honor

Jared Diamond spends a lot of time in GGS making excuses for groups that
didn’t do much domestication of animals and plants. Sometimes the
excuses are valid: farming was hard for Eskimos. Mostly they’re not: the
wild ancestors of horses and cattle (tarpans and aurochs) were dangerous
and mean, not obviously tameable. Yet they were domesticated. His
arguments are even worse for domestication of plants. There are many
plants that could be domesticated ( yes, there are lots of plants in
Africa) – the problem is that once you have a working domesticate, wild
but potentially domesticable plants have to complete with that finished,
optimized product. “In order for anybody to want to plant a new crop
it’s going to have to make them money, to do as well or better than
crops they have now,” That and you have to have locals that want to do
this. Before the Bantu, the hunter-gatherers of southern Africa never
showed much interest in settling down.

So the good is the enemy of the new.

One important factor that has suppressed many locally-developed plants
(likely including goosefoot & sumpweed, domesticated in eastern North
America) is what you might call ‘alien advantage’. If you grow a crop
near its origin, there will be local pests and pathogens that are
adapted to it. It you try growing it in a distant land with a compatible
climate, it often does very much better than in its own country. So…
crops from Central and South America have done very well in Africa, or
sometimes in Southeast Asia. Rubber tree plantations work fine in
Malaysia and Liberia but fail in Brazil. Maize is the biggest crop in
Africa, while manioc and peanuts are important. Most cocoa is grown in
Africa: most coffee is grown in South America. Except for civet coffee
of course, out of Vietnam. The perfect gift.

If you are thinking about a new domestication, you should keep alien
advantage in mind. You might want to raise a domesticated prickly pear
in Australia. Or maybe not…

