+++
title = "PNG Über Alles"
full_title = "PNG Über Alles"
date = "2017-08-14"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/14/png-uber-alles/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/14/png-uber-alles/).

PNG Über Alles

One of the more interesting points in *Guns, Germs, and Steel* is
Diamond’s claim that people in Papua New Guinea (PNG) “are probably
genetically superior to Westerners”: p21. More quotes: “Natural
selection for intelligence has probably been far more ruthless in New
Guinea than in more densely populated, politically complex societies”.
p21. ‘ Modern “Stone Age” peoples are on the average probably more
intelligent, not less intelligent, than industrialized peoples.
Certainly is no hint at all of any intellectual disadvantage of New
Guineans that might serve to answer Yali’s question. p21’

Now this crap is not really essential to Diamond’s overall thesis – that
biogeographical factors are completely responsible for different levels
of cultural development, rather than (even in part) average differences
in population characteristics like personality or cognition. In fact
he’s getting in his own way here, stepping on his own dick: if local
selective pressures could make hunter-gatherers smarter than Chinese or
Jews – then they might also make Chinese or Jews smarter than
hunter-gatherers. Arguing for one people’s innate intellectual advantage
over others is generally frowned upon – for political/social reasons,
not scientific ones – but it’s ok if A. it’s not
pro-European-specialness ( pro-Korean would simply leave people
confused) or B. nobody takes it seriously.

I’d say that the reaction is some A, but more B. A goodly fraction of
people reading GGS simply expel these claims from their memory as
confusing and indigestible, and if asked say that Diamond said no such
thing. I’ve seen this, repeatedly. Some came away with the impression
that he was saying that Stone-Age people are better at what they do,
better adapted to their particular life-style – but that’s not what he
said. It’s irrelevant anyway – what matters are abilities useful in the
modern industrial world, not ones that no longer pay off. Fracking, not
tracking.

Even Diamond doesn’t take it seriously: or, at minimum, doesn’t
understand the implications of his claim. He’s saying that Papuans are
noticeably smarter than industrialized populations, obviously so.
(although apparently not obvious to anyone else on earth – I’ve never
seen anyone else make this claim.) I say that you couldn’t possibly
notice a 1 or 2 pt average advantage in average IQ from personal
observation. 5 pts, maybe: but really, to be so striking, something more
like a 10 pt difference, minimum. A moderate difference in average trait
value causes a huge change in the fraction that exceeds a high cutoff:
if the PNG edge were 10 pts, then the fraction of people with IQs \> 148
(3 standard deviations above average) would be much, much higher in PNG
than in Britain or the US – something like 7 times higher. if this were
the case, PNG, population 7 million, would have as approximately as many
potential Nobel-level intellects as Great Britain. If anyone believed
this, they’d be searching PNG (inch by inch) for those diamonds in the
rough. That hasn’t happened. Nobody takes the implications seriously, or
maybe they don’t see them. Or, maybe, they think that Diamond is sucking
up to his hosts – the Fore are the kindest, bravest, warmest, most
wonderful humans beings he’s ever known in his life.

Diamond’s argument is general, not just about PNG. He says that peoples
who were hunter-gatherers until recently are probably smarter. Yet in no
case does reality actually conform to his hypothesis. In every case,
people with such backgrounds do poorly in in conventional schooling,
often very poorly.

