+++
title = "Sleeper Agents"
full_title = "Sleeper Agents"
date = "2017-08-10"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/10/sleeper-agents/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/10/sleeper-agents/).

Sleeper Agents

Although there are differences, people across northern Europe are not
all that different. Fst across the region is surprisingly low. This
extends to appearance: although you can notice that Danes don’t look
just like Scots, there is overlap, people from group A that could
superficially pass for members of group B. Superficially: looking at
appearances, not at autosomal DNA. All because the whole area is ( to a
large extent) the product of Indo-European invasions, and before that an
Anatolian agricultural expansion. The recipe is not all that different
over that region.

I think that it would have been harder to infiltrate someone from China
into MI6 without anyone noticing.

On an unrelated note, occasionally we have had people suggest or wonder
about whether northern Africa, north of the Sahara, had much admixture
from sub-Saharan blacks back in Classical times or earlier. We now know,
from ancient DNA, that moderately ancient Egypt had significantly less
SSA admixture than Egyptians today, and it is reasonable to think that
this was probably true of North Africa as a whole. I was already sure of
this – because although nearly all contemporary North African
populations have a fair amount of SSA admixture ( \~20%), a few have
almost none ( \< 1%). Key fact: there are several ways to mix two
populations, but (without using advanced genetic technology or waiting
several tens of thousands of years, in the case of mildly incompatible
subspecies like AMH and Neanderthals) there is no way to *unmix* two
populations.

