+++
title = "Domesticated animals and"
full_title = "Domesticated animals and human disease"
date = "2017-08-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/26/domesticated-animals-and-human-disease/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/26/domesticated-animals-and-human-disease/).

Domesticated animals and human disease

Jared Diamond considered the disastrous impact of Eurasian and African
diseases on the inhabitants of the New World, contrasted with a much
smaller impact in the opposite direction, and concluded that a major
factor had probably been transmission from domesticated animals.
Eurasians domesticated quite a few animals, Amerindians not many –
perhaps that was the explanation. In Guns, Germs, and Steel (p 207), he
mentions measles, tuberculosis, smallpox, influenza, pertussis (whooping
cough), and falciparum malaria as likely cases of transmission from
domesticated animals.

We know a lot more about this we did twenty years ago, since we’ve been
sequencing the genes of everything in sight – and it appears that
Diamond was mistaken about the most important members of that list. TB
appears to be ancient in humans, smallpox probably came from some East
African rodent, while falciparum malaria seems to have derived from a
form of malaria carried by gorillas. Measles really does descend from
rinderpest, a cattle plague, but then rinderpest (and mumps) probably
descend from bat viruses. Domesticated animals do play a role in
influenza, along with wild birds. I don’t think we know the origins of
pertussis.

So why then was the Old World such a fount of infectious disease? Well,
it’s bigger. Civilization was older, had had more time to pick up crowd
diseases. Important pathogens, especially those with insect vectors like
malaria, maybe couldn’t make it through Beringia. Transportation and
trade were more advanced in the Old World, and spread disease more
efficiently.

I don’t think that Diamond was making excuses for Amerindians in this,
as he was when talking about domestication itself: having lots of
plagues isn’t usually considered an accomplishment. It seemed like a
reasonable idea at the time, considering the state of the art. It seemed
so to others as well, like William McNeill. It’s not totally wrong –
definitely true for measles – but it’s not a huge part of the
explanation.

