+++
title = "musingsofhh"
full_title = "musingsofhh"
date = "2011-09-27"
upstream_url = "https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/09/27/madrassa-and-terrorists-in-the-expansion-of-dar-ul-islam/"

+++
Source: [here](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/09/27/madrassa-and-terrorists-in-the-expansion-of-dar-ul-islam/).


musingsofhh


### [Madrassa and terrorists in the expansion of Dar ulIslam](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/09/27/madrassa-and-terrorists-in-the-expansion-of-dar-ul-islam/)

September 27, 2011

Many Westerners, and their red Indian (communist) followers have been commenting  
that the perversion of the Madrassa to mass produce talibs and the use  
of the so called asymmetric warfare in the form of terrorists is a  
recent innovation of the otherwise “peace loving” Islamic world.  
Nothing can be farther from the truth. I thought, I should bring to  
the lists attention that these were integral aspects of the Mohammedan  
war machine. If one were to carefully study Indian history they were  
very much in place especially during the Sikh wars and the Maharashtra  
campaigns of both the Mogols and the local sultans.

However, they are best illustrated in the campaigns of the expansion  
of the greatest upholder of Dar ul Islam- the Osman sultans. In their  
revived expansion following recovery from Timur’s invasion, the  
sultans Mehmet the Conqueror, Selim the Grim and Suleiman the  
Magnificent, caliphs of Islam, took defeat and destruction into heart  
of Europe. While the remarkable organizational ablities and strategic  
planning of these sultans cannot be ignored at the heart of their  
machinery lay two fundamental instruments that have been largely  
ignored in secular surveys of their rise to glory. The Osman sultans  
repeatedly proclaimed that they were waging wars for no other purpose  
other than the expansion of Dar-ul-Islam. The sultans literally waged  
an annual jihad for this purpose. It is said that when Suleiman in his  
old age failed to go on his annual jihad, his daughter chided him that  
he had forgotten the duties of a Ghazi.

The two primary instruments of Osman success was the ghulam army of  
the sultan called the Yenicheri and the vast army of the irregular  
sipahis. The Yenicheri was recruited by the devshirme system- it  
comprised entirely of young christian boys who had been captured from  
Eastern Europe and forcibly converted to Islam (The women landed up  
in the sultan’s Haram). Cut off from home and family, traumatized by  
circumcision, they spent all their youth in madrassas, learning the  
Koran, rigorous military skills and absolute devotion to the caliph.  
They disallowed from marriage or property. With their pent up  
frustrations directed in battle with nothing to live for but to die as  
a shahid they formed the elite war machine of the Sultan that  
delivered the coup de grace for the Dar ul harb from whom they had  
sprung.

The other force of the Osmans was the irregular Sipahis who used to be  
sent off to fan over the country side a few weeks before the main  
march of the Sultan, his Begs and the elite Turkish cavalry via the  
well maintained military roads. These irregulars indeed were homologs  
of the very Islamic terrorists of today- terrorizing the countryside  
through incessant raids and slaughter of the hapless immates. This  
prevented any distraction for the march of the main elite force. Any  
Armenian or Greek will tell you how effective these irregulars were as  
late as the last century.

This model of action with the irregular terror specialist followed by  
the elite division is essentially what Pakistan uses in both Kashmir  
(Kargil) and Afghanistan. The analogy is complete when one sees the  
production of the Talibs by the truck load, like the Yenicheri, to  
become shahids to expand the Umma. If one looks harder, this analogy  
is not a merely chance coincidence but a time tested model inherited  
by the ISI quite directly from their Kilafat precursors.

**Category:**

[Uncategorized](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)

[Leave a comment](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/09/27/madrassa-and-terrorists-in-the-expansion-of-dar-ul-islam/#respond)

**Tagged with:**

-   [europe](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/europe/) -   [hindus](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/hindus/) -   [islam](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/islam/) -   [jihad](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/jihad/) -   [kafir](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/kafir/) -   [marathas](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/marathas/) -   [mogols](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/mogols/) -   [mughal](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/mughal/) -   [ottoman](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/ottoman/) -   [sikhs](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/sikhs/) -   [yenicheri](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/yenicheri/)

**[Amir Khusroo the sUfi’s Jihadistprose](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/09/23/amir-khusroo-the-sufis-jihadist-prose/)**

**[The Northern Alliance and history repeatingitself](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/10/19/the-northern-alliance-and-history-repeating-itself/)**
