+++
title = "My complicated"
full_title = "My complicated relationship with BR Ambedkar"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2025/11/07/does-liberation-entail-disembodiment-a-guest-post-by-susanta-bhattacharya/"
date = "2025-11-07"
+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2025/11/07/does-liberation-entail-disembodiment-a-guest-post-by-susanta-bhattacharya/).

My complicated relationship with B.R. Ambedkar

Susanta Bhattacharya, a doctoral candidate in Indian philosophy in Kraków, Poland, published in Journal of Indian Philosophy earlier this year and asked us to share a summary. The full title of the piece is “Does Liberation Entail Disembodiment? Re-examining the Concept of *Pratiprasava* in the *Yogasūtra*“. Feedback is welcomed.

Some interpret the goal of *Patañjali’s* yoga philosophy as a world-denying one which signifies that the ultimate goal of yoga cannot be attained while living. Some interpret the goal of yoga as a world-affirming one which means that the ultimate goal of yoga is attainable even in this world living a life with physical body and mind. One of the central concepts in understanding the spiritual goal of yoga is *pratiprasava*. *Patañjali* uses the term *pratiprasava* to explain the nature of *Kaivalya*. So, the concept of *pratiprasava* is bound up with that of Kaivalya. Without a proper understanding of the concept of *pratiprasava* we cannot understand the idea of *Kaivalya* in the *Yogasūtra*. According to *sūtra* 4.34, there is a process called *pratiprasava* which is necessary for the attainment of *Kaivalya*. But scholars have interpreted these two terms in two different ways: from an ontological standpoint and from an epistemological standpoint. According to the ontological interpretation, *pratiprasava* means the literal dissolution of the empirical world including one’s physical body and mind. So, *kaivalya* is achieved when the *puruṣa* obliterates all the entanglements of *prakṛti*. Ontologically understood, *Kaivalya* is liberation after the death of the body. According to the epistemological interpretation, *pratiprasava* means the dissolution of the misidentification of puruṣa with prakṛti. It is the separation of *puruṣa*’s original self from *puruṣa’s* misidentified psychophysical self which is the manifestation of *avidyā*. So*, Kaivalya* is attained when the *puruṣa* ceases to identify with *prakṛti*. Upon the attainment of Kaivalya, the afflictions and impurities of the mind are dissolved, but not the mind itself. Epistemologically conceived*, Kaivalya* is liberation while living in this physical body.

I argue that both the ontological and epistemological approaches are partially true and partially false. In this paper, I combine aspects of both interpretations. I suggest that *pratiprasava* has two sequential stages: the epistemological stage and the ontological stage. *Pratiprasava*, in an epistemological sense, is the first stage of freedom (*kaivalya*) from all sorts of physical and mental bondages. This type of freedom is derived when all negative and positive effects of *prakṛtic* manifestation do not affect the yogi while living in this physical body*. Pratiprasava*, in an ontological sense, is the second or the final stage of freedom from existence altogether, including the physical body and mind. Based on this understanding of the two stages of pratiprasava, I will contend that there are correspondingly two types of Kaivalya: the *citi-śakti* type of liberation and the *puruṣa-artha-śūnya* type of liberation (see figure 3). *Citi-śakti* means the power of pure consciousness, which in the kaivalya-state abides in its own essence *(sva-rūpa pratiṣṭhā).* The *citi-śakti* type of liberation is grounded in the epistemological interpretation. The Puruṣa-artha-śūnya type of liberation means that for *puruṣa* nothing remains purposeful and necessary when *prakṛti* resolves into its unmanifest form. The *puruṣa-artha-śūnya* type of liberation is based on the ontological interpretation. The *citi-śakti* type of liberation is *Jīvanmukti*. Patañjali defines *Kaivalya* by saying that when *sattva* and *puruṣa* are of equal purity, this is *kaivalya* *(sattva-puruṣayoḥ śuddhi-sāmye kaivalyam iti* 3.56) and the *puruṣa-artha-śūnya* type of liberation is *videhamukti* when Patañjali says that the turning back of the guṇa-s to their source brings kaivalya (*guṇānāṃ pratiprasavaḥ kaivalyaṃ*). These two types of liberation are the two sides of the same coin (*kaivalya)*. These two types of liberation are not conflicting but complementary.

The details of the arguments of may be found in the article, at[https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10781-025-09594-y#citeas](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10781-025-09594-y#citeas)
