+++
title = "Mere convention vs"
full_title = "Mere convention vs seeing correctly"
date = "2019-05-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/12/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/12/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/).

Mere convention vs. seeing correctly

Continuing my [response to Chakravarthi
Ram-Prasad](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/04/there-is-only-name-and-form/),
I want to turn back now to the original point of contention with which
[our exchange first
began](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/#comment-206692):
the role of conventional (*sammuti*/*vohāra*) and ultimate
(*paramattha*) in Buddhaghosa’s thought. First and foremost, I am deeply
puzzled by Ram-Prasad’s claim in [his comment on my previous
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/#comment-221579)
that “Buddhaghosa does not use the locution ‘merely’ (*matta*) in
reference to conventional language”, when one can find this passage on
page 1094 of his and Heim’s own article:

> At XVIII.28, \[Buddhaghosa\] says that “there comes to be the mere
> common usage of ‘chariot’” (*ratho ti vohāramattaṃ hoti*) from its
> parts but that an ‘examination’ (*upaparikkhā*) shows that ultimately
> there is no chariot.” Likewise, when there are the five aggregates of
> clinging, then there comes to be the mere common usage of ‘a being’,
> ‘person’”…

There is *matta*, “mere” or “merely”, used twice in reference to
*vohāra*, the conventional, right in a passage that Heim and Ram-Prasad
themselves both quote and translate (and which is indeed in the original
text). Not only that, this passage is the very passage we have been
discussing at greatest length, Visuddhimagga XVIII.28. So: yes,
actually, Buddhaghosa *does* use the locution “merely” in reference to
conventional language, and Ram-Prasad has himself already agreed, in his
own published writing, that this is the case.

It is true, as Ram-Prasad claims in [the
comment](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/#comment-221579),
that Buddhaghosa’s use of *matta* does not settle the case about his
ontology. It *does*, however, cast doubt on his and Heim’s claim that
Buddhaghosa’s proceeding fom *vohāra* to *paramattha* (never the other
way round) “does not make the conventional erroneous or less true”
(1106). And that claim was this whole conversation’s original point of
contention to begin with. This discussion began because [I had
asserted](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/)
that in the Milindapañhā and the works of Buddhaghosa the ultimate truth
“corresponds to reality”, with conventional truth “simply an appearance
or convenient way of speaking.” Ram-Prasad had initiated this entire
discussion of ours, referring to the “In a double way” article, by
[claiming](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/01/21/ultimate-and-conventional-truth-in-wilfrid-sellars/#comment-206692)
that on his and Heim’s reading, Buddhaghosa’s “usage of the distinction
through abhidhamma does not map on to metaphysical one you make.”

And so I stand by my original view that Buddhaghosa does consider the
ultimate to be *better* than the conventional, more highly valued in
some respect that makes the conventional “mere” by comparison. As per
[Ram-Prasad’s own
analogy](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/#comment-221579),
if “one played ‘merely’ in the Minors, but wanted ‘ultimately’ to get to
the Majors”, one clearly valued the Majors more highly.

Why does Buddhaghosa value *paramattha* more highly? Because it allows
for viewing existence *correctly*, in a way that *sammuti* alone does
not. We have
[already](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/05/13/buddhaghosa-on-seeing-things-as-they-are-3/)
[discussed](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/04/28/there-is-only-name-and-form/)
a passage in which Buddhaghosa says: *Paramatthato pana
nāmarūpamattameva atthīti. Evaṃ passato hi dassanaṃ yathābhūtadassanaṃ
nāma hoti* (Vism XVIII.28). Heim and Ram-Prasad, again, render this
“seeing correctly is the seeing of one who sees in this way, that from
the standpoint of further sense, there is only name and form.” (1106)

“Correctly” is Heim and Ram-Prasad’s translation for *yathābhūta*, a key
word which the Pali Text Society Dictionary renders as “in reality, in
truth, really, definitely, absolutely; as ought to be, truthfully, in
its real essence” and which I had spelled out as “according to the
existent”. Ram-Prasad makes the extremely curious comment that
*yathābhūta* has the “equally possible and more phenomenological sense”
of “according to what has arisen”. We are agreed that the *yathā* part
of the compound means “according to”, but I can find no justification
for rendering *bhūta* as “what has arisen”. While the -ta form is a past
participle and thus gives some justification for a “what has”
translation, the *bhū* root has no etymological sense of “rising”, of
upward movement, that I am aware of – in contrast to other Pali terms,
like *samuppāda*, that do have that sense and are more commonly
translated “arising”. (The Pali Text Society Dictionary makes no
reference to any sense of “arisen” in any definition of *bhūta*, or to
“arise” for the verb *bhavati*.) Rather, *bhū* is a participle referring
to existence; indeed, Wilhelm Halbfass in *On Being and What There Is*
(22) claims that the Sanskrit/Pali roots *bhū* and *as* have *more*
prominent existential functions than the English word “to be” itself.

Indeed, even in his and Heim’s article, Ram-Prasad *himself* never
renders *bhūta* as “what has arisen”, but as “what has become” (1095) or
as “the elemental” (1096). When the article speaks of *bhūta* outside
the compound *yathābhūta*, it is in that latter sense of elements. So:
sure, a translation of “what has arisen” could be argued to have a “more
phenomenological sense” in that it suggests *yathābhūtam* could merely
have to do with seeming, with what arises in the mind before
consciousness, in a way that has nothing to do with existence or
reality. But I find nothing in Buddhaghosa’s own usage of *bhūta* or
*yathābhūta*, in their wider usage in other Pali and Sanskrit texts, or
in “In a double way” itself, that would imply even the slightest reason
to translate *bhūta* as “what has arisen”, as opposed to the far more
standard understanding that identifies it with existence. In
Ram-Prasad’s own words, Ram-Prasad “is entitled to his intuitions on
this of course, but they do not amount to argument.” Heim’s and
Ram-Prasad’s own translation “what has become” gives much more of a
connotation of what has actually come to *be* – an ontological
connotation. From that more justified usage related to existence, it is
surely a short distance to the common and widely accepted translation of
*yathābhūtam* as “in reality”.

To sum up: Buddhaghosa explicitly values the *paramattha* more highly
than what he explicitly calls “mere” *vohāra*, because one who sees what
exists (*atthi*) in a *paramattha* way sees *yathābhūta* – that is, she
sees correctly, according to what has come to be. This is not to say,
though, that the *vohāra* is unnecessary. It remains essential, and next
time I will treat the reasons why.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly)
