+++
title = "The unavoidability of"
full_title = "The unavoidability of comparisons"
date = "2019-05-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/08/the-unavoidability-of-comparisons/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/08/the-unavoidability-of-comparisons/).

The unavoidability of comparisons

What to do with comparisons? They are always risky, insofar as one risks
to style oneself as an impartial observer while being in fact part of
the discussion. Hence, should not one avoid them altogether?  

As tempting as this suggestion might be, I do not think it is viable. As
I see them, comparisons are hardly avoidable. In fact, learning and
understanding are —in my eyes— not different from reducing the unknown
to the known, and therefore necessarily involve the comparison of what
we know already with what we come to encounter, so as to make place for
the latter within the former. This is also the reason which makes it
extremely difficult to learn something altogether new, for instance a
sentence in a language completely unknown or the way a certain technical
procedure works within an engine one knows nothing about. In other
words, we learn by means of (implicit) comparisons. However, implicit
assumptions are dangerous, exactly because we are not aware of them.
Would it not be better to be straightforwardly aware of what we are
doing when learning about, e.g. a new theological approach to the
problem of theodicy?

If I am right and comparisons are not really avoidable, should one not
rather become aware of the risks involved in them? What can these risks
be? The main problem regards the asymmetry of comparisons. If I compare
language A with language B while being myself a native speaker of
language C and knowing A and B equally well, I might be in the ideal
situation for making a comparison. However, this ideal situation is
hardly the case. Usually, we compare something we know less with
something we know better or, even worse, with something we identify
with. That is, the tertium comparationis collapses with one of the two
comparanda. This risk is even bigger in case of the process of learning
through implicit comparisons. Explicit comparisons force one to at least
be explicit as for the two (or more) comparanda and the tertium
comparationis.

**What do readers think? Can you avoid comparisons?**
