+++
title = "“Wrestling with the"
full_title = "“Wrestling with the angel”"
date = "2019-05-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/17/wrestling-with-the-angel/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/05/17/wrestling-with-the-angel/).

“Wrestling with the angel”

Intercultural philosophy is based on a dialogue, i.e., not just on a
sheer juxtaposition of monologues, since such a juxtaposition would not
lead to any new result and both partners would not be able to gain
anything out of it. In order to achieve this result, one needs to be
able to engage in a real dialogue. This is a less trivial issue than it
may look like at first sight and in fact thousands of pages, from Plato
to H.-G. Gadamer, have been dedicated only to the topic of how can
dialogues and especially philosophical dialogues take place. The
situation becomes even more difficult when in addition to the normal
boundaries between people one needs to cross the additional bridge of
cultures and of time. How can such a dialogue look like?

![A.L. Leloir from
render.fineartamerica.com](https://render.fineartamerica.com/images/rendered/medium/canvas-print/mirror/break/images/artworkimages/medium/1/jacob-wrestling-with-the-angel-alexander-louis-leloir-canvas-print.jpg)

Genesis 32,22-32 contains the strange episode of Jacob wrestling with
God. It is a single combat which cannot aim at the destruction of the
other combatant, but rather at engaging closely with him. I will claim
here that this is a good simile for the kind of dialogue one should look
for in intercultural philosophy, especially when dealing with historical
sources. In fact, one should not aim at destroying one’s opponent, but
also not remain at the superficial level of a peaceful chatting. In
order for the encounter to be really fertile, one needs to engage in a
real combat, i.e., in a strict philosophical confrontation, being ready
to have to admit one’s defeat and to change at least some of one’s
assumptions. Vice versa, one’s opponent might also end up being defeated
insofar as one might find out that they overlooked a possible objection
or did not take into account some possible development of their
theories. How can this practically occur?

In my experience, again, Jacob’s wrestling offers a good clue: One needs
to get closer to one’s philosophical opponent. It is not enough to just
cherry-pick an idea and expand it in a different direction in order to
claim that a dialogue had taken place. Rather, one needs to be able to
engage closely with a whole theory, possibly taking into account its
context and its consequences. Now, a historical opponent offers in this
sense serious disadvantages but also an important advantage. The
disadvantages lie in the fact that an opponent who is no-longer alive
cannot react, reassessing one’s views, explaining their point better,
correcting misunderstandings and the like. Much more work needs to be
done, consequently, by the partner who is alive and able to engage in
the discussion. She will need to fill holes, reconstruct partially
unexplained views, make implicit points explicit, expand theories to
unexpected cases etc. She will have to be humble in her attempt, trying
to substantiate each claim in the dead opponent’s own words. I am in
this connection a strong believer in the principle of charity and I try
to reconstruct a theory in the most charitable way. Nothing is gained, I
think, by defeating a weak opponent, and it is even offensive to think
that great thinkers of the past did not think of attacks which look
evident for us.

The advantage of engaging with an opponent of the past lies, conversely,
in their being far from the actuality. They do not need to be influenced
by extra-philosophical issues, such as their opponent’s academical
position or country of residence. This is particularly relevant when it
comes to asymmetrical power relations, such as a star professor in a
well-known university in the Anglo-American world engaging in a dialogue
with an opponent coming from a very different background. Our opponents
from the past do not need to feel intimidated. They will not be
impressed by one’s pedigree and remain inflexible on their positions,
even if they are out of fashion, such as idealism.
