+++
title = "‘Nysa in India’ & the"
full_title = "‘Nysa in India’ & the Related Narratives"
date = "2021-12-17"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/12/17/nysa-in-india-the-related-narratives/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/12/17/nysa-in-india-the-related-narratives/).

‘Nysa in India’ & the Related Narratives

Alexander III of Macedon in his campaign of world conquest reached India
in 327 BCE after attaining victory over the Persian Achaemenid Empire.
It is reported by western classical sources that in India, the invaders
stumbled on a city named Nysa and the inhabitants of the city told him
that it was founded by none other than Dionysus. Alexander, we are told,
was elated; he had found descendants of Greeks, in a far away land,
conquered by the divine. As fascinating this tale is, a history
enthusiast is intrigued to know more about the historicity of this
tradition. Though, as Arrian had rightly said, even if there is doubt
about credibility of such events, they do not seem to be incredible
altogether, if one takes divine agency into account.^(**1**) But as this
tradition is related to Indian civilization and is intricately weaved
with historical personalities; it becomes pertinent to understand the
curious case of ‘Nysa in India’ in detail. This post is a humble attempt
to do precisely that – to understand exactly what this city was, who
were its people and were they really descendants of the Greeks? Or did
such city actually exist? What are the views of various scholars
regarding this issue?

Intricately related to the campaign, the personality of Alexander and
the tradition of Nysa in India are other narratives. Some scholars were
of the view that the tradition signifies actual events related to the
settlements of pre-Alexandrian Greeks in the outlying provinces of
India. Some scholars have discussed the strong possibility that there
exists in today’s Pakistan *i.e.* the ancient Indian north-west, the
descendants of those Greeks. Some disagree with the view but say that
Alexander and his army left behind some of his people and settlements
whose descendants can be seen in today’s communities. Such communities
claim therefore, that they are Alexander’s or his generals’ descendants.
Is there a pattern, a narrative that we are missing behind these
traditions? This post will therefore also attempt in detail to
understand this topic and its related narratives and try to determine
the authenticity of the traditions and these the claims related to the
question of Greek descent in the Indian sub-continent.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/dionysus.jpg?w=1024)

A relief carved on a 2nd century CE Roman sarcophagus depicting the
legend of Dionysus and his triumphal march through the lands of India
([Source](https://art.thewalters.org/detail/33305/sarcophagus-with-the-triumph-of-dionysus/))

As we are dealing with ancient history, we would have to keep in mind
that even at the end of the post, there still might be many inconclusive
arguments in front of us due to many inter and intra-contradictory
sources, except where scientific studies have presented conclusive facts
for example in the case of genetic studies, that will also be discussed
in the post.

Before we consider the western classical sources which are our main body
of information regarding the city of Nysa in India and its relation with
Dionysus, it would be better to learn about when and how Indians learnt
about the Greeks.The reason is because whatever we learn from the
classical sources would have to be read and understood in the light of
and corroboration with the Indian and Persian sources. Only then we
might get a cohesive account of the events.

## Table of Contents & its Links

-   [Eastern Sources](#Eastern-Sources)
-   [Western Classical Sources](#Western-Classical-Sources)
-   [Settlement of Branchidae in Sogdiana: A
    Possibility?](#Settlement-of-Branchidae)
-   [Numismatics: The Athenian ‘Owls’](#Numismatics)
-   [The Question of ‘Greek Descent’](#The-Question-of-Greek-Descent)
-   [Explaining the Parallelisms](#Explaining-the-Parallelisms)
-   [History of the Claims of ‘Greek Descent’](#History-of-the-Claims)
-   [Alexander & his Ambitions of
    Divinity](#Alexander-Ambitions-Divinity)
-   [Conclusion](#Conclusion)
-   [References](#References)
-   [Bibliography](#Bibliography)

## Eastern Sources

### Ancient Persian Sources

We all have heard the word Yavana while reading Indian history. In
ancient Indian literature and inscriptions the word Yavana in Sanskrit
and its equivalent Yona in Pali were frequently used to refer to the
westerners like the Romans, the Arabs *etc*. But it is an established
fact that originally, the word was meant to describe the Greeks and was
only later used in the general westerners’ context.^(**2**) The word
came in to Indian use when Achaemenid King Darius (*r.* 522-486 BCE)
conquered significant portions of the ancient north west India –
Gandhāra \[Gadāra Old Persian\] and also the Sind \[Hi(n)du Old
Persian\]. The Achaemenid Empire now stretched on a huge landmass –
*“from the Saka who are living beyond Sogdia upto Kusha (Ethiopia) and
from India up to Lydia”*^(**3**) as an Achaemenid Inscription of Darius
states.

It is in the epigraphic record of Darius that we first notice the use of
the Old Persian term Yauna.^(**4**) Etymologically, the word Yavana/Yona
is considered to be derived from the Greek word Iawn/Iaones *i.e.* the
word for Ionians. The Ionian Greeks were members of that division of the
Hellenic race which occupied Attica and northern coast of Peloponeus,
who also established their colonies in Asia Minor, where a large
district, Ionia was named after them.^(**5**)

The Persians, even the Hebrews called the Ionian Greeks Yauna and Yawan
respectively and the word was later applied to the Greeks in general. It
is considered that Indians most probably took the word from the Persians
when they first encountered Greeks on the borders of their country (Lal,
2004:1115), after the limits of the Achaemenid Empire reached within
India. Therefore, it was due to Persia that the relations between India
and the Greek world began.^(**6**) Even the respective names that these
two civilizations had for each other were derivations from what the
Achaemenids called them in Old Persian.^(**7**)

Being ruled by the Achaemenids since the time of the King Darius, the
ancient north western Indians and the Ionian Greeks were in mutual
contact. Indian merchants might have met with the Greek merchants in
markets of the Persian Empire. We already know that Indian archers were
employed in the Persian army by King Xerxes to fight against Greeks in
the battle of Plataea in 479 BCE (Vasant, 1988: 331).

### Ancient Indian Sources

#### Hindu
 In ancient Indian literature, it is in *Aṣtādhyāyi* of
Pāṇinī that the term related to the Greeks is first used. Pāṇini was an
inhabitant of the ancient Indian north-west, in the vicinity of
Taxila.^(**8**) In one if its sūtra, while teaching the use of an affix,
Yavanāni is given as an example. From Kātyāyana’s *varttikā*, it is
further deduced that the example given in *Aṣtādhyāyi* was meant to
indicate the Yavanallipyam *i.e.* Yavana handwriting (Lal, 2004: 1115).
The Indian grammarians gave their own understanding of this word’s
etymology and considered Yavana as derived from the Sanskrit root Yu
meaning to mix or to mingle and thus signified a mixed people.^(**9**)
It is also considered that the word Yavana is a secondary
Sanskritization of the Pali Yona.^(**10**) Even the *Mahābhārata*
generally uses the term Yavana but Yauna is also encountered in the epic
(Lal, 2004: 1115).

As Pāṇinī is variously dated between the periods of 6^(th) to 4^(th)
century BCE, it provides us a wide range for when the Indians came in
contacts with the Greeks, enough to learn about their script. Achaemenid
King Cyrus had completed his conquest of the Lydian Empire that included
Ionian territories by 542 BCE, but as mentioned above, it was in the
period of Darius I in 515 BCE that Achaemenids conquered Indian lands
comprising Gandhāra and the Indus region. Thus, it would be prudent to
assume that at least in the commercial arenas of the vast Achaemenid
Empire, the Indo-Greek contacts would have started to materialize from
5^(th) century BCE.

If we add to this the fact that Indian soldiers/mercenaries served in
the army of Xerxes in the battle of Plataea in 479 BCE, it would have
increased the knowledge of Indians about the Greeks because the soldiers
who came back home would have certainly narrated about their adventures
in the foreign lands. Along with this, if we consider the possibility
from numismatic evidence and also of a Greek settlement in
Bactria-Sogdiana, both of which will be dealt with shortly, we are now
moving to the middle of the fifth century when the contacts between
these two ancient civilizations would have increased.

***It would also be safe to assume that information about the Yavana-s
might have been known to the inhabitants in the north-west for some time
before Pāṇinī for him to mention them in his magnum opus.***

It is interesting to include in at this moment an important piece of
evidence from a 8^(th) century CE Buddhist text called the *Ārya
Mañjuśrī Mūlakalpa*, which mentions Pāṇinī as a friend of the Nanda
Emperor Mahāpadma Nanda. This would make Pāṇinī flourishing a
generation before Alexander *i.e.* between 366 – 338 BCE.^(**11**) Thus,
his information on the Yavana-s was based on them either living in the
Indian territories of the Persian Empire or in the Persian satrapy of
Bactria-Sogdiana which still would have brought some Greeks quite close
to India.

There is also a consistent theme in ancient Indian literature that
characterizes Yavana-s and Kamboja-s as quite similar, so much so that
the two tribes are very much mentioned side by side. Both of them are
frequently mentioned wearing their hair short. Similar examples for
Yavana-s and Kamboja-s are found in the *Mahābhārata* and also in the
*Purāṇic* literature. While this suggests that Yavana-s and Kamboja-s
lived near to each other, this information could also be assigned to a
period later than Alexander’s and need not mean referring to the time
before him. Though, these texts certainly had deep layers from the very
ancient-archaic Indian tradition, yet it was still taking its current
form by the start of the Common Era. Therefore, those contacts need not
be earliest ones and Pāṇinī still remains the authority that provides us
with an earliest window of period for first significant contacts between
Indians and Yavana-s, which might have been increasing steadily since
Darius’ victory in the north-west.

#### Buddhist
 In Buddhist literature, one of the earliest references
to Yavana-s occur in the *Assalāyana Sutta* of the *Majjhima Nikāya*
that states the following discourse between Buddha and a young Brāhmaṇa
named Assalāyana –

“What do you think about this Assalāyana? Have you heard that in the
countries of the Yona (yonaraṭṭaṇa) and Kamboja (kambojaraṭṭaṇa) and
other adjacent districts, there are only two castes, the master and the
slave? And having been a master one becomes a slave; having been a slave
one becomes a master?” – “Yes, I have heard this, Sir, in Yona and
Kamboja…having been a slave, one becomes a master.”^(**12**)

It is interesting to note that even here the Yavana-s and Kamboja-s are
mentioned together. Some scholars consider this as a proof of the Indian
awareness about relatively egalitarian societies of the classical Greeks
and therefore a proof of Greek settlement in India at the time of Buddha
which was probably adjacent to the tribe of the Kamboja-s. However,
there is a caveat – Pali texts even though forming the oldest layers of
the Buddhist literature, were put to writing only in the 1st century
BCE and they still kept on developing in the 2^(nd) century CE.**¹³
**Thus, there is a strong possibility that this information also belongs
to later centuries rather than being contemporary to the Buddha *i.e.*
in 6^(th) century BCE (Vassiliades, 2004: 135). Another argument that
favours it being a later interpolation is the fact that the Yona
state/settlement is not mentioned as being one of the sixteen
mahājanapada-s in the earliest of the Buddhist and the Jain texts
(Vassiliades, 2004: 135). The Buddhist text named *Chullaniddesa* (part
of the the *Niddesa* Buddhist scriptures which are included in the
*Sutta Piṭaka*’s *Khuddaka Nikāya*) is the first one to substitute Yona
for Gāndhāra in the list of the sixteen mahājanapada-s (Vassiliades,
2004: 135) but this is also tentatively dated between 2^(nd) century BCE
and 1^(st) century BCE. Hence, we again come to the conclusion that on
the authority of Pāṇinī, we can consider late fifth and early fourth
century BCE as an approximate earliest date when the Greeks might have
made contacts with the Indians in the sub-continent which either were
transitory contacts due to commerce or even a possibility of some sort
of small settlement in the outlying regions could be entertained.

#### Aśokan Rock Edicts
The first known inscriptional-epigraphic
evidence for the word Yona comes from Aśokan Rock edicts – specifically
Rock Edict XIII from Shahbazgarhi in Peshawar of ancient north west
India (now Pakistan). It mentions Antiochos (Aṅtiyako Yonarāja ) as the
representative of the Yona kings and then goes on to mention Yona and
Kamboja etc separately as the people in his own empire.^(**14**)

The Greek kings are named in the Rock Edict XIII makes clear that the
dominion of the King Aśoka stretched as far as six hundred yojanas where
“Yona Aṅtiyako Yonarāja Aṅtiyoko (Antiochos II Theos of Syria, 26-246
BCE) ruled and beyond that, where the other four kings-Tulamaye
(Ptolemaios II Philadelphos of Egypt, 283-246 BCE), Aṅtekine (Antigonas
Gonatas of Macedonia, 278-239 BCE), Makā (Magas of Cyrene, 300-250 BCE),
and Alikyaṣudale (Alexander of Epiros or Corinth, 272-258 BCE) –
ruled.”**¹⁵**

This Rock Edict XIII (also II) of king Aśoka also affirms that the
Kamboja-s, Yavana-s etc were republican or kingless nations
(“araja.visyavasi yonakambojesu..”) within the Mauryan empire. They
also state that the Brāhmaṇs and Śramanas were ubiquitous in the empire
except among the Yonas (Lal, 2004:1116) (Vassiliades, 2004: 136). The
fifth and the ninth Rock Edicts also mention Yonas as king’s subjects
devoted to the Dharma (Vassiliades, 2004:143).

These edicts while surely do give strong evidence about the presence of
Yavana settlements within Maurya Empire and also their proximity to the
Kamboja-s but these again do not prove their substantial existence in
India before Alexander.

Bhandarkar tried to identify the Yonas mentioned in the Aśokan edict
with Aria or Arachosia which were the two provinces ceded by Seleucuos
to Chandragupta and which must have been inherited intact by Aśoka
(Bhandarkar, 1921: 26). He suggested the possibility that they could
have lived in a territory adjoining Gandhāra but outside India.^(**16**)
He tried to corroborate this with the findings of a particular kind of
coins from ancient Indian north-west and Bactria called the Athenian
‘owls’. He was of the view that these Yonas could be the descandants of
the inhabitants of the Greek city Nysa of India mentioned in the western
classical sources as founded by the Greek god Dionysus when he conquered
this land.

As to the possibility that these Yonas in the Aśokan edicts could be the
Greeks which Alexander left behind, he was of the view that as Alexander
did not leave behind him any permanent settlements in or near India
(Bhandarkar, 1921: 26), he only *“left some Greek garrisons, certainly a
province (Nysa) is not named after the race of garrisoned soldiers. It
is only when a tribe or people comes in such terrific masses as to
outnumber the original inhabitants that it gives its name to the
province so occupied by them.”*^(**17**) He found even the idea of a
mere garrison imparting the name of its race to the country where it is
stationed, quite inadmissible, if not ludicrous. Consequently, he opined
that these Yonas signified the Yavana settlements in India or Bactria
before Alexander.

It certainly is a plausible scenario but the conclusion that Yavana
settlements in the outlying provinces of India mentioned in the edicts
was the same as Nysa mentioned in the classical sources is far from sure
as it will be shown later in the post when we will discuss the
characteristics of Nysa which clearly were not Greek but very much part
of the Dardic Indo-Aryan/Indo-Iranian sphere. Hence, it would be prudent
to treat the question of Nysa of India and the question of Greek
settlements (pre or post Alexander) in India quite separately.

### Western Classical Sources


#### §****Pre-Alexandrian Sources*


##### Skylax
 Now we move towards the classical sources for
pre-Alexandrian information that relate actual contacts between Greek
travelers/writers and Indians**.** As previously mentioned, Indo-Greek
contacts happened through the agency of the Persian Empire; it is in the
same vein that the first Greek – Skylax of Caryanda visited ancient
Indian north-west on the orders of King Darius. Though some recent works
do suggest the possibility that he could have visited much interior
India and these recent studies suggest that the river mentioned in
Skylax’s account could be either Ganga according to Panchenko or Yamuna
as per Stoneman^(**18**) but they still remains only theories and
north-west still remains the most probable region he visited. He along
with the other pre-Alexandrian Greek writers who mentioned India like
Ctesias, Hecataios, and Herodotus also limited their descriptions to the
north-western regions of the Indian sub-continent up to the border of
the River Indus.^(**19**) It is important to note that none of these
early writers before the time of Alexander reported any Greek presence
in the region. Though, it is likely that Skylax’s visit was not long
enough that he exhausted even the mountain areas of the north-west and
might have never known about Greek settlements in the region, it would
be much more plausible to argue that there were no Yavana settlements in
India at the time of his visit.

##### Herodotus
 In fact, Herodotus, who was most probably writing on
the authority of previous writers, in III, 102, refers to Indians that
live near the town of Kaspátyros (=Kaspápyros) in the Paktyīké country,
tentatively identified with Kusumpurā and Puṣkalāvatī, both of which
were towns in ancient Gandhāra. About inhabitants of these regions, he
says that their habits are very similar to those of the Bactrians, thus
hinting towards a common culture that existed at least from Bactria to
Gandhāra.^(**20**) On the continuity and similarity within the larger
culture of the north-west of the subcontinent in the ancient times,
Herodotus again provides us with some fascinating details. In III, 38,
4, he also assigns the practice of endocannibalism Kallatiai, a tribe in
India, much like the tribe of Padaei (Tola & Dragonetti, 1986: 167).
Herodotus also accredits this practice in case of other tribes as well
like that of Iranian Massagetae and Issedones (Scythian people of Asian
origin) who as per him lived southeast of Aral Sea in Central Asia. He
also states that Kallatiai were very much shocked when Darius asked them
whether they could burn their corpses.^(**21**)

##### Ctesias
There is also a tendency to ascribe the lighter
complexion of inhabitants of the north-west to post-Neolithic, Iron Age
admixture from Europe, particularly to Alexander and his army and thus
suggesting that the people of the region were Greek descendants. Even if
set aside the Indian sources which contradict this, there is also
contradictory information in the western classical sources as well.
Ctesias, another famous Greek who was in the court of Persian King
Artaxerxes II Mnemon as his physician mentioned in his book Indiká that
all Indians are not black and that some of them were also extremely
white although fewer in number (Tola & Dragonetti, 1986: 175).

#### §****Post-Alexandrian Sources


***Arrian: ***Coming to the sources for ‘Nysa in India,’ Arrian gives
the most detailed description among others. He states that between the
river of Kôphên (Kabul) and Indus (Sindhu), besides many other cities,
there stood also the city of Nysa, which owed its foundation to
Dionysus, and that Dionysus founded it when he conquered the
Indians.^(**22**)

Interestingly, even Arrian treats the matter with skepticism. He makes a
point to note his doubt about the Theban Dionysus who setting out from
either Thebes or Lydia, marched with an entire army, passed through many
warlike nations unknown to the Greeks at the time, but subjugated none
of those people except the Indians (M’Crindle, 1896: 79). He however,
closes the matter on the credibility of the story in his account with
statement, mentioned earlier whose crux is that anything is possible
when it comes to the matter of divine agency.^(**23**)

Arrian then relates that the name of the president of the Nysaians was
Akouphis (it is considered that as the Greek 𝛷 represents *bh* of
Sanskrit, hence the name might have been Akubhi)^(**24**) and with him
came thirty deputies, his most eminent citizens and made a request to
spare the city for sake of the god.

Akouphis then told Alexander, ‘‘The Nysaians entreat you, O King! to
permit them to be still free and to be governed by their own laws from
reverence towards Dionysos; for when Dionysos after conquering the
Indian nation was returning to the shores of Greece he founded with his
war-worn soldiers, who were also his bacchanals, this very city to be a
memorial to posterity of his wanderings and his victory, just as you
have founded yourself an Alexandreia near Kaukasos, and another
Alexandreia in the land of the Egyptians, not to speak of many others,
some of which you have already founded, while others will follow in the
course of time, *just as your achievements exceed in number those
displayed by Dionysos*. Now Dionysos called our city Nysa, and our land
the Nysaian, after the name of his nurse Nysa; and he besides gave to
the mountain which lies near the city the name of Mêros, because
according to the legend he grew, before his birth, in the thigh of Zeus.
And from his time forth we inhabit Nysa as a free city, and are governed
by our own laws, and are a well-ordered community. But that Dionysos was
our founder, take this as a‘proof, that ivy which’ grows nowhere else in
the land of the Indians, grows with us.”^(**25**)

The excerpts suggest that the inhabitants of the city were free; that
they had cavalry and that governance was in the hands of aristocrats
(Narain, 1957: 2). Alexander then asked Akouphis to provide him with 300
of their horsemen and also best of their men from the governing body of
300 members. Interestingly, to this also Akouphis requested that instead
of taking hundred of their best men, he should take twice as number of
the worst men and also take 300 horsemen or even more if he desired.
This he asked “so that on your (Alexander’s) returning hither you may
find the city as well governed as it is now” (M’Crindle, 1896: 81). This
request was also granted by Alexander with few conditions.

Arrian then explains how Alexander went to the Mount Mêros where they
found ivy, how the Macedonians in the party weaved themselves some ivy
chaplets and crowned themselves with them, while chanting hymns to
Dionysus and invoking the god by different names (M’Crindle, 1896:
81-82). Alexander then offered a sacrifice to the god Dionysus and the
Macedonians raised in the god’s honour, shouts of *Evoi* (one of the
Roman names for Dionysus), and reveled like Bacchanals celebrating their
orgies.^(**26**)

***Curtius:*** Curtius, on the other hand, doesn’t mention any
straightaway meeting between Alexander and the Nysaeans. In fact, he
mentions that during the course of his march, Alexander first encamped
near the city. Due to the increasing cold of the night, when campers
lit the fire and fed it with logs of wood, they might have taken slabs
from the wooden coffins or the fire somehow spread to the wooden coffins
which were made of old cedar wood but the result was it engulfed all of
the tombs. A clamour ensued and this alerted the inhabitants of Nysa
after which Alexander instituted a close blockade of the city. Between
being unsure of whether to surrender or to pursue fighting, Nysaeans
surrendered in the end. This is when they told Alexander that the city
was founded by Father Bacchus.^(**27**) Rests of these details are more
or less the same as that by Arrian. While Curtius mentions that
Alexander ascended the mountain Meros with his whole army, Philostratos
(II. 4) says that Alexander did not ascend the mountain but, inspite of
being anxious to do so, he contented himself with offering prayers and
sacrifices at the base.^(**28**)

***The mention of wooden tombs/coffins in Curtius’ account is important
because this frequently becomes the basis on which some identify Nysa of
India and their descendants in the Indian sub-continent, a topic that
will be discussed shortly.***

***Identifying Nysa:** *In Gandhara, Ptolemy mentions a town named
Nagara (Ancient Greek: Νάγαρα) which has a Greek name, ‘also
Dionysopolis’ (ἡ καὶ Διονυσόπολις) and which certainly contained a Greek
settlement. It has been identified with Nagarahara which was situated
between the Kabul River and the Indus, in present-day Afghanistan (Tarn,
1922: 168, 244). This place was also called Udyānapura, *i.e.* “ the
city of gardens,” which the Greeks from some resemblance in the sound
translated it as Dionysopolis, a compound meaning “ the city of
Dionysos.”^(**29**) Today, it can be identified with Nagara Ghundi, a
site, about 4km west of Jalalabad. There also had been suggestions to
identify this Nagara-Dionysopolis with Nysa. This was apparently
confirmed by a mountain called Mar – Koh {i.e, snake-hill) at some
distance eastward from this site, on the opposite bank of the river,
which, *“if Nysa be Nagara, may be regarded as the Mount Meros which lay
near it, and was ascended by Alexander…”* (M’Crindle, 1896: 338). But
Ptolemy was writing in 2^(nd) century CE and the town of Dionysopolis
was most likely a later settlement that flourished after the fall of the
Graeco-Bactrian cities of Ay-Khanoum and Takht-i-Sangin. Also Tarn
believed that the two locations (Nagara and Nysa) were actually far away
from each other.^(**30**)

##### Settlement of Branchidae in Sogdiana: A Possibility?


Was Nysa the only major settlement related to us by the western
classical sources? The Indian sources, as mentioned above do suggest
strong possibility that Indians and Greeks came in contact after the
Achaemenid victory of Darius in India and there might have been some
sort of Greek presence in the country by the time of Pāṇini. But we also
saw that the Greeks are conspicuous by their absence in the description
of India by Skylax and other earlier writers mentioned above, so are we
in a position to speculate another location for possible Greek
settlement outside India but near it? There actually is some information
regarding a pre-Alexandrian settlement in Bactria-Sogdiana. The
proximity of these regions will put them in ideal place to be in contact
with the Indians, especially through commerce and also close enough that
Indians and Greeks might have actually met each other periodically. That
might also explain why Pāṇini knew about them and their script. After
all, he was born and lived in the vicinity of Takṣaśilā (Taxila) which
apart from being a famous city for its university, it was also a very
important economic centre through which a lot of trade happened between
India and Central Asia, the famous Silk route of the later times.

The information is about a settlement of Branchidae in Sogdiana. The
Branchidae claimed to be sacred gens, descending from Branches, the
traditional founder of the temple of Apollo near Miletus in Ionia. Their
forefathers had, according to a tradition, “yielded up the treasure of
their temple to Xerxes; this affair brought so much odium on them that
they went and retired with Xerxes into the interior of Asia.”^(**31**)

Alexander one day in 329 BCE, after his victory on the Achaemenids and
before his invasion of India, left Bactria with his army, marched
through the desert, crossed the Oxus, and while going north towards
Samarkand, stumbled upon something unexpected. As told by Curtius (7. 5.
28–35), he came upon a town, inhabited by Branchidaea who as told above,
had migrated earlier from Miletus by order of Xerxes. The possibility of
situation of Branchidae town could be between Balkh and
Samarkand.^(**32**) The rest of this intriguing account quoted by
Panchenko in his paper can be read in this following excerpt:

“They had not ceased to follow the customs of their native land, but
they were already bilingual, having gradually degenerated from their
original language through the influence of a foreign tongue. Therefore
they received Alexander with great joy and surrendered their city and
themselves. He ordered the Milesians who were serving with him to be
called together. They cherished hatred of long standing against the race
of the Branchidae. Therefore the king allowed to those who had been
betrayed free discretion as to the Branchidae, whether they preferred to
remember the injury or their common origin. Then, since their opinions
varied, he made known to them that he himself would consider what was
the best to be done. On the following day when the Branchidae met him,
he ordered them to come along with him, and when they reached the city,
he himself entered the gate with a light-armed company; the phalanx he
ordered to surround the walls of the town and at a given signal to
pillage the city, which was a haunt of traitors, and to kill the
inhabitants to a man. The unarmed wretches were butchered everywhere,
and the cruelty could not be checked either by community of language or
by the draped olive branches and prayers of the suppliants. At last, in
order that the walls might be thrown down, their foundations were
undermined, so that no vestige of the city might survive. As for their
woods also and their sacred groves, they not only cut them down, but
even pulled out the stumps, to the end that, since even the roots were
burned out, nothing but a desert waste and sterile ground might be left.
If this had been designed against the actual authors of the treason, it
would seem to have been a just vengeance and not cruelty; as it was,
their descendants expiated the guilt of their forefathers, although they
themselves had never seen Miletus, and so could not have betrayed it to
Xerxes (transl. by John C. Rolfe in the Loeb series).”^(**33**)

This tale is narrated not just by Curtius but other western classical
sources also. Strabo says – *“they say that Xerxes founded in this area
(Bactria-Sogdiana) the city of the Branchidae, who set off willingly
with him from their homeland, because they handed over the possessions
and the treasures of the god at Didyma” (Hammond, 1998: 341).*

Diodorus states: *“How the Branchidae having been settled long ago by
the Persians at the extremity of their kingdom, were destroyed by
Alexander as traitors of the Greeks.”* Hammond also considers their
situation in Sogdiana, the north-easternmost province of the Persian
Empire.^(**34**)

As to why Alexander perpetrated the massacre, Hammond explains his view
that Alexander had particularly close ties with Apollo, and, when he
asked the opinion of the Milesians in his army on how he should treat
the Branchidae, he found them divided in their views. So, Alexander took
a personal decision and exacted retribution for the sins (against Apollo
and against Greeks) of the past generation of Branchidae. All males were
executed, others enslaved and the city was completely destroyed
(Hammond, 1998: 344). Narain specially cites an authority like Herodotus
and states that the Greeks of the city states in the Asia Minor were
sometimes threatened by the Persians with exile to the far eastern
portions of the Achaemenid Empire and there are examples of them being
settles there.^(**35**) In fact regarding the possibility of Persians
deporting people, there are other examples – we do find mention of
deportation of 780 Eretrians in 490 BCE (Linonel, 2005: 121).

***As the recovery of Miletus suggests, the number of killed and
enslaved there was rather modest, therefore a speculation can be made
about the strength of the deportees to Sogdiana – the number could have
been around 1000³⁶ and these deportees might have been given land in
those areas to settle there and cultivate the land.***

Some scholars believe that the entire story about the existence and the
subsequent massacre of the Branchidae is not real but Panchenko
disagrees and believes that neither the meeting itself nor the
subsequent massacre was invented (Panchenko, 2002: 245). He also cites
references for suggesting the possibility that Branchidae might have
chosen the exile out of their own insecurity. Therefore, Xerxes accepted
them as his refugees and gave them a frontier area as a settlement. So,
the story of Branchidae’s exile is plausible.^(**37**)

The fact that a massacre of a Greek population has actually been
mentioned by multiple sources, despite the strong possibility of being
an extremely unpopular move, notwithstanding the stated goal of revenge
for the sins of their previous generations, the tone of the events
suggest that they actually happened. Panchenko raises important
questions in this regard like why Alexander, on finding Greeks after
such a long time in the faraway lands of Central Asia and of all options
possible, would decide to massacre them. Panchenko believes that in the
mention of cutting of the sacred groves by Curtius, explained above,
lies the explanation of the tragedy. It would again be better to quote
him to understand the plausibility of the event:

“Since Curtius’ account implies that the city of the Branchidae was
located not far from the place of crossing, it is even possible that
Alexander reached the city while a part of his army had yet to cross the
river; then the wood cut at the sacred grove was immediately used to
build rafts. Whatever the particular purpose, cutting a sacred grove was
a sacrilege; it could be hardly committed without a pressing need. For
the same reason it required a very strong justification. The whole
career of Alexander shows that he was very conscious of what is nowadays
called public relations. By this I mean not only his concern for
posterity. Starting a campaign in a vaguely known and hostile country by
offending a mighty god was fraught with creating panic among the
soldiers as soon as they would face any misfortune. The only way of
justifying the sacrilegious deed was to turn it into the avenging of
another sacrilegious deed – *hierosylia* (Strab. 14. 1. 5). An
additional charge – betrayal of the Greek cause – was not strictly
pertinent, but emotionally was very efficient.”^(**38**)

Another evidence for the historicity of the event can be seen in the
mention by the ancient writers of setting up of altars to Apollo
Didymaeus by Demodamas, a general of Seleucus and Antiochus after his
successes in the area (Panchenko, 2002: 248), probably to atone for the
massacre perpetrated by Alexander. This story also shows the sheer
contrast between the treatment meted out to the Branchidae on one hand
and Nysa in India on the other. The reasons of it could be very
interesting to consider, as we would shortly in this post.

Therefore, a Milesian colony with a number of educated people from the
upper stratum did exist during the century and a half (from 479 till 329
BC) almost next door to north-western India and practically on the
future Silk Road.^(**39**) When we consider the facts discussed above
that Pāṇini being a scholar from Taxila in Gandhāra knew about Yavana-s
and their script, in my opinion, we are then in a position to speculate
that he might have known about this Yavana settlement in
Bactria-Sogdiana. It was related before in the account of Curtius that
these Greeks had already forgot some of their language and had become
bilingual which also means that they remembered their language, albeit
in a diluted form. Therefore, the possibility that the Yavana that
Pāṇini knew about were actually situated in Bactria-Sogidana is as
strong as (may be even more) the possibility of Yavanas being settled in
India.

##### Numismatics: The Athenian ‘Owls’


Until now, we were dealing with literary sources regarding the
pre-Alexandrian evidence for Greek settlements in India were concerned
but know we move on to numismatic evidence called the Athenian ‘owls’
mentioned before. These coins are usually cited in favour of the
presence of Greeks in India and Central Asia before Alexander. These are
a special kind of coins called the Athenian ‘owls’ that have been found
in India and Central Asia (particularly around Oxus). What were these
Athenian ‘owls’ and how are there findings related to the argument for
presence of pre-Alexandrian Greeks in India, one might ask?

In the 6^(th) century BCE tyrant Peisistratos (560-527 BCE) introduced
in Athens a new kind of coinage – the Tetradrachm which then was made a
Stater or the standard coin.^(**40**) It was the largest Greek silver
coin at the time. At first due to commercial reasons and then commercial
as well as the political reasons beacause of the Achaemenid victory over
Ionia in Asia Minor, these coins found wider appeal and they were
imitated widely, even in Arabia and India (Davis, 1960: 71). The
earliest imitations of these Athenian ‘owls’ were made in Egypt and in
southern Levant.^(**41**) These coins, the original ‘owls’ (drachm,
didrachm and tetradrachm) were stamped with the head of Athena on
obverse and her sacred bird, the owl (symbol of knowledge and wisdom)
on reverse with a usual inscription of ΑΘΕ – an abbreviation (alpha,
theta, epsilon) of ΑΘΗΝΑΙΩΝ, which may be translated as *“of the
Athenians”*.

P. Gardner in his paper *On Some Coins of Syria and Bactria* in 1880
published the findings of some imitations of these Athenian ‘owls’ with
the head of Athena on the obverse and an owl on reverse.^(**42**) These
coins were part of what was called the Oxus hoard. Rapson was also of
the view that these Athenian ‘owls’ found their way to the East in the
course of commerce. It so happened that for about a century before 322
BCE, the Athenian mint was closed and the supply from it grew less
(Rapson, 1898: 3). So, attempts were made to faithfully imitate and
produce the originals in northern India as in other place in the
Achaemenid Empire to complete the supply.^(**43**)

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/coins-cropped-1.jpg?w=609)

Imitations of the Athenian ‘Owls’: Attic weight standard; Obverse – Head
of Athena & Reverse – Her Symbol Owl, minted in either Bactria or
Ancient Indian North-West.
([Source](https://www.jstor.org/stable/42659996))

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/coins-2-cropped.jpg?w=659)

Imitations of the Athenian ‘Owls’: Indian weight standard, 1.
Diadrachms; 2. Drachm; Obverse – Head of Athena & Reverse – Her Symbol
Owl, minted in either Bactria or Ancient Indian North-West.
([Source](https://www.jstor.org/stable/42659996))

It provided confirmation that coins from the Greek mainland had been
making their way east since fourth century BCE (Jansari, 2018: 77). This
hoard was buried in *c*.390-380 BC and had coins from Athens and Aegina,
and also from the Greek cities in Asia Minor, including Soli and
Phaselis (Jansari, 2018: 77) along with the imitations of the original
‘owls’. On these Athenian owls’ imitations, the ΑΘΕ was sometimes
replaced by AIΓ(Whitehead, 1943). Some scholars did consider the
possibility that such imitations could be post-Alexandrian, yet, was
considered more likely that these were pre-Alexandrian.^(**44**) Though,
as per Jansari, the tradition of actually minting the imitations spread
to Babylonia and Bactria after Alexander’s conquests, not before him
following important eastern trade routes (Jansari, 2018: 76).

On the basis of the findings of these Athenian ‘owls’, Bhandarkar tried
to prove the presence of Greeks in some outlying province of India and
connected their findings with the Nysa of India mentioned in classical
sources and also the Yona-s in the Aśokan edicts. Bhandarkar considered
the absence of any countermarks on some of the Athenian ‘owls’ to be an
evidence that suggested the coins as native to some outlying district of
India that might have been peopled by Yavanas or Greeks (Bhandarkar,
1921: 29). Narain also speculated that the Athenian ‘owls’ and other
coins of the Greek cities might have been brought there both by traders
and settlers.^(**45**)

In 1933, another discovery was made of a hoard of coins from Kabul
called the Chaman Hazouri Hoard or the Kabul Hoard which included many
bent-bar coins, a kind of punch marked coins from the north west of the
sub-continent. And, along these were found many Greek coins and some
local imitations of the Greek coins (Goyal, 1999: 145) i.e. the Athenian
‘owls’. Recent opinions consider the date for the striking of the
imitations to 360s BCE.^(**46**) An Iranian imitation of an Athenian owl
was among the latest of the group and based on the date of that coin of
about 380 BCE, the date of the hoard was therefore fixed around that
time. This also provided confirmation that in these regions, Greek coins
were in circulation well before the arrival of Alexander (Bopearachchi,
2000: 310) and even the imitations were minted in the south of the Hindu
Kush.

It was earlier suggested by some scholars like Narain that some of the
coins (from the Oxus Hoard) might have been struck by the Greeks settled
in Central Asian territories of the Achaemenid Empire before Alexander’s
arrival. But the earliest coins struck in Bactria including the
imitation of the Athenian owls, according to Bopea did not appear before
305 BCE (Bopearachchi, 2000: 314) during the re-conquest of the Central
Asian satrapies by Seleucos I (306-305 BCE) *i.e.* just before the
striking of proper Seleucid coinage in Bactria.**⁴⁷ **Therefore, the
Achaemenid royal coins and the coins of the Greek cities found from
Bactria-Sogdiana region were mostly imports from western regions
(Bopearachchi, 2000: 309). The reason suggested is that while the
territories of the erstwhile Achaemenid empire south of the Hindu Kush
had a well developed monetary system, the regions north of the Hindu
Kush did not start striking coins before the last decade of the 4^(th)
century BCE.^(**48**)

The fact that relatively lesser number of the low denomination coins as
oppose to the high denomination tetradrachms are found in the north of
Hindu Kush regions, this supports the suggestion that trade in these
areas was still predominately barter and coins were only used for
important commercial exchanges (Bopearachchi, 2000: 324). In contrast to
this, high amount of low denomination coins in south of the Hindu Kush
explains the strong monetized economy of the area. This also helps us to
understand the reason for such a late date for coin striking in regions
north of the Hindu Kush as oppose to the south of the Hindu Kush.

Another hoard called the Shaikhan Dehri hoard found in 2007, in the
ancient city of Puśkalāvati from ancient north-west India (current
Pakistan), also contained many local struck ‘bent bars’ and some new
type of coins. It however, also contained one Athenian ‘owl’, a
tetradrachm minted in Athens with the usual “ΑΘΕ” inscription being
off-flan (Bopearachchi, 2017: 18). The possible date for this coin is
between 510-485 BCE and thus, the Shaikhan Dehri hoard was confirmed to
be much older than the Kabul hoard.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/athens_coin_discovered_in_pushkalavati.jpg?w=800)

Athens coin (Circa 500/490-485 BCE) discovered in Pushkalavati. This
coin is the earliest known example of its type to be found so far east.
(Source – WikiMedia Commons)

So, what exactly does this numismatic evidence actually signifies? The
presence of pre-Alexandrian Greeks in India is therefore not a question
but the question is their presence before Alexander, in such a large
numbers enough for it to be called a settlement in the country. And can
we connect it to the city of Nysa mentioned by western classical
sources? While it has been argued that this suggests Greek settlements
in India, it is still, in my opinion insufficient evidence. What it does
give ample proof of is that commercial relations between India-Central
Asia (Bactria-Sogdiana) and the Greek world were strong.

The Indian side of the Hindu Kush, as already mentioned above had well
established practice of minting coins, unlike the north of the Hindu
Kush. Therefore, when the supply of the Athenian ‘owls’ decreased, with
repercussions for trade in the Persian markets, their imitations were
made by the Indian potentates (as was done at various places in the
Achaemenid Empire), with a probability of some guidance from some Greeks
in the Persian Empire or maybe they were a result of purely indigenous
attempts to replicate the designs of the original Athenian owls’ that
were circulating due to commerce in the Indian north-west and Central
Asia.

One might now ask, if it has been suggested by some studies mentioned
above that the trade in Central Asia was not enough for them to mint
these imitations; that minting proper was only started in the region
after Seleucus I and the earlier imitations are mostly examples of the
coins that reached Bactria-Sogdiana due to commerce, would that not
contradict the conclusion reached before in this post that there was a
settlement of Branchidae in Sogdiana? And why could they not mint these
imitations? This, in my opinion, as the current evidence stands, could
be because the settlement of Branchidae was a migratory one and
therefore, much less connected with the resources, the markets of rich
Asia Minor; they might not have the resources to mint such coins. But
this is only a speculation and the results reached could change with new
archaeological/numismatic finds and studies. 

## The Question of ‘Greek Descent’


The claims that these Greek settlements, either Alexandrian or
pre-Alexandrian left such an imprint on the Indian sub-continent that
some tribes believe themselves to be their descendants has been alluded
to in the start of the post. Why is that? And how is that connected to
the ‘Nysa in India’? To explain the point further – the ancient Indian
north-west, the main region with which this post is concerned, is also
the habitat of some of the peculiar tribes, with fascinating culture and
traditions. In the current times, the Kalash tribe in
Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan represents remnants of such
people. They belong to the Dardic Indo-Aryan group of people. Before
late nineteenth century, the Kalash were part of a much more widespread
zone of the Dardic Indo-Aryan indigenous culture that included the
erstwhile Kafiristan (the land of infidels for *Kafir* means an infidel)
region of Afghanistan whose people were called the Kafirs. Despite the
violent rise of Islam in the region, they had for a very long time
preserved their indigenous religion and culture. However, in 1896-7,
they were forcefully converted to Islam by Amir of Afghanistan, Abdur
Rahim Khan (Cacopardo, 2011: 53) and the region was renamed as Nuristan
(the land of light i.e. the light of Islam). The Kalash survived because
they were on the Indian side (now Pakistani side) of the Durand
Agreement of 1893 between Afghanistan and the British Colonial
Government of India.

Interestingly, there even were claims by some of these people themselves
(including the Kalash and the erstwhile Kafirs) that they were the
descendants of the Greeks. Though, they were claiming their descent not
from the tradition of Nysa but through either Alexander or his generals
or members of his entourage left in India.

### The Genetic Studies


Before moving further in analysis of these narratives, explaining the
similarities and what could be the reasons of these parallelisms and
their various aspects, it is important to declare at the outset that
such claims have been found baseless after various genetic studies done
on the topic in the twentieth century.

A genetic study done back in 2004 found that Kalash were genetically
distinct and that the Burusho and Pathan populations are genetically
close to each other and the Greek population. The study claimed that –
“the admixture estimates suggest a small Greek contribution to the
genetic pool of the Burusho and Pathan and demonstrate that these two
northern Pakistani populations share a common Indo-European gene pool
that probably predates Alexander’s invasion.”**⁴⁹**

Another genetic study done in 2007 of “the Y diversity within Greeks and
three Pakistani populations – the Burusho, Kalash and Pathan – who claim
descent from Greek soldiers,” compared Y lineages within these
populations and re-evaluated their suggested Greek origins. The study
excluded a large Greek contribution to any Pakistani population,
confirming previous studies.^(**50**) But, the study claimed strong
evidence in support of the Greek origins for a small proportion of
Pathans.

New results from more advanced genetic study in 2015 found no evidence
of any recent admixture in the Kalash. It stated that “despite the
claims that the Kalash are descendants of Alexander’s soldiers, this
wasnot supported by Y chromosomal analysis of the Kalash by this
study.” Instead, they observed that “the Kalash share a substantial
proportion of drift with a Paleolithic ancient Siberian hunter-gatherer,
who has been suggested to represent a third northern Eurasian genetic
ancestry component for present-day Europeans.”^(**51**)

The latest genetic research in 2019 by Narsimhan *et al*. found that
Kalash had the highest *ANI* *(Ancestral North Indian)* ancestry
proportion.**⁵² **Therefore, successive genetic studies unfounded the
claims of any pre or post Alexandrian or Greek descent in the Kalash
population and founded the claims of any recent substantial Greek
admixture to be baseless. However, many earlier scholars since the
nineteenth century had suggested that these tribes of the Kafirs and the
Kalash represented the Nysa of India mentioned in the western classical
sources. What were these similarities that gave them such impressions?
And, if these people are not connected to the Greeks (as confirmed by
successive genetic studies), then how can we explain these
commonalities?

### Explaining the Parallelisms


When the British encountered these tribes particularly the Kafirs, their
habits, culture, religion and their ‘European’ physical appearance
intrigued them. Fairly early on, there were speculations by these
British travelers, the writers and scholars that they could be connected
to the Nysa of India mentioned in the western classical sources. There
were some similarities with the culture of this region and some finds
that seemingly supported their connection to the Nysa of India founded
by Dionysus. The earlier claims were mostly related to the Kafirs and
not the Kalash as the Kalash tribe was by and large ignored before and
came into the focus of studies only in the 20^(th) century and even in
these later studies, any Greek connection – Alexander or not was mostly
not mentioned. The claims of any Greek connection to the Kalash are very
recent.^(**53**)

The practice of the Kafirs of keeping the dead body of the departed in a
wooden coffin without burial at the outskirts of the village (Wilber,
1962: 51) reminded the earlier scholars of the wooden coffins mentioned
by Curtius with regard to the Nysaeans. The funeral customs of the
Siah Posh tribe (the former Kafirs inhabiting the Bashgal Valley) were
documented by M. Mohun Lal who accompanied Lieutenant Burnes on his
journey. The details were based on the oral report of a Muslim
mufti who visited the tribe. –

“The funeral of the Siah Posh people is triumphantly solemnized. The
corpse is generally attended by young men, who sing, skip, dance, and
play upon drums. The deceased, unwashed is carried away upon the
shoulders of men, in a large box, as among the Muhammedeans. It is taken
upon the top of a high mountain, and put open to the sun. They sacrifice
a cow, and give a feast to the attendantsof the funeral. Then they
return home, and do not weep at all.’ After sixty days, when the body is
putrefied, and eaten by birds, the women of the family go in an assembly
upon the mountain. They pick up the bones, and after washing them in a
stream, they bring them home, sit round them, and then mourn for a short
time; after this, the men come and convey the bones, they say, “This is
the heaven for you.”^(**54**)

Again the mention of wooden coffins this early on in the nineteenth
century gave fire to the narrative that these Kafirs were descendants of
the Greeks of Nysa. A carved wooden effigy of the deceased was placed in
the cemetery amid feasting and dancing continued for two to three
days.^(**55**) The same is in the case of Kalash where they also use
wooden coffins. The importance of the wooden boxes however, is also
attested in the traditions of the native culture of the Gilgit region
which connects them to larger Dardic traditions. In the Gilgit
traditions, cremation was practiced in some areas, the ashes being
buried in wooden boxes or earthen jars (Jettmar, 2002: 21). They also
believed that witches rode on wooden boxes and were believed to devour
the souls of their neighbours, even their own sons during black masses.
*“In such secret meetings they were assisted by a henchman, feigning
reluctance, who had to slaughter the alter ego of the victim shaped as a
goat. On the other hand, the witches themselves were haunted by another
type of spiritual specialist who might occasionally succeed in saving
the endangered person otherwise destined to die after a few days”*
(Jettmar, 2002: 20).

The importance of juniper in the rituals of Kafir-Kalash tribes has been
used by some to connect them to the ‘Dionysiac’ tradition. The Kafirs
also kept goats, cattle and until recently sacrificed cows and goats to
their gods;^(**56**) this practice again suggested the possibility to
some scholars that they could be related to Dionysus because goat
sacrifice was a big part of worship of Dionysus. The goat/ibex cult
always played a big role in the religion of the Kafirs. The Kalash also
gave huge importance to the goats in their religion (Parkes, 1987: 645).
The reason is that goat husbandry was always much more prominent in the
region than that of cattle. While the Kafirs did use to sacrifice cows,
in the Kalash tradition, cattle are considered unclean and impure
animals and so the consumption of beef, cow’s milk and butter were
avoided.**⁵⁷ **Markhor (capra falconeri) – a giant wild caprid with
beautiful spiraling horns are still considered by the Kalash people to
be extremely sacred. Such is the value of these animals that
goat-markhor horns are one the most prominent motif of the Kalash ritual
iconography (Parkes, 1987: 647). Interestingly, the ritual importance of
juniper and goat – both the ibex and markhor (collectively called
*mayaro*) is well attested in the Shin traditions of Gilgit as
well.^(**58**)

Therefore, being situated in the mountainous region, environment played
a big role in increasing the importance of goats/ibex. Their
significance in the culture and art of the region can be explained by
the role that these animals play in the economy of these tribes which
consequently led to their religious importance as well.

The growth of ivy in these regions, as mentioned above, was also cited
by the western classical authors as the sign that Dionysus founded the
city of Nysa. And, growth of ivy in the region of erstwhile
Kafirs-Kalash therefore became also a point that related them to Nysa.
The prominent use of wine in the culture of these tribes contributed to
more claims by some scholars that there was a genuine connection.

However, as intriguing as it is to see similarities of these cultures
with the traditions of the Dionysiac worship, these similarities can be
easily explained as representing the indigenous religion of this region
which has its roots in the Dardic Indo-Aryan/Indo-Iranian continuum
(Cacopardo, 2011: 70). And these native bases were considered even back
in the nineteenth century by many scholars when the outcome of the
genetic studies was not known and many disagreed with the theories that
they had any Greek or recent European roots. The roots of these
traditions were found, even back then, not in the Greek traditions but
the ancient Indo-Aryan/Iranian culture. For example, Wilson^(**59**) in
his translation of the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa* had noticed the similarity in the
name of the Caumojees (Kam-Kamtoz)**⁶⁰ **of Kafiristan to the ancient
Kāmboja-s who he thought may have retreated to the mountains before the
advance of the Turk tribes.

Notwithstanding the nativity of these traditions, the art of the region
was still claimed by some to be related to the Greek traditions of
Dionysus. The predominant art of the region of not just these tribes but
also including the entire Swat valley (the earlier territory of Kamboja
and Gandhara) also has been called ‘Dionysiac’ for their prolific use of
wine and ‘Bacchalic scenes.’ But, is it really ‘Dionysiac’? As wine
consumption and the other related art is well attested in the context of
the Western classical world and medieval Iran (Filigenzi, 2019: 56),
this resulted in a tendency to see such art form in the Swat valley to
be hierarchically dependent on the western classical world.

It is a fact that wine consumption seems to have existed in Swat valley
from a long time as supported by the archaeological finds of the region.
The following excerpt from Filigenzi’s paper is helpful in this regard:

“The assemblages of the proto-historic graveyards of Swat (*c*. 1700–300
BCE) include a large number of the so called “brandy-bowls,” *i.e.*
drinking vessels characterised by hemispherical, globular or carinated
bodies on a high foot. Although no traces of substances were detected,
their connection to the ceremonial practice of libation is nonetheless
manifest. Some sort of intoxicating liquid was indeed consumed in
proto-historic Swat, probably beyond the funerary context as
well.”^(**61**)

Then there is also the evidence of the archaeological grains including
grapevine from the settlements in the region (Filigenzi, 2019: 60).
Archaeo-botanists estimate that in the Early Neolithic times, the
ancient north west of the Indian sub-continent must have played an
important role in the domestication of the wild grapevine. After all,
wild grapevine is still found in the region (Filigenzi, 2019: 60).
Filigenzi mentions that palaeo-botanical evidence of cultivated grapes
is recorded in the Indian subcontinent from the third millennium BCE
onwards. There also have been found many stone tanks, interestingly near
rock shelters (that cover a wide period from the Bronze age to even
10^(th)-12^(th) century).**⁶² **The shelters have been connected with
transhumant pastoralists as Filigenzi calls them like those of the
Dardic culture. The stone tanks are of both the kinds- winepresses and
the vats. Hence, there is a sound reasoning behind the statement of
Filigenzi when she states that consumption of wine in Swat was a
component of the normal ambit of economic and cultural life, therefore
it would be much better to use a neutral phrase of ‘revelry scenes’ to
describe such art from Swat instead of ‘Dionysiac’.^(**63**)

The connection of wine and gods of Kafirs of Hindu Kush is amply
explained by Filigenzi:

“..an important cult place in honour of Indr, also used for meetings of
important men, was the Indr-ta in Wama, in Southern Nuristan. Indr is
the Kafir version of the Vedic Indra. Like the latter, he is the ruler
of the atmosphere and atmospheric phenomena, and as such is connected in
Kafiristan with rainbows and earthquakes (Jettmar 1986, 64). As
originally connected to ritual consumption of.., Indr is also the god of
wine and owns vineyards (Jettmar 1986; Chandra 1998, 151). In
particular, the Indrakun garden, an orchard located high above the Pech
River, where fruit trees grow embraced by wild vines, traces its origin
back to Indr, who, according to the local folklore, carved the vats into
the boulders himself and visits the garden each summer.” (Filigenzi,
2019: 74-75).

The grape harvest was then celebrated with a festival in honour of Indr
in Indra-ta. The celebration involved ample use of wine, goat sacrifice,
dancing and singing and merriment. Another excerpt from Filigenzi’s
paper explains the festivities:

“On this occasion, a large cult image of Indr was taken from his temple
(Indr-ama) out into the village and placed in the centre of the Indr-ta,
on a boulder that served as a base, next to which was a sacred tree
(already dead at the time of Edelberg’s visit in 1948). Two long rows of
stones were used as sitting places for high-ranking men who used to
drink much wine stored in the Indr-ama. Between the rows of stones there
was a flat dancing ground and, in the vicinity, four stone wine vats
(watkuna). The effigy of Indr was honoured by pouring wine on it and by
sacrificing to it several he-goats and one or two oxen, whose blood was
thrown on the sacrificial fire while ‘priests’ sung hymns.”

Interestingly, a temple of Dionysus on the mountain of Nysa (a mountain
here; not a city) has also been described by Appolonius of Tyana who
visited India in 1^(st) century CE. The festivities described have close
similarities with the Indrakun tradition. Though, the text has been
considered unreliable, yet Filigenzi considers this an evidence of
persistence of the connection that was made between the ‘god of wine’
and Dionysus. (Filigenzi, 2019: 75).

Another intriguing fact that Filigenzi mentions testifies to the
presence of concept of *‘god of wine’* in the Gandhar region when
Alexander was in India.

“Falk (2009, 65) recalled the Gandharan god Soroadeios (a high ranking
yakṣa?) mentioned by Chares of Mitylene, a Greek historiographer who
followed Alexander in his military expedition into Asia. Of Chares’
Stories about Alexander (Peri Alexandron historiai), only a few
fragments survive in citations and excerpts. From the relevant passage,
quoted by Athenaios of Naukratis (Deipnosophistai 1.48.64), we know that
Chares translated the name Soroadeios (i.e. the Greek phonetic version
of an unknown Indian original) as oinopoios, ‘wine maker.'”^(**64**)

The connection of Indr of the Kafir religion with the Vedic Indra was
very obvious but even the visiting god of the Kalash religion in the
sacred time of Chaumos (from Sanskrit meaning four months) who is called
Balimain (Cacopardo, 2011: 74) has emphatic connections with Vedic
Indra. Balima (*bal’ima*) as per scholar Caco would be an epithet
meaning ‘powerful’ borrowed from Kati, while In would stand for Indra,
so the Balimain would mean ‘powerful Indr.’ In fact the Kalasha
themselves address Balimain as Indr in songs and invocations.^(**65**)

There is no doubt that clear similarities exist between these native
religious beliefs of the ancient Indian north-west and the Dionysus
traditions. For example, visit of Balimain is brief because he departs
at the end of Chaumos, while the god of wine Dionysus was believed to
stay for the winter on earth to leave only in spring (Cacopardo, 2011:
74)…. Balima-In, like Dionysos, is a hermaphrodite: he is represented as
male on the right side and female on the left side.^(**66**) It’s
fascinating to note that these traits of Balima-In and Dionysus are also
well known and much prominent part of god Śiva. Dionysus and Śiva also
share more obvious similarities with both of them being the lords of
animals. The bull is also important part of traditions of Śiva and is
connected to Dionysus at the same time; the tradition of being related
to intoxicating drinks is also common to both. Interestingly, there is
also an example of carved Śiva from the Yungang Grottoes in China,
curiously depicted holding grapes thus suggesting a Sogdian connection
of Śiva with grapes (and possibly wine?). At this point, readers may
remember that Herodotus had already specifically related, as mentioned
above, the similarities in the habits of Bactrians and ancient the
north-west Indians (ancient Kamboja and Gandhāra). So, there is a trail
of similarities that can be traced between these regions and their
religious beliefs from India to Central Asia (like the importance of
goat/ibex, wine, bull, etc) right from the ancient times.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/shiva-ji-grapes.jpg?w=959)

A carved depiction of god Śiva holding grapes from the Yungang Grottoes
in Shanxi, China (5th century CE).
([Source](http://www.art-and-archaeology.com/china/datong/yg10.html))
([WikiMedia Commons
Link](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Datong_158.jpg))

The connection of these gods with wine is a fascinating point for
research. These peculiar similarities of the Kafir-Kalash culture with
the European culture, as per Cacopardo might suggest some very ancient
connection between them including the festival cycles, the use of
juniper, the music etc. but he admits that these are only random
parallels at best and a detailed study of European folk traditions would
be needed to draw some conclusions.^(**67**)

While the tradition of Dionysus conquering India on his way to the Greek
shores has been mentioned before, there is also another very intriguing
and lesser known tradition that Cacopardo has shed light on. Euripides
is the first to mention that Dionysos was actually born in India and had
travelled to Greece after a childhood spent in Nysa or on Mount
Meros.^(**68**) He cites on the authority of Grossato that based on the
available archaeological and ethnobotanical evidence, there is a strong
possibility of the tradition of Dionysos and his lesser known legend of
Indian origin to actually signifying the route along which the vine and
viticulture expanded west from Central Asia, especially because this
expansion coincides pretty well with the route followed by the god
(Cacopardo, 2011: 76).

To explain the point regarding the ‘Wine-Route’, it would be better to
quote an excerpt from Cacopardo’s paper:

“At the present state of research it seems that the cultivation of the
vine first developed south of the Caucasus where the wild sub-species of
the vitis vinifera Linnei, the vine at the origin of 99% of the wine
produced today, still prospers. This vine, however, is found as far east
as Tajikistan, i.e. just north of the Hindu Kush. The itinerary that was
later to become the famed Silk-route, Grossato (Ib.) further suggests,
may earlier have been the Wine-route. If we consider that an
autochthonous vine – vitis nuristanica Vassilcz – is found in Nuristan
(Neubauer 1974; Edelberg & Jones 1979: 35) and that the southern slopes
of the chain would have been just as well (if not better) fit for the
production of grapes (cf. Olmo 2000), it appears that our area may be,
if not the very first, at least one of the first wine-producing zones in
Eurasia; that Nysa was in the Paropamisos, i.e. the Hindu Kush, is on
the other hand part of the myth. The circumstance that the goat is one
of the two animals more closely associated with Dionysos could be taken
as a further indication in this direction: the Hindu Kush is apparently
the home of the breed of wild goat which is considered to be the
progenitor of all domestic goats (Snoy 1959: 528). In this context, I
believe, the similarities between Balimain and Dionysos could be
explained by their connection with wine. Rather than of an influence
reaching the Hindu Kush from Greece, no matter when, I believe we should
think in this case of the exact opposite, i.e. an Asian influence
reaching Greece. The route followed by Dionysos would in this case refer
to the itinerary along which viticulture spread west. This does not
imply of course that the figure of Dionysos should be seen as a direct
development of that of Balimain. It may be, rather, that both divine
figures may stem from a remote religious humus common to Greece and the
Indian world, that may be also at the roots of Śivaism (Cacopardo, 2011:
77).”

Regarding the art from these regions of ancient Kamboja and Gandhāra and
their depiction of goat sacrifices,^(**69**) they also seem to have a
close connection with the practices of the Kafirs-Kalash tribes of the
Hindu Kush.

Two fascinating sculptures have been found (Filigenzi, 2019: 76) from
the region which curiously have the representation of both these
important aspects that we have considered – wine and goat sacrifice. One
is of a devī holding a beaker and a severed head of a goat and another
one (a small stele) probably of a male deity, also depicted with similar
traits – a goblet and a severed head of a goat!

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/merged-deva-and-devi-and-goat.jpg?w=396)

First Image: A god holding a goblet and the severed head of a goat, from
Bīr-koṭ-ghwaṇḍai. Second Image: A goat-headed goddess holding a beaker
and the severed head of a goat. (Source – Filigenzi, 2019)

The Gandharan art which has been described as ‘Dionysiac’ surely
borrowed and learnt from the western attributes of art, particularly
dominant was the Greek element due to the long (almost two centuries)
of Greek stronghold in the region, but the traditions that were
portrayed in that art were purely local.

The Greek tradition according to which Dionysus was born out of the
thigh (Meros in Greek) of Zeus and the fact that there were some
mountains sacred to Kalash, one of them being Tirich Mir was considered
by some as another point which connected these far away people to each
other through kinship. But, these mountains are part of the native
mythology for the people of these valleys. They are considered to be the
favored seats of the fairies, as mentioned by Witzel in his study of the
Kalash religion, especially the impressive, 7708 m high pyramid of the
Kailāsa-like Tirich Mir in the North of Chitral (\~ Meru KaṭhB, Meros
Arrian, Anabasis 1.6; Sumeru, Pāli Sineru; cf. \*devameru, Shina díamer
= Nanga Parbat).^(**70**) Witzel is also of the opinion that the Hindu
Kush and Vedic mythology, ritual, and festivals, in spite of many layers
of developments and mutual influences, tend to explain each other very
effectively. And he also suggests that the Kalash religion has many
aspects of the Ṛgvedic religion. In fact, the practice of using wooden
coffins and exposing the interned dead bodies to the sun seems to be
much more influenced by the ancient Iranian traditions than the Greek.

### History of the Claims of ‘Greek Descent’


When it is confirmed that the Kafir-Kalash traditions and culture have
their ancient independent roots in the native Dardic,
Indo-Aryan/Indo-Iranian culture of the north-west of the Indian
sub-continent, it is even more intriguing to think why these tribes
themselves have made claims of being descendants of either Alexander
himself or his generals and soldiers that he left behind in India.

Chronologically, the first time we hear of the claim by a people from
the East of being Alexander’s descendants is in the accounts of the
famous Venetian traveler – Marco Polo. Scholar Cacopardo informs us that
this claim was made by the Shahs of Badakhshan who considered themselves
direct descendants from Alexander’s marriage with the daughter of
Darius, and for that reason all the kings of that line called themselves
Zulkarnein, in memory of their great ancestor (Cacopardo, 2011: 48).
Babur in his work Babur Nama also confirms the claim and says that these
rulers descended from Iskander Filkus,^(**71**) Filkus/Filikus being the
Oriental corruption of the name Philip, and the father of Alexander.
However, this royal dynasty of Badakhshan was later replaced at the end
of the 16^(th) century by an Uzbek dynasty who used the title of Mir,
instead of Shah. The members of this family when spread out after the
fall of their rule, they took with them the claim of being Alexander’s
descendants.

Mirza Haidar Dughlat (1895: 107), the author of Tarikh-i-Rashidi, who
was a relative and contemporary of Babur also states the connection with
Sikander Zulkarnain (Cacopardo, 2011: 49). The British authors of the
nineteenth century also continued to make these claims of Greek
ancestry. Again similar claims were made by the rulers form nearby
principalities like the ruler of Darwaz and the ruler of Talikhan
(Cacopardo, 2011: 49). This continued until it reached a point when all
the princes of upper Oxus were claiming descent from Alexander.
Cacopardo is of the opinion that the source of all these claims was
ultimately one and the same – the royal dynasty of Badakhshan.^(**72**)

South of the Hindu Kush, the claims of Greek ancestry were made in the
twentieth century by Mir of Nager. As there was no trace of such claims
in the oral traditions of the place, caco suggests that it could have
been made to seek favours from the British (Cacopardo, 2011: 49).
Similar lack of coherence was seen in the case of claims from Skardu
which seems to have arisen from the tradition that Skardu as a town was
established by Alexander and was called Iskanderia by the natives. The
tradition of the town being established by Alexander was later
transformed to ancestral claims (Cacopardo, 2011: 50).

Another connection to Alexander is found in *Tarikh-i-Hunza*, an early
19th century work by Muhammad Riza Beg, where a Shah Rais, ruler of
Hunza, Nager and Gilgit is associated with Alexander the Great and is
said to have been nominated as a governor of Gilgit by him. This claim
very interestingly is also traced in the end by Cacopardo to the royal
dynasty of Badakhshan to whom this Shah Rais was actually related. As
mentioned above, these dethroned royals and their relatives found their
way south of the Hindu Kush after the usurpation of their throne in
Badakhshan by the Uzbeks (Cacopardo, 2011: 50). Again, like a fountain
head, the same source can be found in the claims by the last ruling
dynasty of Chitral, the Kator lineage.^(**73**)

As most of these claims are now found related to the dethroned
Badakhshan royal family, another independent source for the Greek
ancestry claim is traced from the regions of Swat and Bajour whose
princes, who styled themselves Sultani, claimed descent from a daughter
of Alexander (Cacopardo, 2011: 51). The mention of this is apparently
found in *Ain-i-Akbari* of Abul Fazl. These princes were later dethroned
by Yusufzai Pathans. A late eighteenth century account also states
about a village in the Bajaur region – *“…a small village called Kanbat,
in which a few hundred families of the former race – the Arab – dwell,
who are styled Iskandarì.”*^(**74**)

The root of all these claims going back to the Marco Polo account has to
be seen in the context of the religion of Islam. To explain this,
Cacopardo quotes a very interesting extract from Olaf Caroe which gives
a context to these oral traditions:

“almost certainly have their origin in the body of western classical
learning translated into Arabic in the days of the Abbasids of Baghdad,
and are part of the Yunani or Greek lore which so largely influenced
Islamic literae humaniores. It was thus that the great deeds of Sikandar
Zul-qarnain – Alexander of the Two Horns – became a part of the
folk-lore of the Muslim world.”

This clearly provides a reason for the title Zul-qarnain used by the
major source for the Greek ancestry claims – the royal Badakhshan family
because Zul-qarnain is an Arabic epithet used for Alexander by the
*Qurán*. Therefore, the ultimate connection of these claims is found in
the Islamic traditions and folklores.

Coming particularly to the claims by the erstwhile Kafirs, Cacopardo
states that Mountstuart Elphinstone, the first British envoy to the King
of Kabul in 1809, when heard about these people (who were still
polytheistic), he considered the possibility of them being the same
people mentioned in *Ain-i-Akbari*, who traced their descent from
Alexander. He sent an envoy there to confirm his hunch, which he himself
later found baseless in his book.**⁷⁵** But, the topic was intriguing
enough to have captured the imagination of Europeans about some long
lost tribe from Europe in such distant lands. As earlier mentioned, even
in the nineteenth century, various scholars found the evidence lacking
and stated their opinions clearly against such possibility. But, the
kinship theory continued to be suggested by many authors. And the
speculation that these people could even be the descendents of the
Nyseans also found some traction at the time.

In fact, the Kafirs themselves seem to have taken on this idea, being
enamoured by this possibility as is shown in one instance where a
delegation of Kafirs presented themselves in front of the British in a
military camp near Jalalabad in 1839 to Sir William Macnaghten and
claimed relationship with the fair skinned British (Wilber, 1962: 51).
Cacopardo suggests that they most likely were influenced to assume such
connection by their common traits of a fairer complexion, of drinking
wine, and of not being Muslims (Cacopardo, 2011: 54). But he also points
out that they already might have been prone to this belief due to their
Islamic neighbours who were the first to find them similar to the
Europeans.^(**76**) In fact, earlier whenever investigations were done
in order to find their origins, it was mostly believed by the Kafirs
themselves that they were actually of Arabic descent from the Quraish
tribe, an obvious fictitious claim found throughout the Hindu
Kush-Karakoram which as scholar caco explains has a fascinating reason
behind it (Cacopardo, 2011: 56):

***“The true meaning of the legend is in fact a statement of ancient
Kafir ancestry because the supposed connection is through Abu Jahel, a
member of the Quraish tribe who was an arch-enemy of Islam”⁷⁷***

The fact that the oral traditions of the Nuristani people made no
mention of any Greek ancestry also strengthens the view that the claim
could very well have been a later assumption. Another factor that might
have influenced such later claims against the established oral tradition
among Nuristanis was the need of survival. By the end of the 19^(th)
century, they had got the wind of an impending raid on them by a large
force of the Pathans and they demanded protection from it by sending a
delegation to Ghulam Haider, the general who later was responsible for
converting the region. The delegation, caco relates had stated that
their tribe is of European descent, their ancestors having been brought
from Europe into Kafiristan by Alexander the Great. This was clearly an
attempt at the time to protect their tribe by connecting them to much
more powerful Europeans.

Many Europeans by the last decade of the 19^(th) century had already
visited the Kafirs and the constant prodding to their origins and
possibilities suggested by these visits might have made the Kafirs aware
of the theories of their European origin amongst these foreigners.
Cacopardo therefore states that these theories, coupled with the
increasing political stature of the British and the already prevalent
Islamic folklore; all of it might very well have induced the Kafirs to
use “ the Alexandrian legend because they thought it could have been
expedient, in that perilous circumstance, to present themselves as
related to the powerful lords of the Indian empire.”^(**78**)

There is one more detail that suggests a relatively recent date for
these European/Greek kinship claims. Taimur, the invader who actually
passed through the region in 1398 CE, made sure to boast that he had
reached and conquered a people who had not been conquered by anyone
before, not even Alexander! (Cacopardo, 2011: 56) This statement of
Taimur is interestingly corroborated by the route which Alexander took
in his campaign. On the authority of various scholars like Stein and
Caroe, Cacopardo has mentioned that Alexander never actually advanced
into mountains further north of Bajaur and Swat.^(**79**) And therefore,
could not have encountered these particular tribes. However, this
culture was surely much more widespread in the region in ancient times
and he might have encountered some other tribe who were also natives of
the region and practitioners of the very same Dardic,
Indo-Aryan/Indo-Iranian religion.

In their oral tradition, Kalash refer to a vague memory of a migration
from the south west under a king called Shalak Shah who came from Tsyam
(Cacopardo, 2011: 58). For the historicity of this Tsyam connection,
Cacopardo is of the opinion that this land called Tsyam or Sham could
most likely refer to northern Chitral and therefore the legend might be
related to an ancient expulsion of a particular Kalash group from
Northern Chitral due to an expansion of the neighbouring Khowar
speakers. (Cacopardo, 2011: 61).They themselves believed that Kalash had
earlier held sway over Chitral and were eventually defeated by the Rais
Mehtars. It seems certain that earlier Kalash were present in a larger
area and were gradually either exterminated or assimilated and that the
movements occurred in wake of the rise of Islam in the region.

Cacopardo informs that many researchers studying the Alexander
connection of the Kalash tribe were mostly informed by one renowned
informant who told a story related to one ‘Sikander Mukada’ with golden
horn, clearly suggesting borrowing from the local widespread Islamic
folklore. This informant then could be the sources of all the sudden
outbursts of the Alexander ancestry claim that was earlier restricted to
the Kafirs (Nuristanis) because the Kalash were relatively understudied,
as mentioned before.

It is important to note at this point that even in the oral traditions
of the Kalash tribe, there is no unanimity regarding their origin. The
Tsyam, as an original homeland, is mentioned only in Bumburet and Rumbur
regions (Cacopardo, 2011: 62) and even in these regions, the knowledge
of Tsyam was not general. To illustrate, one respected elder as per
Cacopardo had no knowledge of any ancient migration and believed that
they were the real inhabitants (*bhumk’i* = of the same soil) of that
valley.”^(**80**)

Even the linguistics have confirmed that the languages of these regions
were rooted in the Indo-Aryan/Indo-Iranian group and keeping this in
mind, any similarities between Kalashamon and Greek would be explained
as deriving from the ancient vertical connection that passes through
Sanskrit, and not from a horizontal one due to more recent contacts or
migrations (Cacopardo, 2011: 59). As there is much strong relation
between the languages of Kalash and Khowar and on these linguistic
grounds, it could be that these people have been in Chitral from second
millennium BCE (Cacopardo, 2011: 66), again negating any scope for the
Greek ancestry claims.

“…it is rather to be seen as the last living example of a cultural and
religious complex that was formerly spread throughout the Hindu
Kush/Karakorum chain; reaching as far as the borders of Ladakh in the
East. (Cacopardo, 2011: 70) and extending to the footholds of the
mountains in the South, and to the northern slopes of the main ridge in
the North.”^(**81**)

There even exist similarity and connection in the social system of the
Kalash and the general ancient Indian social practises. In the first
place the fundamental exogamic rule governing the formation of lineages,
reminds closely of the Indian sapinda system (Cacopardo, 2011: 72).
There even was a class of serfs and artisans who were deemed impure in
their culture and with whom commensality was not allowed. Thus, there is
ample evidence that confirms the Kafir-Kalash people as indigenous to
the region with some archaic European connection that certainly cannot
be due to either Alexander or any of his soldiers left behind in the
military garrisons.

## Alexander & his Ambitions of Divinity


Keeping these conclusions in mind, it is fascinating to think that the
‘Nysa in India’ found such exhilarating appeal in the western classical
culture. Why was that? Why did Alexander on some mere similarities
believe this Dionysus connection with such ease? Why was he trying to
provide credence to an existing tradition? Was it for his benefit? If
yes, then what did he hope to achieve by doing that and did he actually
achieve his goals? In this last section of the post, we again come to
the same sources that started these claims of a city of Nysa,
established by Dionysus in India and we would try to understand
Alexander’s motives.

For this we would have to understand what Alexander’s lineage was. He
was considered to be a descendant of Heracles through his father. He was
a member of the Argead royal house of Macedon, founded by Caranus, was
descended from the Temenids of Argos themselves descended from Heracles
(Diod. 17.4.1) (Leitch, 2018: 110). And through his mother, he was
considered a descendant of Achilles. His origins played an important
role in many of his decisions later in his campaigns. When we understand
the importance of Heracles and the related traditions, we would
understand why outdoing Dionysus by surpassing his conquests became so
important for Alexander, particularly later in the Indian campaign. To
analyze his motivation, his goals and his beliefs, not just in the
divine legends but ultimately in his own divinity, the following
incidents and events help us a lot. And then only we can comprehend the
importance of the legend of Nysa in India for him. In this regard,
Alexander’s efficient use of what we might call kinship diplomacy would
be a good place to start.

From the accounts of Diodorus (Diod. 17.4.1) and Justin (Justin 11.3.1),
it is clear that Alexander used kinship diplomacy as early as in case of
the Thessalian League^(**82**) and this was before the start of his
campaign in Asia. One of the reasons was to make his kingship “more
palatable” and to increase his power in the Hellenistic world (Leitch,
2018: 110). Another example is from Troy – *“Alexander employed kinship
diplomacy with the Trojans by using a connection with them through
Andromache, from whom he was descended through his mother.”*^(**83**)

There is no doubt that Alexander was an exceptional leader to his army
and understood the importance of morale of the forces. This can be seen
when Alexander offered a sacrifice to, Priam, the king of Troy during
the Trojan War (Leitch, 2018: 111). Historians believe that Alexander
did this in order to appease Priam so as not to jeopardize the
Macedonian campaign and there is also the possibility that it was done
to quell the fears of his men.^(**84**) In the subsequent paragraphs of
the post, we will see how Alexander tried to use the legend of Nysa in
India as a morale boost for his army.

In fact, according to Curtius, as early as the battle of Issus where
Alexander would defeat Darius for the first time, he encouraged his men
by promising them that they would ‘one day traverse the bounds set by
Hercules and Liber (Dionysus) to subdue not only the Persians but all
the races of the earth.’ (Stoneman, 2019: 84). The difference between
the manner in which Alexander treated the two ancient cities of Soli and
Mallus, in Cilicia near Issus is also helpful to understand his mindset.
Soli was fined for supporting the Persian cause while in the case of
Mallus, he remitted the tribute which the city paid to Darius because as
per Arrian – *“Mallus was a colony of Argos and he himself claimed to be
descended from the Argive Heracleidae”*,**⁸⁵ **therefore Mallus was
given the advantage of being Heraclid origin.

Similar use of kinship with the gods reduces in number when Alexander
entered the non-Greek world. Yes there were some important incidents in
Tyre and Egypt where the gods Melkart and Ammon were respectively
identified with Herakles and Zeus by the Greeks (Leitch, 2018: 111) but
kinship diplomacy was very limited. Another example is of his Persian
campaign where despite the believed Persian connection due to Perseus, a
descendant of Herakles, the kinship diplomacy was not employed. As these
other ancient civilizations worshipped their own gods, the use of
kinship diplomacy despite the connections believed by the Greeks would
not have been fruitful (Leitch, 2018: 111-112).

Then we see a major shift in his decision of the dismissal of the troops
of the League of Corinth. *“By dismissing these troops, Alexander
acknowledged that he had accomplished what he set out to do, at least in
the eyes of the League of Corinth, and anything from here on out was
simply unnecessary. Alexander was doing this for himself now and that’s
why kinship myth makes reappearance in this campaign and is different
from before.”***⁸⁶ **From now on, he was on the path to achieve his
personal goals of world conquest and not strategic political gains.

The episode involving the Gordian Knot even back in 333 BCE clearly
showed that he knew how to use legends for his own ends and the episode
had added much to his personal mystique since the gods, it seemed, were
ordaining him as the conqueror of Asia (Gilley & Worthington, 2010:
194).

The incident in Egypt is a good example where we clearly see a precedent
for the germination of Alexander’s ambitions for divinity. While at
Siwah in Egypt, Alexander visited the oracular site of Zeus Ammon.
There, he was met by the priest, “but he misinterpreted (perhaps
intentionally) the priest’s greeting *paidion* (‘o boy’) for *pai
dios* (‘o son of Zeus’). Although much of the visit is a mystery, since
Alexander met the priest and heard the god’s responses to his questions
in private, the sources reveal a change in Alexander for he now openly
called himself the son of Zeus… Once again, the king manipulated a
situation for his own ends.”^(**87**) This visit to Siwah itself has to
be seen in the light of the possibility that it was an attempt to
emulate Perseus and Heracles. (Gilley & Worthington, 2010: 195).

Later, an incident with the philosopher Anaxarchus might have even given
him the idea that Alexander himself should be a god like Herakles. In
328 BCE, Arrian narrates that the philosopher made a speech proposing
that ‘it would be far more just to reckon Alexander a god than Dionysus
and Heracles, not so much because of the magnitude of Alexander’s
achievements, but also because Dionysus was a Theban, and had no
connection with Macedon, and Heracles an Argive, also unconnected with
Macedon, except for Alexander’s family, for he was descended from
Heracles’. Callisthenes responded to it by his own argument that ‘even
Heracles did not receive divine honours from the Greeks in his own
lifetime, nor even after his death till the god of Delphi gave his
sanction to honouring him as a god’. In short, Alexander should wait
until he was dead if he wanted to be a god (Stoneman, 2019: 84). As
Heracles had an intimate connection to the Macedonian royal house, his
legends had deep imprint on Alexander. The exceptional achievements of
the hero who had become god provided him with a model. Already Philip
had claimed land conquered by Heracles.^(**88**)

***But, Alexander was now attempting to surpass his divine ancestor. The
motive of stating these incidents is that Alexander had now started to
seriously consider and believe in his own divinity.***

His first attempt to actually put his belief in practice came with an
incident in Bactria in 327 BCE, before his march on India. Here, he
attempted to introduce the Asian practice of *proskynesis* at his court
in which an individual either prostrated himself before the king or
bowed and blew the king a kiss but the move backfired. For the Greeks
however, the gesture was blasphemous since it appeared to be an act of
prostration to the gods, and even the posture was not acceptable as
noted by some scholars. We wouldn’t be wrong to assume that Alexander
definitely would have known the risk he was taking by such decision. He
must have known how his men would critically react to such a religiously
charged custom. Yet, he took the risk. The result was on the expected
lines. The attempt was a failure in the end, because his court
historian, Callisthenes, *“refused to participate, and the other men
followed suit”* (Gilley & Worthington, 2010: 195).

We can see how deeds of Herakles and surpassing them would have then
become important for Alexander. Even though, Alexander himself might
have believed in his divinity but the fellow Greeks and Macedonians were
not going to so easily. We have to understand that Alexander’s campaigns
of 327 BCE at Bactra, and then in India (327-325 BCE) were not a
military necessity: no Indian ruler at that time threatened his
conquests of either Iran or Central Asia (Olbrycht, 2010: 360). Keeping
these events in mind, again we can see ambitions of something grander.
Alexander, a king was in the need of something more persuasive for him
to become a god. Could India provide him with an opportunity to surpass
Heracles and Dionysus? It could and it did. That’s why for Alexander,
campaign in India has to be seen in the context of not just a campaign
of a world conqueror but a campaign in which if he, a king emerged
victorious, a god would be born.

Not only the legends of Dionysus, which have been the main concern of
the post but legends of Heracles and Alexander’s attempt in going ahead
than the god himself by conquering India came into play when as per
Curtius, claims of being descendants of the Hercules’(Heracles’) army
were made by the tribe of Sibi of India. Diodorus also mentions on the
same lines when he relates this story *vis-à-vis* India – *“It is said
that Heracles of old thought to lay siege to this ‘rock’ (Rock Aornos)
but refrained because of the occurrence of certain sharp earthquake
shocks and other divine signs, and this made Alexander even more eager
to capture the stronghold when he heard it, and so to rival the god’s
reputation”* (Diod. 17.85.2).”^(**89**) This Aornos was convincingly
identified by Aurel Stein with Pir-Sar (Stoneman, 2019: 86). In this
story, we again notice the consistent theme of Alexander and his
ambition to ‘rival’ the gods.

However, it is fascinating to note that unlike Dionysus no previous
classical writer mentions exploits of Heracles east of the Caucasus
before Alexander’s campaign in India. To provide a solution for this
problem, there was a deliberate attempt on part of Alexander to identify
the Hindu Kush as the Caucasus (the Indian Caucasus) and thus this
assisted the extension of his adventures to this region.^(**90**) Arrian
also mentions how Macedonians transferred the name of Mount Kaukasos
from Pontos to the eastern parts of the world and the land of the
Paropamisadai adjacent to India (for they called Mount Paropamisos,
Kaukasos), to enhance the glory of Alexander as if he had passed over
Kaukasos. And again, he says that when the Macedonians saw in India
itself oxen marked with a brand in the form of a club, they took this as
a proof that Herakles had gone as far as the Indians.^(**91**)

Stoneman is of the opinion that the conquest of Aornos seemed to be the
point at which the myth of Heracles began to infiltrate the myth of
Alexander in a significant way (Stoneman, 2019: 86). But, many ancient
writers like Eratosthenes, Strabo, Arrian doubted the authenticity of
these claims and noted that these legends were mere fabrications by
Alexander’s flatterers and were boasted only on magnify Alexander’s
achievements (Stoneman, 2019: 86).

Strabo says, “That these are fabrications of the flatterers of Alexander
is clear, especially because the historians do not agree with one
another, with some speaking about but others simply not recording them”
(Strabo 15.1.9).”^(**92**)

As the lineage of the Macedonian Royal House was connected to Heracles,
it is easier for us to understand why Alexander would have wanted to
surpass him and why was he eager to see any signs of Heracles in India.
But why was he hoping to see signs of Dionysus as well? Even though
Dionysus was not considered an ancestor of the Macedonian royal house in
earlier times, he had been worshipped there by the fourth century BCE
(Stoneman, 2019: 91) and Nysa was the place where Dionysus was
considered to have been born or reared. According to Greek traditions,
Nysa was traditionally localized in Arabia, however, this Nysa had
already been traditionally situated in multiple places like in Euboea,
Thrace, Lydia and Ethiopia as well.**⁹³ **But after Darius’ victory over
India, the knowledge and tales regarding the mysterious land had already
started to take shape in the classical Greek world. It was at this time
in a play by Euripides, a fifth century BCE author and a tragedian of
classical Athens, that Dionysus was made a conqueror of all of Asia
including Bactria and India. It wouldn’t be wrong to assume that this
play must have been known to Alexander. (Stoneman, 2019: 93). Euripides’
plays “*The Bacchae* and *The Cyclops* could have influenced Alexander
by allowing for Dionysus to have potentially traveled to India and for
Alexander being able to claim descent from Dionysus
respectively.”^(**94**) The Macedonian king was therefore predisposed to
find signs of Dionysus’ presence in India along with Heracles.

However, there is another intriguing reason as to why Alexander might
have wanted to identify with Dionysus. Stoneman tries to reason an
interesting possibility – Dionysus was a god who had a mortal mother,
though his father was Zeus. Like Heracles, Stoneman continues, he was a
latecomer to Olympus, but unlike Heracles he was a ‘true god’, because
his mother Semele was also translated to Olympus (Stoneman, 2019: 91).
So, Alexander probably wanted to surpass the deeds of a ‘true god’ in
his campaign in India. And that’s why Dionysus and his legends related
to Nysa in India became much more valuable for Alexander.

It is clearly not that the case that Alexander was creating every legend
from the scratch. After all, there were stark similarities between the
gods of the local inhabitants and their religious practices with what
Alexander and his army encountered in India. But, as we analyzed in
previous sections, these were possibly related to even more
ancient/archaic Neolithic connections. Another point to remember is that
this identification with the Greek gods was neither limited to India. In
fact, as we read before, this was the same in the case of Ammon of
Egypt, Melkart of Tyre and also interestingly, in another example of the
‘Gallic Heracles’ Ogmius, who was represented as a very old man who,
besides his club, bow and lion-skin, has a chain bored through his
tongue by which he leads his followers.**⁹⁵ **Clearly, the similarities
of a Greek and a foreign god need not be that close for Greeks to
identify them (Stoneman, 2019: 87) as the extensions of their
divinities. The Greeks’, Bevan says,’ *‘always experienced a keen joy of
recognition, when they could connect foreign things with the figures of
their own legends..”* **⁹⁶ **Though, it can also very well be argued
that this was not peculiar to the Greeks but was part of the general
traits of ancient polytheistic religions and cultures across the world.

Therefore, Alexander’s predisposition to find imprints of Dionysus and
to some extent Heracles in India led him and his army to ascribe
whatever similarities they could find in the local religious practices
and identify them as extensions of the Greek gods. This is the reason
that when they found mountains where vines and ivy grew, they connected
it to a sign of Greek divinity. The Macedonians and Greeks do not seem
to have understood that it was simply a question of altitude whether
such plants grew in ‘India’, but still took it as a sign of the god’s
presence.**⁹⁷ **Arrian noted that the Indians wore dappled clothing like
Bacchants and banged drums and cymbals a lot (Stoneman, 2019: 94). The
wine-cult also seemed to have been prevalent. These
‘Dionysiac’/‘Bacchalic’ style of the festivities of the inhabitants of
the ancient Kamboja and Gandh āra must have solidified this belief of
the Greeks and the Macedonians. We have to understand that Alexander and
his companions were not seeking to explain phenomena of Indian religion,
but to find evidence for Dionysus in this unfamiliar land (Stoneman,
2019: 97).

Hence, it’s not that unique that Greeks saw their divinities in the
foreign ones but what is rather unique is the precision with which this
was put to use by Alexander for his ‘public relations’. Arrian says
about Alexander with regard to the legend of Dionysus and Nysa in India
– “since he had himself reached the place to which that deity had come,
and meant to penetrate farther than he; for the Macedonians, he thought,
would not refuse to share his toils if he advanced with an ambition to
rival the exploits of Dionysos.” (M’Crindle, 1896: 81). Alexander
perceived that by sparing the citizens he had not so much served their
interests as those of his own army.^(**98**)

Readers should also notice how Alexander was being presented in these
stories. It was clearly not anymore about god Dionysus but equally or
rather more importantly about Alexander himself. Arrian relates in what
posture and condition the deputies from Nysa in India found Alexander:
“the deputies, it is said, on entering the Alexander’s tent found him
sitting in his armour, covered with dust from his journey, wearing his
helmet, grasping his spear. They fell to the ground in amazement at the
sight and remained for a long time silent. ” (M’Crindle, 1896: 80).

Justin also states: “…When he had reached the city of Nysa, and found
that the inhabitants offered no resistance, he ordered their lives to be
spared, from a sentiment of reverence towards Father Bacchus, by whom
the city had been founded ; at the same time congratulating himself that
he had not only undertaken a military expedition like that god, but had
even followed his very footsteps. He then led his army to view the
sacred mountain, which the genial climate had mantled over with vine and
ivy..”(M’Crindle, 1896: 321).

There are also other instances in India other than Nysa, which according
to the classical writers, Alexander was told to have appeared a divine
to the inhabitants. As soon as Alexander entered the ‘boundaries of
India’, he was met by the petty kings of the area, who ‘welcomed him as
the third son of Zeus to come that way’, according to Curtius. When the
army reached the Oxydracae (Kṣūdrakas), near the junction of the
Hydaspes ( Jhelum) and Acesines (Chenab), the people announced that
‘they wished to retain the freedom which they had preserved for all time
from Dionysus’ arrival in India to that of Alexander. Strabo even said
that they claimed descent from Dionysus, which he must have got from one
or other of the Alexander historians. Further south, the people they
called the Sabarcae (in the region of Multan) were so terrified by the
sight of the Macedonian army that ‘they believed an army of gods was
approaching with a second Father Liber (a name famous among those
peoples).^(**99**)

How much importance was being given to this narrative of Alexander and
his divinity can be seen in the statements of both Arrian and Plutarch.
Both state that Alexander trained the Indians to respect the gods, among
whom he included himself.^(**100**) This was again not only in case of
India but there were other examples as well in which as per Strabo
Alexander added himself to the gods already worshipped by the Arabs,
namely Zeus and Dionysus (Stoneman, 2019: 81).

But despite such publicized signs of the divine in India, Alexander’s
men were losing their morale; they had been pushed to their limits.
Neither the conquest of Bactria-Sogdiana, nor of India was ever a part
of the plan. The army of Alexander was exhausted and the apprehension of
facing an even bigger force, if they moved ahead, made the soldiers
worried. When they refused to march beyond Hyphasis, Alexander gave this
speech to the soldiers, where we again see the importance of the legends
of Dionysus and Heracles related to India –

“…Know ye not that it was not by staying at home in Tiryns or Argos, or
even in Peloponnesos or Thebes, that our ancestor was exalted to such
glory, that from being a man he became, or was thought to be, a god. Nor
were the labours few even of Dionysos, who ranks as a god far above
Herakles. But we have advanced beyond Nysa, and the rock Aornos, which
proved impregnable to Herakles, is in our possession…”^(**101**) But
Alexander could not persuade his men and the soldiers remained steadfast
in wanting to retreat.

Alexander’s campaign in India and his discovery of a city of Nysa gave
fire to the legend of Dionysus and him being intimately connected to
Alexander. Though, Dionysus was not an ancestor of the Macedonian house,
Stoneman says that by the end of Alexander’s reign somebody had managed
to insert him there: ‘the stemma was fully fledged in the Ptolemaic
period, and there was every reason for its evolution at Alexander’s
court’. This is more obvious when we see that Dionysus appeared as a
symbol of Alexander in the Grand Procession of Ptolemy
Philadelphus.**¹⁰² **Even though, as mentioned before, Dionysus was
already an important god in Macedonia but now Alexander adopted Dionysus
as a presiding deity of his reign (Stoneman, 2019: 91).

For the same reason, Megasthenes had hoped to identify Heracles and
Dionysus in India because Alexander had insisted they were there
(Stoneman, 2019: 88). The legend of Dionysus’ expedition to India
clearly accelerated after Alexander’s death, turning up in several lost
Hellenistic epics, and ultimately culminating in the epic by ancient
author Nonnus (Stoneman, 2019: 98) in which he wrote –

From a wind-tossed branch a Hamadryad Nymph bent low, emerging womanly
from her leafy flanks. Thyrsus in hand, she looked just like a Bacchant
. . . and whispered in the ear of grape-draped Dionysus: ‘God of Wine,
lord gardener of the fruits . . . I am a Hamadryad of the beautiful
leaves; and here, where fierce warriors lie in wait for you, I will
reject my fatherland and save your army from death. I offer loyalty to
your satyrs, although I am Indian, and I take the part of Dionysus.’

— Nonnus, Dionysiaca 22. 84–100^(**103**)

## Conclusion


As perfectly put by Stoneman, *“Alexander came to India not just with a
research project (if he did) but with a determination to stamp on the
alien land a character that he and his fellow Macedonians could
recognize.”***¹⁰⁴ **And this amplified the legends related to Dionysus
and his city of Nysa in India. Does that mean that there is no evidence
of any settlement of pre-Alexandrian Greeks in India? As discussed in
the previous sections, on basis of numismatics and even ancient Indian
sources, there is such a possibility of Greeks being present in India in
the north-west of the sub-continent or there is even a possibility of
their settlements in some outlying provinces of the country. But, the
evidence is not conclusive enough in this regard and that’s why the
question of any proper pre-Alexandrian Greek settlements in India should
be considered in negative until any more conclusive evidence emerges.
What is conclusive is that the ‘Nysa in India’ was a legend that had not
much to do with facts and got early mention due to the plays by written
by Euripides and got more popular due to the campaign of Alexander. The
native tribes of ancient Kamboja of the sub-continent were the actual
inhabitants of ‘Nysa’. There is a stronger possibility of Greek presence
in Bactria-Sogdiana as suggested by the story regarding the exile of
Branchidae.

What is conclusive on the basis of the same evidence is that directly or
indirectly, the civilizations of India and Greece were for sure in
contact by fifth century BCE and the Persian Empire was the catalyst of
these contacts. And, these contacts only accelerated after Alexander
even though his conquests in India were soon undone by Chandragupta
Maurya. What is conclusive is that narratives regarding the erstwhile
Kafirs, the remaining Kalash or any tribe of the sub-continent for that
matter and them being the ‘Greek descendants’- Alexander’s or otherwise
– should really be put to rest. The genetic studies mentioned in the
post have found those claims baseless. And there are enough plausible
reasons, alluded to in the post that explains any similarities between
these far away civilizations.

There is no doubt that an imprint of Greek civilization and ideas were
felt strongly in ancient India – even more so in various aspects of the
culture of the ancient Indian north-west, particularly after the
establishment of the Graeco-Bactrian Kingdom and more when Indo-Greeks
found their foothold in the country in later centuries. As mentioned
earlier, the art of the region was most strongly influenced by these
contacts but the ideas and the emotions portrayed in that art remained
rooted in the indigenous religion and culture.

What should certainly be understood is that the idea of a city of ‘Nysa
in India’ founded by Dionysus and the subsequent popularity of these
legends in the western classical world had a lot to do with Alexander’s
campaign, in mythologisation of his expedition in heroic terms, his
attempts to surpass his divine ancestors and interestingly, his belief
in his own divinity.

## References


-   **¹** M’Crindle, 1896. *The Invasion of India by Alexander the
    Great.* p. 79
-   ^(**2**) Lal, 2004. Yavanas in the Ancient Indian Inscriptions. p.
    1115
-   ^(**3**) Unvala, 1947. Political and Cultural Relations.. p. 174
-   ^(**4**) Lal, 2004. p. 1115
-   ^(**5**) Vasant, 1988. *Yavanas in Western India.* p. 331
-   ^(**6**) Tola & Dragonetti, 1986. *India and Greece Before
    Alexander.* p. 159
-   **⁷ ***ibid*. p. 164
-   ^(**8**) Narain, 1957. *The Indo-Greeks*. p. 1
-   ^(**9 **)Lal, 2004. p. 1115
-   ^(**10**) *ibid.*
-   **¹¹ **Jayaswal, 1934. *An Imperial History of India.* p. 16
-   **¹² **Vassiliades, 2004. *Greeks and Buddhism…* pp. 134-135
-   **¹³ ***ibid*. p. 135
-   **¹⁴ **Lal, 2004. p. 1116
-   ^(**15 **)Vassiliades, 2004. p . 144
-   ^(**16**) Bhandarkar, 1921. *Lectures on Ancient Indian
    Numismatics*.. p. 26
-   ^(**17 **)*ibid*. p. 27
-   **¹⁸** Stoneman, 2019. *The Greek Experience of India: From
    Alexander to the Indo-Greeks*. p. 28
-   **¹⁹** Vassiliades, 2004. p . 136
-   **²⁰** Tola & Dragonetti, 1986. p. 167
-   **²¹** *ibid.*
-   **²²** M’Crindle, 1896. p. 79
-   **²³** *ibid.*
-   **²⁴** *ibid.*
-   **²⁵** *ibid.* p. 80
-   **²⁶** *ibid.* p. 82
-   **²⁷** *ibid.* p. 192
-   **²⁸** *ibid.*
-   **²⁹** *ibid.* p. 338
-   **³⁰** Tarn, 1922. *The Greeks in Bactria & India.* p. 168,244
-   **³¹** Narain, 1957. p. 3
-   **³²** *ibid.*
-   **³³** Panchenko, 2002. *The City of the Branchidae and the Question
    of Greek Contribution to the Intellectual History of India and
    China*. p. 244
-   **³⁴** Hammond, 1998. *The Branchidae at Didyma and in Sogdiana*. p
    .341
-   **³⁵** Narain, 1957. p. 3
-   **³⁶** Linonel, 2005. *Historical Commentary on Herodotus Book
    6*. p. 121
-   **³⁷** Panchenko, 2002. p. 246-247
-   **³⁸** *ibid.* p. 248
-   **³⁹** *ibid.* p. 249
-   **⁴⁰** Davis, 1960. *Greek and Roman Coins and their Historical
    Interest.* p. 71
-   **⁴¹** Jansari, 2018. *The Spophytes Coins: from Punjab to Bactria
    and back again*. p. 76
-   **⁴²** Gardner, 1880. *On Some Coins of Syria and Bactria.* p. 191
-   **⁴³** Rapson, 1898. *Indian Coins.* p. 3
-   **⁴⁴** Head, 1906. *The Earliest Graeco-Bactrian and Graeco-Indian
    Coins.* p. 8
-   **⁴⁵** Narain, 1957. p. 4
-   **⁴⁶** Goyal, 1999. *The Origin and Antiquity of Coinage in
    India.* p. 145
-   **⁴⁷** Bopearachchi, 2000. *Coin Production and Circulation in
    Central Asia and North-West India (Before and After Alexander’s
    Conquest*. p. 314
-   **⁴⁸** *ibid.* p. 309
-   **⁴⁹** Mansoor, A., *et al.* 2004. *Investigation of the Greek
    ancestry of populations from northern Pakistan*.
-   **⁵⁰** Firasat, S., *et al.* 2007. *Y-chromosomal evidence for a
    limited Greek contribution to the Pathan population of Pakistan*.
-   **⁵¹** Ayub, Q., *et al.* 2015. *The Kalash genetic isolate: ancient
    divergence, drift, and selection*.
-   **⁵²** Narasimhan, *et al.* 2019. *The formation of human
    populations in South and Central Asia*.
-   **⁵³** Cacopardo, 2011. *Are the Kalasha Really of Greek Origin?* p.
    57
-   **⁵⁴** Abdullaev, 2017. *Funeary Tradition of the Ancient East in
    Examples from Anatolia and Bactria-Margian. Origins or Parallels?*
    pp. 44-45
-   **⁵⁵** Wilber, 1962. *Afghanistan: its people, its society, its
    culture.* p. 51
-   **⁵⁶** *ibid.*
-   **⁵⁷** Parkes, 1987. *Livestock Symbolism and Pastoral Ideology
    Among the Kafirs of the Hindu Kush.* p. 647
-   **⁵⁸** Jettmar, 2002. *Beyond the Gorges of the Indus: Archaeology
    before Excavation*. p. 19
-   **⁵⁹** Wilson, 1866. *The Vishnu Purana: A System of Hindu Mythology
    and Tradition*. *Vol III.* p. 292
-   **⁶⁰** Wilber, 1962. p. 50
-   **⁶¹** Filigenzi, 2019. *Non-Buddhist Customs of Buddhist People:
    Visual and Archaeological Evidence from North-West Pakistan.* p. 60
-   **⁶²** *ibid.* p. 61
-   **⁶³** *ibid.* p. 63
-   **⁶⁴** *ibid.* p. 78
-   **⁶⁵** Cacopardo, 2011. p. 74
-   **⁶⁶** *ibid.* pp. 74-75
-   **⁶⁷** *ibid.* pp. 72-74
-   **⁶⁸** *ibid.* p. 76
-   **⁶⁹** Filigenzi, 2019. p. 74
-   **⁷⁰** Witzel, 2004. *Kalash Religion. The Ṛgvedic Religious System
    and its Central Asian and Hindukush Antecedents.*
-   **⁷¹** Cacopardo, 2011. pp. 48-49
-   **⁷²** *ibid.* p. 49
-   **⁷³** *ibid.* pp. 50-51
-   **⁷⁴** *ibid.* p. 51
-   **⁷⁵** *ibid.* p. 54
-   **⁷⁶** *ibid.* p. 54
-   **⁷⁷** *ibid.* p. 56
-   **⁷⁸** *ibid.* p. 55
-   **⁷⁹** *ibid.* p. 61
-   **⁸⁰** *ibid.* p. 62
-   **⁸¹** *ibid.* p. 70
-   **⁸²** Leitch, 2018. *Alexander The Great’s Use of Myth on
    Campaign.* p. 110
-   **⁸³** *ibid.*
-   **⁸⁴** *ibid.* p. 111
-   **⁸⁵** *ibid.*
-   **⁸⁶** *ibid.* p. 112
-   **⁸⁷** Gilley & Worthington, 2010. Alexander The Great, Macedonia &
    Asia. *A Companion to Ancient Macedonia*. p.195
-   **⁸⁸** Stoneman, 2019. p. 83
-   **⁸⁹** Leitch, 2018. p. 112
-   **⁹⁰** Stoneman, 2019. p. 84
-   **⁹¹** M’Crindle, 1896. p. 83
-   **⁹²** Leitch, 2018. p. 112
-   **⁹³** Stoneman, 2019. p. 93
-   **⁹⁴** Leitch, 2018. p. 113
-   **⁹⁵** Stoneman, 2019. p. 87
-   **⁹⁶** Law, 1943. *Tribes in Ancient India*. p. 154
-   **⁹⁷** Stoneman, 2019. p. 93
-   **⁹⁸** M’Crindle, 1896. pp. 321-322
-   **⁹⁹** Stoneman, 2019. p. 94
-   **¹⁰⁰** *ibid*. p. 81
-   **¹⁰¹** M’Crindle, 1896. p. 124
-   **¹⁰²** Stoneman, 2019. p. 98
-   **¹⁰³** *ibid.* p. 91
-   **¹⁰⁴** *ibid.* p. 81

## Bibliography


1.  Abdullaev, K. (2017). [Funeary Tradition of the Ancient East in
    Examples from Anatolia and Bactria-Margian. Origins or
    Parallels?](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318286882_Funerary_tradition_of_the_ancient_east_in_examples_from_anatolia_and_bactria-margiana_Origins_or_parallels)
    pp. 27-50. Turkish Academy of Sciences Journal of Archaeology.
    Vol 20.
    DOI:[10.22520/tubaar.2017.20.002](http://dx.doi.org/10.22520/tubaar.2017.20.002)
2.  Ayub Q, Mezzavilla M, Pagani L, *et al.* [The Kalash genetic
    isolate: ancient divergence, drift, and
    selection.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4570283/)
    *Am J Hum Genet*. 2015;96(5):775-783.
    [https://doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.03.012](https://doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.03.012)
3.  Bhandarkar, D. R. (1921). *[Lectures on Ancient Indian
    Numismatics.](https://archive.org/details/lecturesonancien00bhaniala/)*
    The Carmichael Lecturs, 1921. University of Calcutta.
4.  Bopearachchi, O. (2000). [Coin Production and Circulation in Central
    Asia and North-West India (Before and After Alexander’s
    Conquest.](https://www.academia.edu/15798938/_Coin_Production_and_Circulation_in_Central_Asia_and_North-West_India_Before_and_after_Alexander_s_Conquest)
    Indologica Taurinensia, International Association of Sanskrit
    Studies, pp. 267-353.
5.  Bopearachchi, O. (2017), *[Achaemenids and Mauryans: Emergence of
    Coins and Plastic Arts in
    India,](https://www.academia.edu/32663753/INDIA_AND_IRAN_IN_THE_LONGUE_DUR%C3%89E)*
    in Alka Patel; Touraj Daryaee (eds.), India and Iran in the Longue
    Durée, UCI Jordan Center for Persian Studies, pp. 15–48.
6.  Cacopardo, A. (2011). [Are the Kalasha Really of Greek Origin? The
    Legend of Alexander the Great and the Pre-Islamic World of the Hindu
    Kush.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318084609_Are_the_Kalasha_Really_of_Greek_Origin_The_Legend_of_Alexander_the_Great_and_the_Pre-Islamic_World_of_the_Hindu_Kush)
    *Acta Orientalia. Vol 72.* pp. 47-92.
    [https://doi:10.5617/ao.4847](https://doi:10.5617/ao.4847)
7.  Davis, S. [“GREEK AND ROMAN COINS AND THEIR HISTORICAL
    INTEREST.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/24591082) *Acta Classica* 3
    (1960): 67–76.
8.  Filigenzi, A. (2019).
3. [Non-Buddhist Customs of Buddhist People:
    Visual and Archaeological Evidence from North-West
    Pakistan.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336347615_3_Non-Buddhist_Customs_of_Buddhist_People_Visual_and_Archaeological_Evidence_from_North-West_Pakistan#citations)
    In B. Kellner (Ed.), *Buddhism and the Dynamics of Transculturality:
    New Approaches* (pp. 53-84). Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.
    <https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110413083-003>
9.  Firasat, S., Khaliq, S., Mohyuddin, A. *et al.* [Y-chromosomal
    evidence for a limited Greek contribution to the Pathan population
    of Pakistan](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4570283/).
    *Eur J Hum Genet* **15,** 121–126 (2007).
    <https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201726>
10. Gardner, P. (1880). [ON SOME COINS OF SYRIA AND
    BACTRIA](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.104447/page/n209/mode/2up).
    *Numismatic Chronicle-Journal Of The Numismatic Society 2nd Series
    Vol.20.* pp. 181-191.
11. Goyal, Shankar. [“THE ORIGIN AND ANTIQUITY OF COINAGE IN
    INDIA.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/41694581) *Annals of the
    Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute* 80, no. 1/4 (1999): 125–54.
12. Hammond, N. G. L. (1998). [The Branchidae at Didyma and in
    Sogdiana.](http://www.jstor.org/stable/639826) *The Classical
    Quarterly*, *48*(2), 339–344.
13. Head, Barclay V. [“THE EARLIEST GRAECO-BACTRIAN AND GRAECO-INDIAN
    COINS.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/42659996) *The Numismatic
    Chronicle and Journal of the Royal Numismatic Society* 6 (1906):
    1–16.
14. Jansari, S. (2018). [The Spophytes Coins: from Punjab to Bactria
    and back
    again.](https://www.academia.edu/38183611/The_Sophytes_Coins_from_the_Punjab_to_Bactria_and_back_again)
    *The Numismatic Chronicle*, 71-98. The Royal Numismatic Society,
    London, 2018.
15. Jayaswal, K. P. (1934). *[An Imperial History of India – In a
    Sanskrit Text \[c. 700 BC – c. 770
    AD\]](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.12147/page/n3/mode/2up)*.
    Motilal Banarasi Das, Lahore.
16. Jettmar, K. (2002). *[Beyond the Gorges of the Indus: Archaeology
    before
    Excavation.](https://archive.org/details/dli.pahar.3734/page/n3/mode/2up)*
    Oxford University Press.
17. Lal, Shyam Bihari. [“YAVANAS IN THE ANCIENT INDIAN
    INSCRIPTIONS.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/44144820)*Proceedings
    of the Indian History Congress*, vol. 65, Indian History Congress,
    2004, pp. 1115–20.
18. Law, B.C. (1943). *[Tribes in Ancient
    India](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.215048/)*.
    Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona.
19. Leitch, C. (2018). *[ALEXANDER THE GREAT’S USE OF MYTH ON
    CAMPAIGN.](https://www.eiu.edu/historia/16Historia2018CLeitch.pdf)*
    Eastern Illinois University, 109-114.
20. Lionel, S. (2005). *[Historical Commentary on Herodotus
    Book 6.](https://books.google.co.in/books?id=WSo_DwAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false)*
    Brill Academic Publication.
21. Mansoor, A., Mazhar, K., Khaliq, S. *et al.* [Investigation of the
    Greek ancestry of populations from northern
    Pakistan.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/7506714_Investigation_of_the_Greek_ancestry_of_populations_from_northern_Pakistan)
    *Hum Genet* **114,** 484–490 (2004).
    <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-004-1094-x>
22. M’Crindle, J.W. (1896). *[The Invasion of India by Alexander the
    Great.](https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.231273/page/n7/mode/2up)*
    Second Edition. Archibald Constable and Company, Westminster.
23. Narain, A. K. (1957). *[The
    Indo-Greeks.](https://archive.org/details/in.gov.ignca.6278/page/n5/mode/2up)*
    The Clarendon Press; Oxford
24. Narasimhan VM, Patterson N, Moorjani P, *et al.* The formation of
    human populations in South and Central Asia. *Science*.
    2019;365(6457):eaat7487.
    [https://doi:10.1126/science.aat7487](https://doi:10.1126/science.aat7487%20%0d)
25. NEWELL, EDWARD T. [“MISCELLANEA NUMISMATICA: CYRENE TO
    INDIA.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/43607211) *Numismatic Notes and
    Monographs*, no. 82 (1938): 1–101.
26. Panchenko, D. [*The City* *of the* *Branchidae* *and the* *Question*
    *of Greek Contribution* *to the* *Intellectual History* *of India*
    *and
    China*](https://www.academia.edu/24174581/THE_CITY_OF_THE_BRANCHIDAE_AND_THE_QUESTION_OF_GREEK_CONTRIBUTION_TO_THE_INTELLECTUAL_HISTORY_OF_INDIA_AND_CHINA),
    Hyperboreus 8 (2002) 2, 244–255.
27. Parkes, P. (1987). Livestock Symbolism and Pastoral Ideology Among
    the Kafirs of the Hindu Kush. *Man*, *22*(4), 637–660.
    <https://doi.org/10.2307/2803356>
28. Rapson, E.J. (1898). *[Indian
    Coins.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.38554/page/n5/mode/2up)*
    Karl J. Trubner, Strassburg. Bombay Education Society’s Press.
29. Roisman J., Worthington, I.,(Ed.) (2010). *[A Companion to Ancient
    Macedonia.](https://archive.org/details/AncientMacedonia/page/n3/mode/2up?view=theater)*
    Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
30. Stoneman, R. (2019). *The Greek Experience of India: From Alexander
    to the Indo-Greeks.* Princeton University Press.
31. Tarn, W.W. (1922). *[The Greeks in Bactria &
    India.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.125997)*
    Cambridge University Press.
32. Tola, Fernando, and Carmen Dragonetti. [“INDIA AND GREECE BEFORE
    ALEXANDER.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/41693244)*Annals of the
    Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute*, vol. 67, no. 1/4,
    Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1986, pp. 159–94.
33. Unvala, J. M. [“POLITICAL AND CULTURAL RELATIONS BETWEEN IRAN AND
    INDIA.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/44028063)*Annals of the
    Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute*28, no. 3/4 (1947): 165–89.
34. Vasant, Suresh. [“YAVANAS IN WESTERN
    INDIA.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/42930237) *Bulletin of the
    Deccan College Research Institute* 47/48 (1988): 331–38.
35. Vassiliades, Demetrios Th. [“Greeks and Buddhism: Historical
    Contacts in the Development of a Universal
    Religion.”](http://www.jstor.org/stable/44362383) *The Eastern
    Buddhist* 36, no. 1/2 (2004): 134–83.
36. Whitehead, R. B. (1943). [THE EASTERN SATRAP
    SOPHYTES.](http://www.jstor.org/stable/42663277) *The Numismatic
    Chronicle and Journal of the Royal Numismatic Society*, *3*(1/4),
    60–72.
37. Wilber, D.N. (1962). *[Afghanistan: its people, its society, its
    culture.](https://archive.org/details/afghanistanitspe00wilbrich/page/n7/mode/2up)*
    HRAF Press, New Haven.
38. Wilson, H. H. (1866). [*The Vishnu Purana: A System of Hindu
    Mythology and
    Tradition*.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.47537/page/n5/)
    Vol. III. Trubner & CO., 60, Paternoster Row. London.
39. Witzel, M. (2004). *[Kalash Religion. The Ṛgvedic Religious System
    and its Central Asian and Hindukush
    Antecedents.](https://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~witzel/KalashaReligion.pdf)*
    Griffiths, A. & J.E.M. Houben (a cura di), The Vedas, Texts,
    Language & Ritual. Proceedings of the Third International Vedic
    Workshop, Leiden 2002. Egbert Forsten, Groningen.

