+++
title = "vR^itrahan"
full_title = "vR^itrahan"
date = "2021-11-27"
upstream_url = "https://vriitrahan.wordpress.com/2021/11/27/notes-on-christianity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vriitrahan.wordpress.com/2021/11/27/notes-on-christianity/).

vR^itrahan

There are multiple internal contradictions in the gospels which cannot
be resolved. Mark is the earliest (\~70 CE) and John is the latest
(\~120-130 CE). Irreconcilable contradictions would lead to collapse of
biblical inerrancy. The geographic accuracy portrayed in the gospels is
irrelevant to the accuracy of their narrative. eg – if fig trees of
rural Palestine are mentioned, doesn’t make the account about Jesus
true. The people in the gospel accounts are rural Aramaic speakers in
Palestine whilst urbanized Greek speakers are writing the Gospels. There
was an oral tradition of Jesus and his life being carried forward and
hence leading to changes in the story. eg- Judas Iscariot death story in
Matthew vs Acts is totally different. The geneaology of Jesus is totally
different as well.

We already know stories of Jesus were circulating orally and hence we
have the non-canonical gospels (Timothy, Barnabes, Infancy gospel etc)
and we know they’ve been changed. We know certain stories from the
non-canonical gospels ended up in the Quran (eg- Jesus making clay birds
come to life in the Quran is found in the Infancy gospel). Now the
question is are the nicene gospels immune from errancy? do they preserve
a perfect story? scholarly answer – firm no.

There is text fatigue in Matthew which shows he is copying Mark,
sometimes he gets lazy and often omits key details.- eg [Mark
6:14](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mark+6%3A14&version=NIV),
King Herod but Matthew calls herod a “Tetrarch” and a king. These are
different titles. This explains perfectly why[Mark
13:30](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Mark+13%3A30&version=NIV)
said “this generation wont pass away until all these things have come to
pass” while [Matthew
24:36](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew+24%3A36&version=NIV)
says this about the parousia (But about that day and hour no one knows,
neither the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.).
*Basically Matthew is writing later than Mark and has to come up with
explanations as to why the end times have not come yet even though a
generation has now passed.*  
  
The Gospel of John is the latest gospel. Matthew, Mark or Luke never
talk about Jesus being god. The historical Jesus was an appocalyptic
prophet. John is only gospel that calls him God and the only one in
which Jesus makes bombastic claims such as [John
8:48](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John%208%3A48-59&version=ESV)
(**Before Abraham was, I am)**

What did early Christians really believe in?

Well, it was saturated with dualistic appocalyptic thought. Jesus was an
appocalyptic preacher. God vs Satan. Satan controlls demons and sin is
literally a demonic force that is trying to enslave you and do its will.
Now, Satan missing in the Old Testament of course.

These Jewish (Christians) thought that in the present age the forces of
sin are in control, we have no control. They were pessimistic about
their life, living under Roman yoke with periodic wars, famines,
droughts etc. However, they thought God will make things right in an age
to come. Then, God’s vindication will apply to those who died as well.
Those who sided with God in this age will be rewarded. Those who sided
with powers of sin will face eternal judgement. Powers of sin here are
the ones with material wealth, political control etc. So the poor and
pessimistic could feel “we aren’t wealthy but truly as we sided with
Christ, the wealthy will be punished in the next age while we will be
rewarded” – There will be judgement and reversal of fortunes.

They felt the end is imminent. *“Some of you standing here.. Mark 9:1”
or Mark 13 “Truly i tell you, this generation will not pass before”*
Spitzer’s view.The son of man in the gospels is a cosmic judge
different from Jesus.

The Messiah was the future annointed King of Israel, chosen by God. The
Messiah was a human being. The historical Jesus thought he was the
Messiah. He thought he was the future King to rule Israel. *And herein
lies the real reason why Jesus was crucified*. He was killed not because
he was an appocalyptic prophet (there were thousands of such Jews in
that time in Palestine) but he was killed because he dared to claim to
be the King of the Jews and of Israel, thus challenging Roman authority.
He had 12 disciples who would rule the 12 tribes and Jesus will be the
ruler. So, Jesus was exectued for calling himself King of the Jews.
*Pontius asks him “are you the king of the jews?” and on his cross, when
he had been crucified it said “here lies the king of the jews”*

Judas went to authorities and told them this, quite probably. Jesus was
not planning to die, he thought the son of man would arrive and he’d be
installed as King. The betrayal of Judas was the betrayal of Christ’s
secret message to his disciples that he would be King of the Jews in the
future. Judas told this to the Romans.

The earliest christians believed Jesus was born human and made divine at
his resurrection. How do we know this? Well, Paul looks like
occassionally he’s quoting something, a pre-literary tradition. We can
use philological means to understand when Paul quotes this pre-literary
oral tradition and then compare the accounts/descriptions of Jesus in
the oral tradition vs. otherwise. The views in the oral tradition won’t
be that of Paul personally unlike other parts of his gospel and letters.
This gives us a chance to look at possible authentic statements of the
earliest christians. [Romans
1:3-4](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Romans+1%3A3-4&version=NRSV)
says that Jesus *became the son of god by his resurrection.*

*Jesus was the adopted son of god* for early christians. Adopted
children in the roman world had a high status unlike today. They had to
have a good character, which is why they were adopted. So some early
christians thought Jesus was adopted son of god. Here starts a backward
movement of Christology- when did he become the son of god? early
christians kept pushing back the date. First they say he became the son
of god at his resurrection, then they say no he became the son of god
when he was baptized. *Then it finally changes to no, he the was son of
god when he was already born.* It finally changes to *he was god himself
and always has been god*. We can notice how cultic devotion to Christ
keeps upending his divine status and how early Christians keep
attributing claims to him that he never made himself. A Jewish man who
had simply claimed to be the Messiah (a human being) and the future King
of the Jews had now been raised to the literal status of God himself, a
claim that would’ve likely horrified the historical Jesus.

The stories of Jesus born of a virgin are not found in Paul or Mark,
only in Matthew or Luke. *(This is similar to a divine being, a Greek
god, impregnating a human to produce an immortal)*. Early christians
eventually started saying Christ was exalted even from before his birth.
This leads to *exaltation vs incarnation christology*.

*Paul thought Christ was an angelic being who become a human being.*
Once again we look at a pre-literary oral tradition with the Bible. [The
Phillipians
Hymn](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Philippians+2%3A6-11&version=NRSV).
Christ became like a human, he became humbled and he died. Jesus has
been exalted to status of god. He did not start out equal with god, he
was in the “form of god” (divine being) and wanted a life of service but
god had raised him to his level after seeing his sacrifice. The
Christology of John is even higher, it is the most exalted theology.
Exalted here means the status accorded to Christ. John says the word is
with god, the word is christ. It is an independent entity like shabda
brahman. This word of god became a human being for our sake. Thus, the
resurrection is the key of christology, the resurrection leads to the
claims of Jesus being exalted to becoming divine.

Part of the psychological reason why devotion to Christ necessarily
meant you had to exalt him was that *if you could just be a good person
by following the jewish laws, then what is the point of following
christ? this retrospective thinking makes early christians believe his
death was substitutary atonement.*

In the gospel of john, there is a much harsher stance on jews probably
because *Johannians were a community of ex-jews kicked out of their
synagogue because of believing in christ*. (jews not children of abraham
but of devil). closed community – johannians.

Some comparisons to Egyptian myths. The Osiris myth, cut into pieces.
His wife Isis puts the pieces together and he becomes the ruler of the
underworld. Similarly Christ is murdered and becomes lord of all? but
Osiris never comes back to life, lives in underworld.

Is it perfectly acceptable to write books under other peoples names? no,
– forgery. pseudoepigraphical books are just forgeries. (more on this
later).

Modalism was a popular view in 3rd century Christianity. They said that
God has 3 modes. Just like a man can be a husband, father and a son.
However, Tertullian refuted this and said you cannot have something and
be that thing. you cannot have a father and be the father.The Council
of Nicea is chiefly Arian vs Alexander. Arian’s view that the son was
created by the father is rejected. If God created the son it means god
was not the father at one point of time, if he became the father it
means he changed. If he changed, it means he’s not perfect. Hence god
was always the son father and holy spirit all at the same time.

To conclude, we understand a few things quite well. Jesus Christ was a
Jew, an appocalyptic prophet like thousands of others in 1st century
Palestine. He never thought he was God, neither did the earliest
Christians think he was God. He claimed to be the human Messiah of the
Jewish bible and claimed to be the future King of Israel and the Jews.
He was crucified by the Romans because he claimed to be the King of
Israel. There were oral accounts of his life circulating for 40-50 years
before someone decided to write them down (Mark did this the first
around 70 CE). The Gospels are based off oral accounts and hence often
contradictory. These deepset internal contradictions in Christian
scripture, as simple as the geneaology of Jesus ensure they can never be
“inerrant” as otherwise claimed. The Gospels are thus unreliable.
Further, the Gospels are forgeries and have had multiple verses added on
to them by later christians (Byzantine scribes) – More on these two
points later. The Gospel that emphatically says Jesus is God is the
Gospel of John, which is the latest one and was written approximately
100 years after Christ’s death. *Christ was a man who eventually was
deified by early Christians, no doubt due to Hellenic pagan influence*.
In fact, his earliest descriptions (beard, long hair, white robe) would
all be taken from descriptions of say Zeus or Poseidon. No doubt, it was
not that hard for Hellenic pagans to accept the worship of a man as God,
as they’d been doing for so long. In this manner, the syncretization and
deification of Christ helped spread Christianity much more easily in the
Roman Empire than a purely Jewish and monotheistic faith would’ve
spread. The trinity was created solely to justify the status of Christ
as God.

Christianity thus is quite certainly
[euhemerism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euhemerism#:~:text=Euhemerism%20(%2Fju%CB%90%CB%88h,real%20historical%20events%20or%20personages.&text=In%20the%20more%20recent%20literature,%22historical%20theory%22%20of%20mythology.),
or a religion in which the mythology is based of a historical figure who
was made God by his devotees.

This answers the question C.S Lewis had asked us a while ago – *Lewis
says that Christ was either lunatic, liar or the lord. He had of course
mistakenly assumed Christ ever thought he was God in the first place*,
or his earliest followers had thought the same.

