+++
title = "Who is a Hindu?"
full_title = "Who is a Hindu?"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/07/06/who-is-a-hindu/"
date = "2025-07-06"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2025/07/06/who-is-a-hindu/).

Who is a Hindu?

Again and again, the question of who is a Hindu comes up on social media. We have encountered some form of it for almost 30 years on the internet, starting from the days of the old mailing lists to this day on Twitter. There are several variants of it; a common one is: what are the “Red Lines” one must draw to exclude someone from being an H? There are even more specific forms of it which we are not articulating, as it makes the ignorant H on the street go apeshit just hearing it. Why give them that pain… We see this deep urge to sharply define a H in large part as a reactionary impulse – something triggered by the Abrahamistic assault on the practitioners of the dharma happening over the ages.

This does not mean that the Hindu-s over the ages entirely lacked a self-definition. In fact, from the time they had to encounter the Other (e.g., self-derived counter-religions), they offered certain definitions. Even among the sectarian traditions within the Hindu fold, keeping with its inherent polytheism, we see polyfocal definitions of the larger Hindudom. For example, the Niśvāsa, an early scripture of the Śaivāgama canon, states:

prāsādaṃ kārayitvā tu viṣṇuṃ ye sthāpayanti hi ॥  
viṣṇu-lokaṃ vrajanty ete modante viṣṇunā saha ।  
brahmāṇaṃ skandaṃ rudrāṇīṃ gaṇeśaṃ mātaraṃ ravim ॥  
vahniṃ śatakratuṃ yakṣaṃ vāyuṃ dharmmañ jaleśvaram ।  
yo yasya sthāpanaṃ kuryāt prāsāde tu suśobhane ॥  
pūjaye parayā bhaktyā so ’mṛto hy asya lokatām ।

Those who indeed have a temple constructed for Viṣṇu and install him will go to the world of Viṣṇu and rejoice together with Viṣṇu. Those who perform the installation of Brahmā, Skanda, Rudrāṇī, Gaṇeśa, the Mātṛ-s, the Solar deity, Agni, Indra, the Yakṣa (Kubera), Vāyu, Dharma (Yama) or Jaleśvara (Varuṇa) in a beautiful temple and worship them with the highest devotion become immortal \[in the\] world of the \[respective deity\].

This indicates an inherently polyfocal soteriology anchored on the deity being worshipped (something which we will utilize down the line in creating a definition). Thus, even within a specific sect, in this case the Śaiva-śāsana, there was an acceptance of a polyfocality. However, it does not mean that the text sees no boundaries. The Niśvāsa-mukha clearly states that it sees all paths other than Laukika (the worship of the Hindu pantheon, typically by “Paurāṇika” means), Vaidika (worship via Vedic rituals), the Atimārga and the Mantramārga (the last two being the branches of the Śaiva-śāsana) as bad paths (kupatha). Thus, it is drawing a boundary that is not very different from the intuitive modern boundary accepted by most Hindu-s (i.e., excluding the counter-religions).

However, it should be realized that this boundary was not always fixed in the same way. Other comparable definitions that emerged over a millennium placed it at different radii. Sometimes the boundary was not sharp, but there was still an implicit understanding of the endogenous counter-religions clinging to the periphery, with a core formed more or less of the recognizably Hindu path. We see this in Bhaṭṭa Jayanta’s Āgamaḍambara. Other inclusive boundaries (“big-tent”) were implicitly given in medieval times by authors like Vijñānabhikṣu and Vidyāraṇya. While we ought to be guided by the long tradition in this regard, the one lesson we learn from it is that the boundary and/or the definition of who is H need not be a static one. There is definitely no harm in it changing with time, depending on the benefits it offers to those inside the boundary, likewise, with its porosity.

Given this background, we would say that the best definitions for the current age are those anchored in identity and theology rather than philosophy. Philosophy is hard to understand for most and is highly debated even among the erudite. Hence, consensus is difficult even for a basic axiomatic framework. Thus, we argue that good definitions of who is H should ideally leave out philosophical anchors. When it comes to identity, we recommend against a racial one, though we recognize and accept the historical importance and powerful biological draw of such an anchor. Just as the Turk in Türkiye’s self-identification as a Turk should not be denied, so too with the identity of a Hindu Cham in South Vietnam, however removed he may be from the Corded Ware vipra on the steppe. What is the unbroken thread of identity in these examples? While there is racial transitivity (i.e., transitive genetic relationships between adjacent populations in the chain of migration or memetic transmission), there may not be much racial congruence between the starting point and the end point. Yet, in these examples, either the common cultural or religious identity or both is unmistakable.

In a similar vein, we argue against basing H identity on particular texts, beliefs or diets. As a polyfocal tradition, foundationally, we accept a multitude of texts from different temporal layers as scripture. There are definitely strong strictures as to what text gets canonized, and each stream has had its own boundaries with respect to acceptable texts, but the bottom line is that there is no single anchor. Unlike the Abrahamistic cults, the H dharma is not a religion of belief. This is not to say that beliefs do not exist or are unimportant, but a close examination emphasizes praxis over doxa. Some beliefs might be eventually falsified by objective reality. Hence, hanging the entire identity on something like that would make it vulnerable to an encounter with reality itself. Certain beliefs are hard to either prove or disprove and exist in a liminal zone of falsifiability: for example, the belief that deeds in a given life are coupled to reincarnation (pūrvajanma-karman), which a large fraction or the majority of Hindus believe in. While one can easily see the evolutionary rationale for the fixation of this belief– it encouraged pro-social behaviors in post-Neolithic societies– this in itself does not test the falsifiability of the belief. Moreover, a study of H scriptures shows that even though belief in this principle is common, it is absent or not central in some key layers of the religion. Further, it is also shared with the endogenous counter-religions and is not a boundary condition distinguishing the H.

Coming to diets, in modern Hindudom, we encounter those who can be characterized as practicing H, consuming a wide range of food, including viands that might be entirely proscribed in one sect or another. Diet is heavily influenced by local ecology, and one cannot expect uniformity in this regard across vast territories. Moreover, while diet might impinge on the inner life, it can hardly be a cornerstone of religion. Finally, we have the issue of language. H speak a diversity of languages as their primary tongue. Even this note is being written in English, which was brought by the English conquerors only recently. Thus, one language alone cannot be taken as the anchor identity. That said, we do believe it would be useful for those identifying as H to accept the Sanskrit language as a medium of divine communication.

Given the above, we believe that the identity aspect can be best captured via self-identity: You are H if you self-identify as H. This is one part of the definition. There are no red lines there: if you think you are H, you are H (it is a different issue about how aware or how good a H you are). However, this is not sufficient to complete the definition. First, just identifying as H does not automatically mean that you are qualified to be taken seriously on H issues: that needs way more qualification. Second, many true votaries are not sufficiently interested/aware of history or their tradition to be able to articulate that self-identification as a Hindu. Hence, the theological clause comes in.

From the Vedic age, the distinction between the self and other was on theological grounds (e.g., śatravo .anindrāḥ: i.e., those who did not worship Indra mapped onto the enemy category). Thus, we present the second clause: If you are a votary or a deity or deities belonging to the Indo-Aryan pantheonic archetype, then you are H. The key here is archetype: thus, a deity like Gaṇeśa might have emerged late in H tradition but still plainly maps onto the Indo-Aryan archetype. In other cases, the unerudite might find it hard to see the connection, e.g., that between the Kaṟuppu deities and Murukaṉ in the Tamil country, respectively with Mahākāla and Skanda. Hearing this clause, someone might also begin to bawl something to the tune of: “You are encouraging Brahminism and excluding tribal deities.” The reality is that we have spent a good part of our life studying tribal/avarṇa expressions of the religion and have concluded they, in large part, uncomplicatedly map onto the Indo-Aryan pantheonic archetype; hence, this objection is moot. Thus, this is not an exclusive definition; hence, it can accommodate various tribal groups, be it in the Northeast of India or in Indonesia. We should further emphasize that this theological anchor is rooted in praxis (Sanskrit: yajana) rather than a mere belief in it. Indeed, even in the Veda, the other was distinguished as the ayajvan.

What about Indian counter-religious groups under this definition? It is up to them. By the second of the above clauses, some of them might fall within the Hindu radius. However, if they vehemently wish to reject that identity, then good riddance: they can call themselves whatever they want, and we reciprocate the hostility.
