+++
title = "Two articles’ take on"
full_title = "Two articles’ take on shaiva siddhAnta"
date = "2017-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2017/03/01/two-articles-take-on-shaiva-siddhanta/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2017/03/01/two-articles-take-on-shaiva-siddhanta/).

Two articles’ take on shaiva siddhAnta



Contrast
[access-ritual-knowledge-hinduism-case-veda-agama](http://indiafacts.org/access-ritual-knowledge-hinduism-case-veda-agama/)
(by the young Āngīrasa) with
[the-hushed-splendour-of-saiva-siddhanta-will-humanity-realise-its-full-potential](https://swarajyamag.com/culture/the-hushed-splendour-of-saiva-siddhanta-will-humanity-realise-its-full-potential)
(which shrI Jataayu pointed me to) . Both are by tamiL-s, both dealing
(in part) with broadly the same topic. The former is honest and clear –
it evoked admiration in me. The latter immediately roused suspicion and
slight underwhelmedness.



In the latter, the sections “Rejecting scriptural literalism” and
“Egalitarianism” had me wondering “so what’s the big deal?”, when I came
to “Siva, the go between.” I was thinking: “Why exactly is he writing
this article? what’s so remarkable about nindA-stuti”. But when I got to
“Against Casteism”, I was dumbstruck by the seemingly shameless
misrepresentation of the tradition. Just take a scene or two from a
story, scrupulously avoid mentioning \*strong support for the varNa
system\* within the shaiva siddhAnta system (see the appropriate section
in the former article) and magically stick the heading “against
casteism”.

I suppose that we must be thankful that the author did not reduce the
magnificent shaiva siddhAnta tradition to the level of the outright
subversive lingAyata system. Assuming that he is just innocently trying
to communicate his experiential joy (rather than slyly pushing a
favorite agenda), the author would do well to be more honest and
careful.  

As a side note, looking at today’s नट-विट-शठ-s, we might do well to be a
bit wary of “bards and actors”. Their current excessive influence seems
to be a sad indicator of the state of hindudom.

