+++
title = "किरणागमान्तर्गतशिवस्तोत्रम्"
full_title = "किरणागमान्तर्गतशिवस्तोत्रम् – kiraṇāgamāntargataśivastotram – A saiddhāntika stotra from the kiraṇāgama by garuḍa to śrīkaṇṭharudra"
date = "2019-05-20"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/05/20/%e0%a4%95%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%a3%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%ae%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b6%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b5%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a5%8b/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/05/20/%e0%a4%95%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%a3%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%ae%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b6%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b5%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a5%8b/).


					किरणागमान्तर्गतशिवस्तोत्रम् – kiraṇāgamāntargataśivastotram – A saiddhāntika stotra from the kiraṇāgama by garuḍa to śrīkaṇṭha-rudra				



[ May 20, 2019 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/05/20/%e0%a4%95%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%a3%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%ae%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b6%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b5%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a5%8b/ "Permalink to किरणागमान्तर्गतशिवस्तोत्रम् – kiraṇāgamāntargataśivastotram – A saiddhāntika stotra from the kiraṇāgama by garuḍa tośrīkaṇṭha-rudra")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/05/20/%e0%a4%95%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b0%e0%a4%a3%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%ae%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%97%e0%a4%a4%e0%a4%b6%e0%a4%bf%e0%a4%b5%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%a4%e0%a5%8b/#respond)

# किरणागमान्तर्गतशिवस्तोत्रम् – kiraṇāgamāntargataśivastotram – A saiddhāntika stotra from the kiraṇāgama by garuḍa tośrīkaṇṭha-rudra

In the saiddhāntika śaiva system, there are twenty-eight mūlāgama-s
(primary āgama-s), each of which is traditionally supposed to be
complete with four distinct sections:

1.  vidyāpāda
2.  yogapāda
3.  kriyāpāda
4.  caryāpāda

The kiraṇāgama (also known as the kiraṇamahātantra) begins with the
vidyāpāda, the section/pāda of an āgama text which covers the “vidyā”
portion of an āgama, covering the matters of how the various āgama-s
were revealed and to whom they were revealed, the doctrine of tattva-s
(the fundamental principles which constitute all of existence; in the
saiddhāntika and bhairava streams of mantramārga śaivam, there are 36
tattva-s) and other such philosophical matters. The vidyāpāda of the
kiraṇāgama opens with this verse by garuḍa:



कैलासशिखरासीनं सोमं सोमार्धशेखरम्।

हरं दृष्ट्वाब्रवीतार्क्ष्यः स्तुतिपूर्वमिदं वचः

kailāsaśikharāsīnaṃ somaṃ somārdhaśekharam\|

haraṃ dṛṣṭvābravīttārkṣyaḥ stutipūrvamidaṃ vacaḥ

\[The one\] seated on a summit of mount kailāsa, the soma (Here, it
figuratively means, “one with umā”), the one crowned with the half-moon,
the hara (Figuratively, the one who removes the bonds of the soul);
preceded by a stuti, having seen him, tārkṣya (garuḍa-deva) says these
words.

Here, the great saiddhāntika commentator of kāśmīradeśa, the great lion
of siddhānta śaivam, mahākaṇṭha kaṇṭhīrava śrī bhaṭṭa rāmakaṇṭha
(hereafter, rāmakaṇṭha), takes the pains to explain the order in which
the opening events of the text takes place:

1.  Firstly, the stuti of garuḍa takes place: This beautiful stuti is
    given in śloka-s 2 to 9 of the first chapter of the āgama.
2.  Secondly, having uttered the words of praise, garuḍa obtains the
    sight of śrīkaṇṭha-rudra.
3.  Thirdly and finally, having now seen his guru, śrīkaṇṭha-rudra,
    garuḍa then utters the words (the question in śloka 10 of the text),
    opening the sacred dialogue between master and disciple.

We will see the actual commentary in detail in a subsequent post, or a
subsequent edit of this very post. Now, we will see this stuti of 8
śloka-s, where the word, “jaya” appears a total of sixteen times.

जयान्धकपृथुस्कन्धबन्धभेदविचक्षण।

jayāndhakapṛthuskandhabandhabhedavicakṣaṇa

Victory, oh one skilled in splitting theknot of the broad shoulders of
andhaka!  
जय प्रवरवीरेशसंरुद्धपुरदाहक॥

jaya pravaravīreśasaṃruddhapuradāhaka ॥

Victory, oh burner of the \[threefold\] city, held/concealed by those
most distinguished among the lords of the heroes/vīra-s (the three
tripurāsura-s)  
जयाखिलसुरेशानशिरश्छेदभयानक।

jayākhilasureśānaśiraśchedabhayānaka ।

Victory, oh fearsome one, \[who\] lopped offa head of the lord of all
the deva-s (brahma)!  
जय प्रथितसामर्थ्यमन्मथस्थितिनाशन॥

jaya prathitasāmarthyamanmathasthitināśana ॥

Victory, oh one who is the very destruction of that manmatha (kāmadeva),
whose skill/ability \[to induce passions\] is
well-renowned/widely-spread.  
जयाच्युततनुध्वंसकालकूटबलापह।

jayācyutatanudhvaṃsakālakūṭabalāpaha ।

Victory, oh one who removes the power of the kālakūṭa \[poison\], which
ruined the body of acyuta!



जयावर्तमहाटोपसरिद्वेगविधारण॥

jayāvartamahāṭopasaridvegavidhāraṇa ॥

Victory, oh the bearer (vidhāraṇa) of the force/speed (vega) of the
river (sarit), which is greatly proud/haughty (maha+āṭopa) with its
windings/curves (āvarta)!



जय दारुवनोद्यानमुनिपत्नीविमोहक।

jaya dāruvanodyānamunipatnīvimohaka ।

Victory, oh deluder of the sages as well as their wives in the dāruvana
garden-grove!



जय नृत्तमहारम्भक्रीडाविक्षोभदारुण॥

jaya nṛttamahārambhakrīḍāvikṣobhadāruṇa ॥

Victory, oh who dreads \[the world\] with shaking, due to the great
exertion/effort of the play of his dance!



जयोग्ररूपसंरम्भत्रासितत्रिदशासुर।

jayograrūpasaṃrambhatrāsitatridaśāsura ।

Victory, oh one who, assuming the fierce form, terrified the thirty
(tridaśa, a synonym for deva) and the asuras (Basically, the
devāsura-s)!



जयक्रूरजनेन्द्रास्यदर्शितासृक्सुनिर्झर॥

jayakrūrajanendrāsyadarśitāsṛksunirjhara ॥

Victory, one who, in the mouth of the lord of the cruel folks, showed a
stream of blood!

**Note:**Due to the sheer strange wording of the verse, this is my
favorite part of the whole stuti. While, on a surface reading,
commentators have identified this line to pertain to the episode, where
śiva humbles rāvaṇa by pressing down the mountain on his heads, one of
the commentators, the venerable śrī tryambakaśambhu, gives a rich and
beautiful inner meaning of this line, which we will see in a subsequent
post or subsequent edit of this post.



जय वीरपरिस्पन्ददक्षयज्ञविनाशन।

jaya vīraparispandadakṣayajñavināśana ।

Victory, oh who is (or caused) the destruction of dakṣa’s sacrifice by
stirring up (parispanda) the hero/vīra (that is, vīrabhadra)



जयाद्भुतमहालिङ्गसंस्थानबलगर्वित॥

jayādbhutamahāliṅgasaṃsthānabalagarvita ॥

Victory, one who took pride in that form (saṃsthāna) of the liṅga,
wondrous (adbhuta) and great (maha)!



जय श्वेतनिमित्तोग्रमृत्युदेहनिपातन।

jaya śvetanimittogramṛtyudehanipātana ।

Victory, oh one who, for the sake of śveta-muni, felled the body of
fierce death (ugramṛtyu)!



जयाशेषसुखावासकाममोहितशैलज॥

jayāśeṣasukhāvāsakāmamohitaśailaja ॥

Victory, who has infatuated/bewitched the daughter of the mountain
(śailaja; that is umā) with desire (kāma); \[this kāma\] which is the
abode (vāsa) of the totality (aśeṣa) of pleasures (sukhā)!



जयोपमन्युसन्तापमोहजालतमोहर।

jayopamanyusantāpamohajālatamohara ।

Victory, oh one who removed the great heat/torture (santāpa) of upamanyu
and the darkness (tamas) of the web (jāla) of delusion (moha)!



जयपातालमूलोर्ध्वलोकालोकप्रदाहक॥

jayapātālamūlordhvalokālokapradāhaka ॥

Victory, oh one who burns (pradāhaka) \[these\] worlds (loka-s) and the
aloka-s (the non-human worlds ranging from those of piśāca-s to
brahmadeva) from above (ūrdhva) the root (mūla) of the pātāla-s!

**Note**: In the siddhānta cosmology, below the pātāla-s are the
naraka-s, which are directly above the world of kālāgni-rudra. At the
time of absolute destruction, kālāgnirudra engulfs all the worlds above
it.

We have thus ended the simple translation of the stuti. We hope to
delve, as soon as possible, deep into the symbolic meanings and the
classical commentaries on the stuti by the boundless grace of sadāśiva.

May the sixteen loud and thunderous jaya-s of the stuti shake the skulls
of those who mock śiva and his āgama-s;may the deva praised by the
four vedas and twenty-eight āgama-s protect the student of the hymn!

