+++
title = "Homosexuality,"
full_title = "Homosexuality, epigenetics, and zebras"
date = "2013-01-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/12/homosexuality-epigenetics-and-zebras/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/12/homosexuality-epigenetics-and-zebras/).

Homosexuality, epigenetics, and zebras

The recent article in the Quarterly Review of Biology has some good
points. It does not argue that homosexuality is adaptive, which would be
silly. It does not argue for Lamarckian epigenetics, which would also be
silly. I should also point out that they’ve given up on sexually
antagonistic selection, since the GWAS surveys pretty much rule it out.

They note that variations in hormonal levels before birth don’t seem to
cause much trouble, and conclude that humans adjust to those levels –
homeostasis, basically. They suggest that this is implemented by
epigenetic changes, and that sometimes those epigenetic changes are not
properly reset in the next generation. Leaky epigenetics.

Of course, this hardly ever results in funny-looking genitalia – you’d
think it would, but then natural selection has made that kind of error
rare. Of course, it should have made epigenetic leakage that cause
low-fitness behaviors like homosexuality equally rare. Which is the
problem with this hypothesis: it rests on the assumption that natural
selection in humans has been on a mysterious, all-expenses-paid vacation
when it comes to mating. They suggest that maybe sexual behavior have
changed since the human-chimp split and therefore there just hasn’t been
enough time to thoroughly canalize sexual development in humans.

I guarantee that speech is newer than that. What fraction of people are
unable to talk? Gee, being mute is far less frequent than homosexuality,
even though speech sure seems more complicated. Why is speechlessness so
rare? Speech is damn useful, and natural selection has made failure
rare. But it’s not more useful than reproduction its own self.

Rice suggested sexually antagonistic genes, earlier. What fraction of
known, common, fitness-reducing syndromes are known to be caused by
that? Gee, none of them. What fraction are known to caused by leaky
epigenetics? None.

What fraction are known to be caused by infectious organisms?
Practically all of them. So you know it can’t be that, right? Life is
really a vast murder mystery – it’s always the one you least suspect.

The Emmdees say that when you hear hoofbeats, think horses, not zebras.
When explaining homosexuality, people think of pterodactyls and
unicorns.

