+++
title = "War Before Civilization"
full_title = "War Before Civilization"
date = "2013-01-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/04/war-before-civilization/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/04/war-before-civilization/).

War Before Civilization

When you think of war, you usually think of organized states, or at
minimum peoples with moderately sophisticated modes of production,
agriculturalists or pastoralists. But hunter-gatherers manage as well.
Not just war, but decisive war, the kind that that obliterates the enemy
and results in a major geographic expansion. Before the Eskimos, there
was a different population living in arctic North America and Greenland,
the Dorset culture. Over a fairly short period, between 1000 AD and 1500
AD, the Thule (ancestors of modern Inuit) moved east, replacing the
Dorset. It looks as if the Thule didn’t mix much with the previous
occupants either: we have an early Dorset genome that looks very
Na-dene-like, while the Eskimos are not. The conflict was recent enough
to leave legends among the Eskimo: they say the first inhabitants were
giants, taller and stronger but easily scared off.

While we’re at it, the Na-dene managed to pushed down from western
Canada and Alaska all the way into the Southwest, leaving the Navaho and
Apache where they are today. Although the Navaho surely mixed with
generic Amerinds, they look different, more Asian, so they likely still
have a lot of their ancestry coming from the second, Na-dene migration
into North America.

Neither of these stories sound very much like like Excoffier/Currat
diffusion models.

This has me wondering how many waves of population replacement occurred
*before* agriculture in Europe. We know that homo sap replaced the
Neanderthals, but we sure don’t know that population replacement stopped
there. There were certainly waves of immigration in the Neolithic –
middle Eastern farmers and probably Indo-Europeans – but what about
earlier?

