+++
title = "Paternal Age and"
full_title = "Paternal Age and Homosexuality"
date = "2013-01-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/06/paternal-age-and-homosexuality/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/01/06/paternal-age-and-homosexuality/).

Paternal Age and Homosexuality

There’s something interesting about the paternal age effect in
homosexuality – apparently there isn’t one. It certainly exists for
autism, schizophrenia, manic-depression, and mental retardation, which
suggests that de novo mutations play an important role in all of them.
But homosexuality, although it is obviously a Darwinian mental illness –
despite the opinions of the loons who wrote the DSM – does not seem to
be mutation-driven. At least not much. It’s a different kind of crazy.

There were already reasons to think this. First, homosexuality is A.
common and B. involves disruption of a relatively simple adaptation, one
that ought to present a smallish mutational target. It would not be easy
for something driven by mutation to become that common (> 1%), when the
number of key genes involved in sexual targeting probably is not
especially large. Certainly not large compared to the number that
influence general intelligence.

Besides that, we (I have a tapeworm) don’t see syndromic forms of
homosexuality, ones in which particular mutations cause the phenotype of
interest (deafness, for example) but also cause other characteristic
changes, such as wide-set eyes and a white streak of hair (Waardenburg
syndrome). About 15% of the mutations causing deafness are syndromic. I
don’t know the fraction of mutations causing mental retardation that are
syndromic, but it must be substantial: that’s why people working with
mentally retarded youth talk about FLKs – funny-looking kids. There
might be genetic/syndromic kinds of homosexuality, but they must be
rare. They might be very informative, however.

By the way, I’m supposed to say ‘intellectual disability”, instead of
retardation, according to various morons.

