+++
title = "Does Śāntideva’s theory"
full_title = "Does Śāntideva’s theory make demands?"
date = "2015-07-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/05/does-santidevas-theory-make-demands/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/05/does-santidevas-theory-make-demands/).

Does Śāntideva’s theory make demands?

My friend [Stephen
Harris](http://www.hum.leiden.edu/philosophy/academic-staff/harrisse.html)
recently posted an [interesting
article](https://www.academia.edu/13212028/Demandingness_Well-Being_and_the_Bodhisattva_Path)
on the question of whether Śāntideva’s ethics is “overdemanding”. I
appreciate the article’s methodological approach. It engages Śāntideva’s
ethics with the categories of analytical moral philosophy while moving
beyond the relatively fruitless attempt to
[classify](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/taking-back-ethics/)
it: not “is Śāntideva’s ethics consequentialist?” but “is Śāntideva’s
ethics vulnerable to the charges made against consequentialism?” The
latter approach is more important because it allows *engagement* with
Śāntideva’s ideas: asking the question “to what extent is Śāntideva
*right*?”

There is much that is thoughtful and valuable in Harris’s article, and I
can’t engage with all of it. It raises important points that go beyond
anything I can say here. I’m going to focus on one narrow point that I
think Harris doesn’t develop enough, but I don’t want that to detract
from the wider issues at stake here. If what I say here is correct, I
think much of Harris’s overall argument would survive, though its terms
would likely be significantly altered.

The point that nags at me is the focus in the article – a focus
inherited from the analytic categories Harris employs – on *obligation*,
or duty or demand. (I’ve previously noted Christine Korsgaard’s
[argument](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/value-beyond-obligation/)
that the move from virtue to obligation is a characteristically modern
one, and that is quite relevant here.) The overdemandingness objection,
as Harris describes it, “arises when a moral theory makes unfair
*demands* on its adherents.” (my emphasis) This is a common objection
made against the likes of [Peter
Singer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/01/of-drowning-children-near-and-far-i/).
It is not just that Singer tells us that we should give up all possible
comforts in order to feed and clothe the starving; he
[adds](http://www.utilitarian.net/singer/by/1972----.htm), as well, that
doing so is not merely a charity but a duty:

> It follows from what I have said earlier that we ought to give money
> away, rather than spend it on clothes which we do not need to keep us
> warm. To do so is not charitable, or generous. Nor is it the kind of
> act which philosophers and theologians have called “supererogatory” –
> an act which it would be good to do, but not wrong not to do. On the
> contrary, we ought to give the money away, and it is wrong not to do
> so.

Singer’s theory, then, *demands* that we give our money away. But what I
want to suggest is that Śāntideva is not making a demand in the same way
– so that something is missed when one describes his theory as
“overdemanding”. The point I am making here has to do with the
significant
[Spinozist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/02/goodness-as-preventing-suffering/)
or even [Nietzschean
element](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/ethics-without-morality/)
to be found in Śāntideva’s thought. In chapter VI of the
Bodhicaryāvatāra, Śāntideva argues hard against the very idea of blame,
and in so doing, I think, moves his emphasis away from Singer’s idea of
moral wrongness. Those who do wrong are not targets for blame but for
compassion. Śāntideva thinks it *better* that we follow the path he lays
out for it –but it is not clear to me that he *demands* it, or that we
are obliged to do so.

Harris’s seventh footnote rightly notes: “In addition, early Buddhist
traditions hold the bodhisattva path to be an optional supererogatory
commitment and so would not face the overdemandingess objection.” My
suggestion here is that we should likely view Śāntideva himself (and
possibly most Indian Buddhist thinkers, Mahāyāna and otherwise) in the
same way.

Nietzsche tells us that beyond good and evil does not mean beyond good
and bad; and I think Śāntideva’s ethical vocabulary is closer to the
latter pair of categories. Likely the most common normative terms in his
writings, one might note, are [puṇya and
pāpa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/translating-pu%E1%B9%87ya-and-papa/):
good and bad karma (or karmically good and bad). If we in the 21st
century are going to try to apply an ethic of karma we will likely need
to
[naturalize](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/)
it; I do think it is fruitful to do so. But [I have
argued](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/)
that when we do, we are best off identifying good karma with something
like Greek *eudaimonia* – a concept having far more to do with virtue
than with obligation. In Śāntideva himself it has a close connection
with the absence of suffering – and not, I have argued, with [moral
blame](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/02/goodness-as-preventing-suffering/).

Now as Harris rightly notes, Śāntideva’s claims about what is good are
quite extreme – an ascetic monastic life far removed from the everyday
world, committed to the well-being of all other beings. But as I read
him, his theory does not *demand* that we take up this life. Rather, it
recommends that we take it up if we know what is good for us. To avoid
this life is to commit ourselves to that very suffering we wish to
avoid; we are doing something wrong in that we are making a *mistake*.
It is in the nature of the world’s phenomena that they are not only
empty but lead us to suffering. To avoid the bodhisattva path is not
forbidden so much as *unwise*.

So to the extent that there are supposedly unfair demands made on the
agent, these demands are not made by the theory, but by the *world*. the
theory merely describes those demands inherent in the nature of things.
If that is the case, its unfairness seems much less of a problem, for
one cannot expect the world to be fair. (Except, perhaps, [if one is a
monotheist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/karma-answering-a-question-not-worth-asking/),
as Śāntideva is not.) One can of course object that the world is not in
fact as Śāntideva describes it. But to the objection that what the world
demands of us is *unfair*, it is quite reasonable to respond: tough
luck. That is how the world is, and my theory merely reports it. It
would be really nice if the world’s demands were fair, but they aren’t,
and we will just have to live with that.
