+++
title = "Ultimate reality in"
full_title = "Ultimate reality in Hinduism, Buddhism (etc) Some suggestions for a possible syllabus"
date = "2015-07-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/14/ultimate-reality-in-hinduism-buddhism-etc-some-suggestions-for-a-possible-syllabus/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/14/ultimate-reality-in-hinduism-buddhism-etc-some-suggestions-for-a-possible-syllabus/).

Ultimate reality in Hinduism, Buddhism (etc.): Some suggestions for a possible syllabus

A reader (Robert [Gressis](https://csun.academia.edu/RobertGressis))
asked me to give him some advice for a class on philosophy of religion
in which he would (admirably) like to insert something more than “the
typical western philosophy of religion”. He would be interested in
primary and secondary literature on the following topics:

1.  What is the nature of the ultimate reality (from Hindu, Buddhist,
    Islamic and Jewish perspectives)
2.  Why should we believe that that is what the ultimate reality is like
    (from the above perspectives again)
3.  Is there a non-rational means of coming to know the nature of
    ultimate reality? (I’m asking here about attitudes like faith in the
    above traditions)
4.  What are persons like, and what will happen when we die? (from all
    the above perspectives)
5.  Given what ultimate reality is like, and given what we’re like, how
    should we conduct ourselves?

Ad 1: My first reaction is that it is quite difficult to speak of a
“Buddhist” answer (since, to begin with, Theravāda Buddhists would speak
of *nirvāṇa* or *bodhi* as the *summum bonum*, whereas Indian Mahāyana
Buddhists would rather emphasise the Bodhisattva-path and Pure-Land
Buddhists would again emphasise Avalokiteśvara’s Paradise), and it is
surely impossible to speak of a “Hindu” one. I do not want to enter into
the moot issue of whether “Hinduism” exists, but even if it does, it is
surely not a unitary tradition. I know, Western scholars are often used
to read about an impersonal *brahman* as the “Hindu” answer to 1., but
this is only due to the fact that Advaita Vedānta thinkers (upholding
the theory of *brahman* as the ultimate reality) reached the West before
others (and possibly also to their gaining a predominant position during
the Vijayanagara empire). Śaiva authors of the Pratyabhijñā school, for
instance (about which you can refer to Raffaele Torella’s and Isabelle
Ratié’s studies, to begin with), speak of a personal ultimate reality,
namely Parameśvara Himself.

I have anticipated my general perplexity to Robert, who has answered as
follows:

> I should have said that I’m interested in a representative perspective
> from these four traditions. I realize that in some cases there is no
> representative perspective, but what would you be pleased if an
> undergraduate learned, given that they could only learn 1 or 2
> perspectives on these topics?

This being said, I would suggest Theravāda and Yogācāra for Buddhism
(the reason for the choice of the latter is that Madhyamaka is really
hard to deal with in terms of “Absolute reality”) and two among
Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta (personal God of which all the world, we included,
are specifications), Advaita Vedānta (impersonal brahman, all the rest
is only illusion, *māyā*), Acintya Bhedābhedavāda —aka Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism— (personal God, who is paradoxically distinct and
non-distinct from the world, see this article by
[Graheli](http://www.google.at/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0CDAQFjACahUKEwjL-eeGydjGAhXM1RQKHQtlAHU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fhomepage.univie.ac.at%2Falessandro.graheli%2Fpublications%2FGraheli_2007_Narration_Comprehension_Paradox.pdf&ei=He2jVYv3KMyrU4vKgagH&usg=AFQjCNH_jmI_Jgmn0BZK8PPN7dYpAvt_MA&sig2=1dPBQHORTervrtFapLtB2w&bvm=bv.97653015,d.d24)),
Nyāya (God as ontological foundation of the metaphysics) or Pratyabhijñā
(personal God, all the rest is His conscious play, *līlā*) for the
so-called Hinduism. The choice would depend on one’s further choices
(see below). I would nonetheless be clear about the problems entailed by
the term “Hinduism”.

This is known (2) through recognising (*pratyabhijñā*-) oneself as part
of it (see Ratié’s *Le Soi et l’Autre*, in case you read French). Also
most Buddhist schools uphold that it is possible to achieve knowledge of
the Four Noble Truths through some sort of intellectual intuition
(*yogipratyakṣa*, about which you can read
[this](https://www.scribd.com/doc/80599969/Observations-on-Yogipratyaksa-Raffaele-Torella)
essay by Torella available on line). Nyāya authors, especially from
Uddyotakara onwards, will rather stress that the Ultimate (=God
understood in an Aristotelian way, that is, as the Metaphysic entity
which makes sense of the world) can be achieved thorugh inferential
reasoning (see Chemparathy’s 1972 work on the Rational Theology of
Udayana). And Śaiva authors of the Śaivasiddhānta school followed this
path (I have dealt with that in my thesis, but it is unfortunately in
Italian).  
By contrast, Pūrva and Uttara Mīmāṃsā authors firmly deny that the
Ultimate can be accessed through anything but the Sacred Texts.

Ad 3: Pūrva Mīmāṃsā author would claim that their attitude in this sense
is purely rational and not fideistic, whereas Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava authors
explicitly acknowledge the value of *śraddhā* ‘faith’. Interestingly
enough, faith is recognised as a distinct topic also in Theravāda
Buddhist texts (see [this
study](https://www.academia.edu/1376420/Faith_and_Renunciation_in_Early_Buddhism_Saddh%C4%81_and_Nekkhamma)
by Giuliano Giustarini).

Ad 4: There is a very interesting
[book](http://www.ashgate.com/isbn/9781409443544) edited by Kuznetsova,
Ganeri and Ram-Prasad on the concept of “subject” in “Hinduism” you
might want to have a look at. “Our” Matthew Dasti edited with Edwin
Bryant a related book on *Free Will, Agency, and Selfhood in Indian
Philosophy*, which is very interesting and at the same time probably
also accessible to a non-specialised public.

Ad 5: This is, again, a very vast question, whose answers range from
ascetism (especially in Jainism —although you did not mention it in your
original query— and some trends of Buddhism and Yoga) to the traditional
acknowledged *mārga*s ‘paths’. These were originally the path of
(ritual) action, upheld by the thinkers of Pūrva Mīmāṃsā on the basis of
the prescriptive portions of the Vedas (called Brāhmaṇas) and also on
the ethics of the *Bhagavadgītā*, and the path of knowledge (of the
ultimate non-distinction between oneself and the brahman; or of the
nature of the brahman and of oneself), upheld by Vedāntic schools. To
those two, the path of devotion (*bhakti*) (to God, or to the brahman
seen as God) was added, for those for whom the first two were too hard.
Within Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta (see the book by Mumme reviewed
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/26/book-review-of-the-srivai%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%87ava-theological-debate-by-patricia-y-mumme-reviewed-by-elisa-freschi/))
a forth path was added, namely that of surrender (*prapatti*) to God,
for those (probably all human beings) who were unable even to be
selfless devotees.

Now, I am perhaps not the best candidate to answer (also insofar as have
I never taught in the US and may, thus, not be able to assess the
expectations of US students), thus, “the floor is open” for further
suggestions.
