+++
title = "Renunciation and the"
full_title = "Renunciation and the Good Life"
date = "2015-07-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/17/renunciation-and-the-good-life/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/17/renunciation-and-the-good-life/).

Renunciation and the Good Life

The following is an expanded version of the introduction to my paper,
“Renunciation, Pleasure, and the Good Life in the Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads,”
forthcoming in *Philosophy East and West* (July 2017).

The Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads characterize the life of the *saṃnyāsin*
(renunciate) as devoid of earthly pleasure. At the same time, these and
other texts record confusion and suspicion toward those who would pursue
such a life, and disbelief that such severe austerity could be required.
To many, the *saṃnyāsin* seems to forsake the good life in forsaking
earthly pleasures. I call this the ‘Precluded Pleasures Objection’ to
the *saṃnyāsin* ideal.

A number of replies to the Precluded Pleasures Objection might be drawn
from the Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads themselves. The first points out that the
*saṃnyāsin* ideal is typically reserved for members of the twice-born
classes, and perhaps only *brāhmaṇa* men, who have reached relative old
age. Whether the ideal is attractive to anyone outside of this small
group, then, seems irrelevant.

The problem with this reply is that the ideal remains unattractive to
most members of that small group for whom it is intended for the same
reasons that it is unattractive to the broader community. The
abandonment of all earthly pleasures is generally unattractive to the
privileged and the underprivileged, the young and the old. This must be
at least part of the explanation for the extraordinary rarity of the
*saṃnyāsin* of the most austere – and ideal – sort.
*Paramahaṃsaparivrājaka Upaniṣad* 287-288, for example, admits that “in
this world, the *paramahaṃsaparivrājaka* (the highest type of
renunciate) is very rare. If there is one \[of them\], he alone is
always pure. He alone is a man of the Vedas.”[\[1\]](#_ftn1)

The second reply explains the relative unpopularity of the *saṃnyāsin*
ideal in terms of the shortcomings of those who fail to see its appeal.
Most people, after all, are excessively attached to things that are
unworthy of enjoyment. *Maitreya Upaniṣad* 110 says, “\[tangible\]
objects (*artha*) such as \[those relating to\] sound, touch, and so on
(*śabdasparśādayo*) are certainly worthless (*anartha* *iva*).” It is
hardly a shortcoming in the *saṃnyāsin* ideal that it demands that
people abandon what is of little value to begin with.

The Precluded Pleasures Objection is not so easily dismissed, however.
Even if popular conceptions of the good life overvalue a wide range of
earthly pleasures, there are still other earthly pleasures that seem
genuinely valuable. If the *saṃnyāsin* takes no pleasure in the world,
then he does not enjoy a visit from a friend or the beauty of a sunset.
He takes no pleasure in the sound of a sparrow’s song or the sight of
children playing. Pleasures such as these, however, seem genuinely
valuable. It might even be that pleasures such as these are essential to
the good life. If they are, then the *saṃnyāsin* forsakes the good life
in forsaking earthly pleasures.

A third reply admits that the life of the *saṃnyāsin* is not especially
good for him, but insists that this sacrifice is required in order to
attain *mokṣa* (liberation). This strategy ought to be one of last
resort, however. It would be better, all other things being equal, if
the current life of the *saṃnyāsin* were sufficiently good for him than
if it were not, in just the same way that it would be better, all other
things being equal, if each year of a person’s life were sufficiently
good for him than if it were not. A life is not for naught just because
of one bad year, and a series of lifetimes might not be for naught just
because of one bad lifetime, but one bad year is a significant cost, and
one bad lifetime is more significant still.

Furthermore, once it is admitted that the current life of the
*saṃnyāsin* is not intrinsically good for him, there is little reason to
think that the current life will be the only one that is not
intrinsically good for him. If one bad lifetime is a significant
detriment, a series of bad lifetimes is much worse.

A final reason to resist admitting that the life of the *saṃnyāsin* is
not especially good for him is that many of the Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads
repeatedly describe the *saṃnyāsin* as taking immense and constant
pleasure in the *ātman* (true self) and/or *brahman* (God) – not only in
future lives, but in his current life as well. *Kuṇḍika Upaniṣad* 27,
for example, says “the wise sage (*vidvān*… *muniḥ*) always rejoices in
the self (*ātmārāmaḥ sadā*).” *Bṛhad-Avadhūta Upaniṣad* 309 describes
the *saṃnyāsin* saying, “let \[my\] mind dissolve in the bliss of
*brahman* (*brahmānande*).”

The claim that the *saṃnyāsin* takes immense and constant pleasure in
the *ātman* and/or *brahman* points toward a fourth reply to the
Precluded Pleasures Objection. While the *saṃnyāsin* forsakes earthly
pleasures, he is more than compensated by the pleasure he takes in the
*ātman* and/or *brahman*.

The problem with this reply is that pleasures are not obviously
interchangeable in this way. The life of the *saṃnyāsin* might be
deficient, despite his great pleasure in the *ātman* and/or *brahman*,
because it is devoid of so many other important pleasures, just as the
life of a person who only enjoys gazing at the greatest works of art
might be deficient because it is devoid of so many other important
pleasures.

A fifth reply states that earthly pleasures invariably produce earthly
desires. Earthly desires, in turn, lead to suffering, in the form of
rebirth, and so on, that outweighs the value of any earthly
pleasure.[\[2\]](#_ftn2)

It is false, however, that earthly pleasures invariably produce earthly
desires. Suppose a person tastes an artichoke for the first time, and
enjoys it, but only because she has never tasted anything quite like it.
She knows that the taste of the artichoke will not be novel in the
future, and hence, does not desire to taste another artichoke, despite
having just enjoyed one. Similarly, a person might fully enjoy living in
the dormitory in his first year in university, but have no desire at all
to live in the dormitory after this, counting the experience unsuitable
for all but freshmen.

In other cases, an agent enjoys something but does not come to desire it
because she believes it is bad. A parent might take pleasure in hearing
that the school bully was beaten up by an older child, and yet not want
the child to be beaten up again. Someone might take pleasure in seeing a
person trip and fall in a comical way, but wish no such thing upon
anyone.

If earthly pleasures do not invariably produce desires, then they do not
inevitably cause suffering. And if earthly pleasures do not inevitably
cause suffering, then earthly pleasures might make a significant
positive net contribution to the intrinsic value of a life. If the life
of the *saṃnyāsin* is devoid of such pleasures, then his life might be
deficient as a result.

The Precluded Pleasures Objection can be avoided, but only by revising
the *saṃnyāsin* ideal so that it is consistent with the *saṃnyāsin*
enjoying the world. If it is possible to enjoy earthly things without
desiring them, as I’ve just suggested, then this account seems more
plausible.

Indeed, the example of the *saṃnyāsin* fits well with many of the
examples that I just mentioned. In each of these cases, the agent enjoys
something but does not come to desire it on the basis of good reasons.
The person who eats the artichoke does not desire to eat another
artichoke because she knows that the novelty has worn off. The parent
does not desire to see the bully beaten up again, because he knows that
harm to children is bad.

Likewise, the *saṃnyāsin* who has just enjoyed a visit from a friend
(for example) does not desire another visit from his friend, because he
knows that the desire itself produces suffering. For this reason, he
enjoys the visit from a friend, but does not desire another visit. He
might enjoy other earthly things in the same way, and yet remain devoid
of desires for earthly things more generally.

Indeed, these kinds of considerations might explain the otherwise
inconsistent claim that the *saṃnyāsin* takes pleasure in everything
that he encounters. *Nāradaparivrājaka* 154, for example, says that the
sage “is satisfied with what he attains by chance
(*yadṛcchālābhasaṃtuṣṭa*).” *Bṛhad-Avadhūta Upaniṣad* 305 explains that
“the yogin enjoys objects (*yogi viṣayān prabhuṅkte*), but is not
defiled by merit or demerit (*na lipyate puṇapāpaiś*). \[He remains\]
pure.” If the yogin enjoys things, but does not accrue merit or demerit,
then he must enjoy things without desiring them. This means that he
takes pleasure in things without desiring them, and hence, without
prolonging rebirth. If his life contains earthly pleasures, however,
then his life is not deficient for the reasons cited in the Precluded
Pleasures Objection.

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) All citations of the Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads refer to
Schrader, F. Otto. (ed.). 1912. *The Minor Upaniṣads Vol. I: Saṃnyāsa
Upaniṣads* (Madras: The Adyar Library).

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Stephen Harris considers a similar reply to a related
(but not identical) objection to the *bodhisattva* ideal in the second
chapter of his dissertation, *Demandingness, Self-Interest and
Benevolence in Śāntideva’s Introduction to the Practice of Awakening
(Bodhicaryāvatāra)* (University of New Mexico).


