+++
title = "A plea for more mutual"
full_title = "A plea for more mutual knowledge and cooperation among scholars"
date = "2015-07-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/20/if-you-work-on-indian-philosophy-in-north-america-in-europein-japanin-india/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/20/if-you-work-on-indian-philosophy-in-north-america-in-europein-japanin-india/).

A plea for more mutual knowledge and cooperation among scholars

If you work on Indian Philosophy in North America, you are probably in a
department of Religious Studies (or of Philosophy, or of South Asian
Studies), you are a member of the RISA newsletter, attend the annual AAR
conference (perhaps also the APA one), publish and read books by North
American University Presses, have the problems usually connected with
attaining a TT position or a tenure, etc. etc. More importantly, your
environment suggests you to include Indian texts in great philosophical
enterprises. You need to be aware of the last methodological
advancements and to know the jargon and the methods of religious studies
(and/or of anthropology, philosophy, etc.).

If you work on Indian Philosophy in Europe, you are probably in an
Institute of classical Indology or of Oriental Studies (or of Classics,
only rarely of Philosophy or of Religious Studies), you are a member of
the Indology newsletter, attend once in three years the World Sanskrit
Conference, the IABS conference, perhaps also the DOT and the other
various national and international conferences, publish and read books
by Brill, Routledge, Harrassowitz, Peter Lang, OUP or CUP and other
European University Presses, have the problems usually connected with
having your projects financed, etc. etc. More importantly, your
environment often suggests you to be precise, analytic, historically,
philologically and linguistically accurate in collecting and analysing
your data.

Mutatis mutandis, similar differences apply to scholars in Japan and
India (where there are also important scholarly communities working on
Indian philosophy).  

I know, these are gross generalisations and as such they are also
incorrect. There are many North American, Indian and Japanese scholars
in the Indology mailing list, or publishing on *Journal of Indian
Philosophy*, or at the WSC; as well as there are many European scholars
in the RISA mailing list, at the AAR conference or publishing on
*Philosophy East and West*. Similarly, there are Indian scholars
publishing on *Indogaku Bukkyōgaku Kenkyū* and North American ones
publishing on the *Adyar Library Bulletin* and so on.

Yet, it is a pity that, although our community is extremely small (a
middle sized bank in a state capital has more employees than there are
scholars of Indian philosophy in the world), we often ignore our
colleagues’ work, which are published in journals and presses we are not
used to check. Thus, European scholars often ignore the achievements of
their North American, Indian and Japanese colleagues and vice versa.

Personally, I hope that this blog will be a small contribution towards
the goal of knowing each other and working together to the shared goal
of improving our knowledge of Indian thought. In this sense, our
different methodological strengths could make a cooperation even more
important and fruitful.
