+++
title = "Talkin’ ’bout their"
full_title = "Talkin’ ’bout their generations"
date = "2012-10-29"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/10/29/talkin-bout-their-generations/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/10/29/talkin-bout-their-generations/).

Talkin’ ’bout their generations

According to the Decode results, mothers contribute 15 mutations,
regardless of age, while men contribute 25 + 2\*(g-20) mutations, when
g is the average paternal age. As I pointed out earlier, if g is the
same in both sexes, the average number of mutations is just 2g, which
makes for 2 mutations per calendar year. I’ve been checking out average
maternal age: it doesn’t vary much. The lowest I’ve seen was 26, the
highest 30, so 28 is a reasonable number. So far, in the data we’ve
gathered, the population with the highest paternal age was in Gambia,
with an average paternal age of 47. If we assume that the average
maternal age is 28 (which look about right from the graph: I haven’t
digitized it yet) then the average kid would receive 94 new mutations
(15 maternal, 79 paternal). With an average generation length of 37.5
years (the average of 28 and 47), that makes for 2.5 mutations per
calendar year: about 15% higher than you would see in most populations,
where the gap between average maternal and paternal age is not nearly as
large.

A Gambia-sized gap would result in a noticeably higher rate of neutral
genetic divergence. If it had existed long enough you might be able to
notice it, but I think there’s a better chance of seeing this effect in
Australian Aborigines, who had high average paternal age and might have
had it for a long time. Other than the Australians, I would guess that
all the old-dad societies are relatively recent.

The higher mutational load is not just a consequence of the higher
per-year mutation rate in these old-dad societies – since generations
are longer, there is less selection per calendar year (considering that
most selection acts early in life). The number of mutations per
generation is probably the most important number. I found some numbers
for Polar Eskimos, hunter-gatherers (they gather snow) in a tough
environment: average maternal age was 27, average paternal age was 32,
for an average generation length of 29.5. They’d have 64 mutations a
generation: the per-generation rate in Gambia is 47% higher.

There are also qualitative differences in selection: selection is
weaker in childhood and stronger in midlife in an old-dad society, as
Henry pointed out. So that situation should select for longer life,
except that’s hard to manage in the presence of higher-than-usual
genetic load.

