+++
title = "Samskrit\u200c \u200cWeek\u200c \u200c–\u200c"
full_title = "Samskrit\u200c \u200cWeek\u200c \u200c–\u200c \u200c2021\u200c"
date = "2021-08-13"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VGtSSk1rMTZaM2RQUkZVMVQwUlJQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VGtSSk1rMTZaM2RQUkZVMVQwUlJQUT09).

Samskrit‌ ‌Week‌ ‌–‌ ‌2021‌ 



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-1628872774Samskrit%20week%202021%2019.jpg)

Samskrit Week is celebrated every year three days before and three days
after the Shravana Purnima. Hence this year it will be from 19th to 25th
August. It has become a routine program of Samskrit institutions and
organisations. No doubt they have to celebrate and propagate Samskrit.
But should it be the program of Samskrit institutions alone? Don’t
others too have the responsibility of popularising Samskrit? Samskrit
belongs to all and all need to learn or work for Samskrit. A community
which abandons its language of culture, its source of inspiration and
its bond of unity cannot flourish to its fullest. Losing the link to our
past is like losing the civilizational memory and the priceless
heritage.  
  
Though I write about Samskrit Week every year in Samskrit language and
appeal to Samskrit scholars and students, this year I decided not to
appeal to them but to appeal to everybody who love Samskrit, who revere
Samskrit and to all those who understand their belongingness to the
great Samskrit heritage, because the onus of promotion of Samskrit lies
on all of them. Hence, I am writing this article in English/Indian
languages and not in Samskrit.  
  
If you really love Samskrit, which ever institution or organisation you
are working in or associated with, request them to do some thing for
Samskrit in this Samskrit Week. Request every one amongst your contacts
and acquaintances to help the cause of Samskrit in whatever possible
way. You can request – 1) to start learning Samskrit 2) to donate
generously to any of the Samskrit teaching activity/ Prachar/ Gurukul/
Veda Pathashala/ Project etc. 3) to be a volunteer 4) to give time to
teach/organise 5) to utilise his/her talent - for Samskrit.  
  
Making the Samskrit Week celebrations more focussed may produce greater
impacts. To popularise Samskrit, the focus can be popularising Samskrit
Knowledge Systems. NEP 2020 says (in para 4.17) “The importance,
relevance, and beauty of the classical languages and literature of India
also cannot be overlooked. Sanskrit, while also an important modern
language mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India,
possesses a classical literature that is greater in volume than that of
Latin and Greek put together, containing vast treasures of mathematics,
philosophy, grammar, music, politics, medicine, architecture,
metallurgy, drama, poetry, storytelling, and more (known as ‘Sanskrit
Knowledge Systems’), written by people of various religions as well as
non-religious people, and by people from all walks of life and a wide
range of socio-economic backgrounds over thousands of years. Sanskrit
will thus be offered at all levels of school and higher education as an
important, enriching option for students, including as an option in the
three-language formula. It will be taught in ways that are interesting
and experiential as well as contemporarily relevant, including through
the use of Sanskrit Knowledge Systems, and in particular through
phonetics and pronunciation. Sanskrit textbooks at the foundational and
middle school level may be written in Simple Standard Sanskrit (SSS) to
teach Sanskrit through Sanskrit (STS) and make its study truly
enjoyable.” Hence one way to highlight Samskrit is via popularising the
“Sanskrit Knowledge Systems” (SKS) in this Samskrit Week. Every day, one
aspect of SKS may be highlighted for seven days.  
  
A search on the internet shows up ample number of websites on Indian
Knowledge systems in Samskrit, Tamil, Prakrit, Pali, etc languages.
Select any site and topic you like and share them to as many people as
you could or in as many groups as possible. If you are going to arrange
any talks, you would easily get seven speakers on seven topics of SKS
for seven days.  
  
Why don’t we make Samskrit Week celebrations something different this
time? Share your thoughts in social media in this regard. Let us reach
maximum number of people and approach maximum number of institutions.
Samskrit teachers and Samskrit students celebrating Samskrit Week in the
premises of Samskrit Universities and Samskrit Colleges will be good to
keep their spirits up. Conducting competitions for school students are
also needed. But let us take Samskrit beyond that. Let the country know
about Samskrit Knowledge Systems this time. Samskrit language was the
chariot of Knowledge Systems of this land for thousands of years. Let
Samskrit Knowledge Systems be the chariot for Samskrit language at this
juncture of educational reforms!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 1892 \| 13-08-2021 10:09
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

