+++
title = "Venkatapati Deva Raya –"
full_title = "Venkatapati Deva Raya – the Great Savior of Southern India"
date = "2014-11-23"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/11/23/venkatapati-deva-raya-the-great-savior-of-southern-india/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2014/11/23/venkatapati-deva-raya-the-great-savior-of-southern-india/).

Venkatapati Deva Raya – the Great Savior of Southern India

**Disastrous two decades post Talikota**

The most common opinion among the people and historians has been that
post the disaster at Talikota, Vijayanagara had fallen into a period of
misfortune facing defeats after defeats – losing territory gradually.
They either defended their borders or lost territories. The famed
aggression seen from the days of Saluva Narasimha to the last days of
Aliya Rama Raya had deserted the empire completely. The truth is much
different.

It is indeed true that the period from 1565 to 1585 was nothing but two
decades of misfortune and ignomy. Tirumala Raya, who lost one of his
eyes and his eldest son at the talikot.a battle, tried to re-establish
the Hindu rule at Vijayanagara but had to abandon the city for good by
1567 when he transferred the capital to Penukonda – due to constant
attacks from the Mohammedan rulers of Bijapur and Golkonda. By the time
he left the throne to his son, Sri Ranga Raya, he had faced several
invasions in the northern parts of his empire – wherein he lost Adoni,
Turkal, Dharwad and Bankapur to Adil Shah of Bijapur. While he was able
to drive back the Mohammedan forces which invested Penukonda, he was not
able to recapture any of the territories lost to the enemies. His
transfer of capital to Penukonda effectively ended any attempt to regain
Raichur doab for the empire. Portuguese compelled the nayaks of the
western coast to pay tribute to them by using the opportunity of a weak
empire. This further alienated the nayaks from the emperor as the
emperor was not able to help his nayaks – as he was facing constant
attacks on his northern borders from Mohammedan neighbors.

Sri Ranga Raya’s fortunes turned to the worse year after year. Though
initially, he was able to regain the forts lost to Golkonda – his
inscription of 1576 mentions that he conquered Vinukonda and Kondavidu
which must have been captured by Golkonda army sometime prior to this.
Nayak rulers of the western Kanarese districts accepted the suzerainty
of Adil Shah. In 1575, when Adil Shah invested Penukonda, Sri Ranga Raya
was able to repulse the Bijapur army with the help of his vassal, Hande
chief of Bukkarayasamudram. But in the following year, when he tried to
check the expedition of Adil Shah towards Penukonda, he was imprisoned
alive by the Bijapur army leading to a rout of the Hindu army and had to
be ransomed back for a huge sum. Hande, the vassal who helped him in the
previous year, defected to Adil Shah thinking that the Hindu empire was
due to set very soon and the days numbered. In a period of 11 years,
twice the Hindu rulers were captured by the Sultans. After Talikota, the
empire lost all possessions to the north of Tungabhadra while after the
second defeat, they lost all possessions to the north of Penukonda. The
following year, we see another invasion of Penukonda by Adil Shah. But
this time, Jaggadevaraya, the son in law of the emperor, killed two of
the four Bijapur generals leading the attack and drove back the
Mohammedans with huge losses. Some terrirory seems to have been regained
back but not all the lost lands were reconquered. The empire was
continuously on a backfoot. The rebellion and treachery of the nayaks
post Talikota also contributed to the weakness of the empire.

Post 1579, Qutb Shah of Golkonda dispatched his troops against the
empire capturing Vinukonda, Kondavidu, Bellamkonda and Udayagiri.
Golkonda army, led by a traitorous Brahmin general named Murari Rao
captured Ahobilam and sent the ruby encrusted image of Vishnu to the
Sultan. This was one place where Sri Ranga Raya was able to decisively
defeat the Mohammedans later. Srivan Satakopa Svami, pontiff of Ahobila
math during that time, conveyed to the king that Vishnu appeared in his
dreams and asked the two generals Venkataraju and Tirumalaraju to lead
the armies of the empire against the occupying forces and reestablish
his worship at Ahobilam. The emperor dispatched these two generals
against the Golkonda forces entrenched in Ahobilam. They achieved a
signal victory against the Mohammedans and captured Murari Rao alive
(who was left alive due to his being a Brahmana – in our eyes, he was no
Brahmana and was fit for the most torturous death possible).

The eastern Telugu region was lost to Golconda while the north western
Kanarese and parts of western Telugu region was lost to Adil Shah. Sri
Ranga Raya was able to quell the rebellion of his vassals on the
Southern and western coasts. Later towards the end of his rule, he
regained Ahobilam but the empire had indeed effectively lost most of the
possessions to the north of Penukonda when he breathed his last during
1585-86. The annual jihads which were stopped by Krishna Deva Raya were
resumed by the Sultans post Talikota. That the sultans gained a decisive
upperhand is established by this. His brother, Venkatapati Raya, during
his viceroyalty at Chandragiri, managed an expedition to Lanka and
gained tribute from there (this action of Venkatapati during one of the
most turbulent periods of the empire seem to indicate a reversal of
fortunes for the better which shall occur during Venkatapati’s reign).

**Ascension of Venkatapati Deva Raya**

It was at this juncture that Venkatapati Deva Raya (generally called
Venkatapati Raya by historians) adorned the throne of Vijayanagara at
Penukonda. He was the youngest of the four sons of Tirumala and gained
the throne after the death of Sri Ranga. Though there were sons to
another one of his elder brothers (Rama of Sri Rangapatnam) – who had
perhaps a better claim to the throne – the Brahmins, generals and
ministers of the court preferred to raise Venkatapati to the throne as
he was considered the fittest man to rule the empire at such a critical
moment. The empire appeared to be tottering everywhere and seemed to be
nearing its death in a few years. Most major vassals had become
non-cooperative and were trying to become independent. These nayaks had
lost the vision for Hindu unity and were destroying the very foundation
of the empire for their selfishness.

Venkatapati Deva Raya was crowned by his royal preceptor Lakshmi Kumara
Tathacharya, who was 13-14 years of age at the time, as Srimad
Rajadhiraja Paramesvara Sri Vira Pratapa Sri Vira Venkatapati Deva
Maharaja. Despite popular beliefs, Vijayanagara had not folded so easily
post Talikota. While the two decades post Talikota was indeed a period
of disaster for the empire, a complete reversal of fortunes occurred
during the reign of Venkatapati Raya. He is one of the three monarchs
whose life size statues are found in the precincts of Tirumala
Venkatesavara svami mandira. The other two being Krishna Deva Raya and
his brother, Achyuta Deva Raya. We shall now look at his conquests and
accomplishments.

**Invasion of Golconda territories**

He began his reign with an invasion of the dominions conquered by
Golkonda during the reign of his elder brother. Qutb Shah sent a vast
army against Venkatapati, driving him back to Penukonda and invested it.
Venkatapati sent ambassadors to Qutb shah asking for a peaceful
settlement and after this submission, Qutb Shah left Penukonda – happy
that his newly conquered lands will remain with them. But Venkatapati
proved to be a mastermind in strategy and tactics. Within three days he
filled the Penukonda fort with required materials to withstand a long
siege and on the fourth days, 30 thousand musketeers under Jaggadevaraya
entered the fort to strengthen the defense. Matla Anantaraju, who later
was called the right hand of the emperor, also participated in the
defense of the fort. Where the fort was almost defenseless a few days
ago, it became almost impregnable. Raghunatha Nayaka, prince of Tanjore
Nayaks, also arrived to Penukonda with the Tanjore army. The Sultan
understood his mistake and returned to commence the siege once again but
it was of no use. Raghunatha Nayaka, Matla Anantaraju and Jaggadevaraya
inflicted crushing defeats on the Golkonda forces forcing the latter to
raise the siege and retreat.

**Pennar Massacre**

On the banks of Pennar, Venkatapati led the troops in person. He
ambushed the Golkonda forces in the waters of Pennar, killing 50000
Muslims and dyeing the river red. This grand victory of Venkatapati
broke the back of the Qutb Shah forces. For the first time since
Talikota, Hindu forces had decisively crushed the invading marauders.
The fear which had earlier engulfed the hearts of the Sultans during the
reigns of Krishna Deva and Aliya Rama Raya came to re-occupy the place
once again. Post this crushing defeat, Venkatapati chased the remnants
of Qutb Shah’s forces till the banks of Krishna. Prince Muhammad Shah is
shown as having lost a battle every other day while on this disastrous
retreat. The vassals who ruled to the south of Krishna revolted against
the Qutb shah and joined the cause of Vijayanagara. Golconda forces were
also involved in defending their kingdom against the Mughal Prince Murad
in the north, This split worked in favor of Venkatapati even more.

**Annihilation of Qutb Shah’s forces – regaining territories lost**

Qutb shah tried to recover from this disaster by sending an able general
Amin-ul-Mulk to defend the possessions to the south of Krishna. While
Amin-ul-Mulk managed to put down the revolts to some extent, it was very
temporary ; as within a year, Venkatapati had successfully forced the
Muslims forces to retire beyond Krishna. While Muslim chronicles state
that he did not recapture Kondavidu, a careful study of the texts show
that it is a lie. The Muslim chronicles state that when Venkatapati
attacked Kondavidu, he became alarmed on seeing the Golkonda
reinforcements and sued for peace. But the fact that he put the Muslim
general to death and had even reached Kassimkota (north of
Vishakapatnam), whose ruler Mukunda Raja, defected to Vijayanagara shows
that he not only managed to reduce Kondavidu but even cross Krishna
along the coast and conquered coastal lands upto Kassimkota and Palkonda
( i.e) almost the entire coastal region of current day Andhra Pradesh
came under his control.

**Defeat of Adil Shah**

Adil Shah attacked the Kanarese districts and besieged Penukonda. But it
seems Venkata convinced a Hindu general of Bijapur to defect and
inflicted a crushing defeat on the Bijapur army forcing the Sultan to
flee to his capital. It appears that during this retreat Venkata managed
to recapture some territory from Bijapur as well – we come across a
renewed invasion in western Kanarese districts where the nayaks who had
earlier accepted suzerainty of Adil Shah rebelled against the Sultan and
joined Venkata’s army in conquering Bankapur and adjoining areas (lost
in the reign of Tirumala Raya). Venkatapati Deva Raya ruled from 1586 to
1614. We do not find any Muslim invasion of his dominions post 1595. He
achieved what Krishna Deva Raya achieved – putting an end to the annual
jihads. Where Krishna Raya had a strong empire bequeathed to him and
built upon the edifice further; Venkatapati was handed a weak empire
whose vassals were not even cooperating with the sovereign. In such a
tenuous situation, he managed to turn the tables on the Mohammedan
neighbors of the north.

**Consolidation of the empire**

The later portion of his reign was spent in subjugating the vassals. He
forced the Nayaks of Madurai and Jinji to accept his suzerainty. When
Lingama Nayaka of Vellore revolted, he dispossessed Lingama of his fort
and moved his own capital to Vellore. Till his death in 1614, he ensured
that the empire remained intact and strong. The empire broke up only due
to unfettered internecine struggle which began after his death leading
to the Nayaks once again declaring independence – thus, disunity leading
to defeat.

Where the empire was on way to disintegration and complete destruction
before 1600, Venkatapati turned around the fortune of the empire
singlehandedly. The importance of his reign in the defense of Hindu
culture in Southern India has been greatly underestimated, nay even
forgotten. The importance of strong Hindu rulers has not been understood
either. The presence of Jaswant Singh stopped the hands of Aurangzeb
from indulging in open anti-Hindu activities in northern India. Though a
vassal, Jaswant was seen as a strong Hindu ruler and it was feared that
Hindus might band together under his banner if they were persecuted.
This prevented Aurangzeb from imposing Jiziya and destroying temples
till the death of Jaswant. Upon the death of Jaswant, the tyrant is
known to have thanked the rakshasa the Mohammedan’s worship as the
creator for the death of this Hindu ruler. It was the arrival of a
resurgent Maratha power in the Deccan which saved the holy land from
being swamped by the unmatta-s.

**Savior of Southern India**

In the case of Southern India, the destruction of Vijayanagara would
have made the field open for the Sultans to indulge in complete
eradication of dharma and its institutions. Had the empire been
destroyed before 1600, the Sultans would have got a period of 5 decades
before any prominent Hindu power arose in the region (Marathas under
Shivaji). Rather, the long reign of Venkatapati put an end to this
possibility. Vijayanagara’s destructions was postponed by 4 decades due
to his strong reign. The ultimate destruction happened in late 1630s and
1640s. By the time Vijayanagara reached its sunset in the 1640’s,
Chattrapati Shivaji had begun his rise among the Marathas while his
father began to exercise great power in his jagir of Bengaluru. A new
fountain of Hindu power was established around the same time, thus
saving the Hindus from a period of absolute tyranny which would have
otherwise been inflicted upon them. Venkatapati Raya was indeed the
savior of Southern India. One of those rare gems whose value has been
wrongly assessed by most of us.

**Stronger Pratap of the South**

Where Rana Pratapa Simha declined to bow his head before any Mohammedan,
Venkatapati had made a similar statement in South. During the early
1600’s, an ambassador from Akbar visited Venkatapati at his durbar in
Chandragiri. It was suspected that the visit was more to spy on the
empire rather than being a diplomatic visit. It was expected that Akbar
would conquer the Deccan Sultanates and force Vijayanagara to submit to
him. To which Venkatapati supposedly stated “I will not kiss the feet of
a Mohammedan”. He was preparing for a war against Akbar rather than even
think about accepting the suzerainty of some Mohammedan ruler – however
powerful he might be. We end with this note on the indomitable spirit of
this last great emperor – perhaps even the greatest emperor of
Vijayanagara. Where Pratap is now popular among the Hindus, this
stronger Pratap of Southern India (who ruled a vast empire and kept the
Mohammedan Sultans at bay – whose title also includes Pratap) has been
forgotten by the masses.

