+++
title = "Thoughts on Realisms"
full_title = "Thoughts on Realisms interlinked by Arindam Chakrabarti 1/ [UPDATED]"
date = "2021-04-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/04/16/thoughts-on-realisms-interlinked-by-arindam-chakrabarti-1/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/04/16/thoughts-on-realisms-interlinked-by-arindam-chakrabarti-1/).

Thoughts on Realisms interlinked by Arindam Chakrabarti 1/ [UPDATED]

Author: A philosopher of two worlds, pupil of amazing scholars of Nyāya
and of Analytic philosophy, completely accomplished in both worlds in a
way which is hard to repeat

—Book: It puts together Arindam’s research of 27 years. Thus, it is a
collection of articles, but very well edited together, possibly because
they deal with a topic very much at the heart of Arindam’s global
philosophical enterprise, one that I am going to discuss below.

—Target reader: A Mark Siderits, i.e., someone who is completely
committed to the project of “fusion philosophy” (more on that below),
who is able to roam around Sanskrit texts and is committed to
Anglo-Analytic philosophy AND to its confidence in neurosciences. Thus,
this target reader, unlike in Sanskrit philosophy, demolishes the idea
of a stable unified subject, but believes in the world of atoms and
mind-independent objects of hard sciences. This point is crucial to
explain why Arindam often explains how denying the subject \*will\* lead
to denial of the object as well, rather than explaining that denying the
object will lead to denying the subject (as it would happen in Sanskrit
philosophy and European one).

—Topic: Arindam is an outspoken realist. He grounds his realism in the
self-evident reality of hard sciences, based on which we cannot be
illusionists nor idealists. However, he also claims that one cannot be a
realist about objects without being also a realist about subjects AND
even about universals and relations (!). So, basically if you want to be
a good scientist, you are committed to defend also a robust
understanding of the subject and you can’t avoid defending also
universals and relations, such as inherence. Once you open the door a
little bit and allow for the idealism / not realism about universals,
you WILL UNAVOIDABLY end up undermining the whole realist enterprise.

—Methodology: I spoke already about “fusion philosophy”. This is not
comparative philosophy, insofar as what Arindam does is not a
descriptive comparison nor a detached description of two or more
comparable points of view. Rather, he has a problem he cares about
(realism) and uses the best possible arguments to drive his point home.
And he finds the best arguments in Nyāya and in contemporary
anglo-analytic philosophy, with some addition of neuro-sciences, but
also of other philosophical traditions. They are anyway all subservient
to finding the truth. There is no interest in being complete or
exhaustive, nor in exploring different points of view as a good thing in
itself. This also explains why Arindam does surprisingly little to
justify his methodology and espouses some possibly naïve terminological
choices, such as speaking of “Indian vs Western philosophy”.

—”Object”: not just atoms, but also mid-sized objects, like the ones we
encounter every day, chairs etc. Here the key is its persistence through
time (via re-identificability at different moments of time) of the
object, which is invariably linked to the persistence through time of
the subject.

—”Subject”: Which subject is Arindam defending? One that is the complex
knower of Sanskrit philosophy, i.e., the unified knower who is able to
perceive with different sense faculties and remember and is then able to
desire and act based on what they cognised. Against Hume and the
Buddhist and neuro-scientific idea that it is enough to have unrelated
sensations + a superimposed sense of their unity.

—”Universals”: You cannot be a realist, says Arindam, unless you are
also a realist about universals. You need universals to recognise things
as tokens of a certain type. And, since Arindam is the intelligent crazy
person he is, he adds a great example: A piece of music exists
independently of its specific realisation. Similarly, a universal exists
independently of its specific instantiations. Now, you might say that
it’s hard to be a realist about universals, since these are products of
our mind. No, replies Arindam basing himself on P.K. Sen. If you think
that you can’t perceive universals, it means that you have a wrong
theory of perception. He therefore welcomes conceptual perception and
expert perception as evidences for the perceptibility of universals.

—”Properties”: This includes also universals and what Sanskrit
philosophers call upādhis ‘pseudo-universals’, such as generalisations

—Indefinability of truth: Arindam defends the Nyāya precept according to
which it is possible to uphold simultaneously these two things:

A. Everything that exists is \*in principle\* knowable

B. Not everything that is knowable is known at any point of time

Why is this important? Because if existence and knowability are
invariably connected, then Dharmakīrti’s argument about the
sahopalambhaniyama is doomed to failure.

UPDATE: The sahopalambhaniyama says that objects are never experienced
outside of cognition, hence there is no reason to assume that they exist
outside of cognition.
