+++
title = "Rejecting Śāntideva’s"
full_title = "Rejecting Śāntideva’s ethical revaluation"
date = "2021-04-11"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/04/11/rejecting-santidevas-ethical-revaluation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/04/11/rejecting-santidevas-ethical-revaluation/).

Rejecting Śāntideva’s ethical revaluation

The key goal of [my
dissertation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/05/lele-dissertation.pdf)
was to understand Śāntideva’s thought as it was and how it *could* be
applied in a contemporary context. Now, for [my
book](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/resolving-cliffhangers-in-a-book/),
I want to *actually* apply Śāntideva’s thought, which requires asking
where he is right and where he is wrong. And that, it turns out, changes
my understanding of some of the dissertation’s key concepts – especially
the one in its title.

The dissertation is entitled “Ethical revaluation in the thought of
Śāntideva”. In its third chapter, I describe “ethical revaluation” as a
consequence of Śāntideva’s ideals of nonattachment (*aparigraha*) and
patient endurance (*kṣānti*). I explain the idea of ethical revaluation
as follows:

> one revalues objects in a way that reflects the object’s real effect
> on one’s flourishing. Such a revaluation needs to be a qualitative and
> not merely quantitative change; but it is more than even that, in that
> one changes one’s view of what might be called the “direction” or
> “sign” of the object’s effect. That is, one is not merely saying that
> the object is less (or more) good for us than we had thought, but that
> what we thought was good for us is actually bad or at least neutral.
> (122)

Specifically, in Śāntideva’s ethical revaluation, one revalues (normally
positive) possessions and human relationships [as
negative](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/wealth-is-not-neutral/),
because they are sources of attachment, and the (normally negative)
wrongdoing of others as positive, because that wrongdoing is a ground
for patient endurance. One *changes the sign* of the valuation.

It’s striking to me to come back to these passages now, thirteen years
later, because I see how different my thinking on these concepts is.
Especially: I would want to weaken the connection between nonattachment
and patient endurance on one hand, and ethical revaluation on the other.
Because now I *accept* nonattachment and patient endurance – to some
extent – but I reject ethical revaluation as it is described above.

Let me unpack all this a bit more. I see now that a reason I was drawn
to Śāntideva as a dissertation topic is that I find his ideals of
nonattachment and patient endurance valuable and worthy. We human beings
*do*, I think, get too attached to [externals beyond our
control](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/) – what
Śāntideva calls *bāhya bhāva*s – and I agree with Śāntideva that “the
mind does not get tranquility or obtain joy and happiness, nor go to
sleep or to steadiness, when the dart of anger is lodged in the heart.”
(BCA VI.3) So I think it is worth cultivating a state of patient
endurance such that, as the dissertation says, “one remains calm and
even happy in the face of various undesired events — pains,
frustrations, wrongs —that one might face” (129): a state that requires
keeping at least some distance from those externals.

But there is only so far I’m willing to go with the point. The idea of
changing the *sign* of externals’ effect – the sign in an arithmetical
sense, positive vs. negative – is a dramatic and radical one. Śāntideva
tells us that *having* possessions – which, for him, include personal
relationships as well as material goods – is bad, because they make us
attached to them. But this claim only makes sense if (as I think
Śāntideva would agree) they do not actually contribute independently to
our flourishing, or that contribution is so small that it is outweighed
by the attachment they produce. And I do not think this is the case.

I’ve outlined my reasoning for this view
[before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/).
I think Śāntideva would agree with Aśvaghoṣa that we should not delight
in the objects of the world because they are impermanent and cause
suffering. But I do not think this is sufficient reason to reject them.
The reduction of suffering is [only
one](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/)
of the values we human beings come to ethical inquiry with, and I don’t
think it is sufficient to always override other values and aims – joy,
love, justice, self-expression. I think Śāntideva’s non-Buddhist
opponents were wise to treat *mokṣa*, the liberation from suffering, as
only *one of* the [human
aims](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/the-four-puru%e1%b9%a3arthas-across-cultures/),
the *puruṣārtha*s. But I don’t think that it is a rejection of Buddhism
to think this way, since I do suspect that some great classical Buddhist
thinkers, like the author of the
[Mahāvaṃsa](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/a-buddhism-very-different-than-the-one-we-think-we-know/),
at least tacitly agree with me on this point.

Writing my [article on disengaged
Buddhism](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)
helped me see this point, as I responded to the two engaged Buddhist
authors who have paid disengaged Buddhism meaningful attention: Sallie
King and Hsiao-Lan Hu. King and Hu both advocate what Hu calls a
“this-worldly Buddhism”. King notes that if, as many classical texts
say, the “three poisons” of craving, anger and delusion

> are indeed the root of the problem, then the problem is *in our minds,
> not in the world.* We can free ourselves of *duḥkha* by practicing
> Buddhism in such a way that we rid ourselves of this craving, hatred,
> and delusion. This has nothing whatsoever to do with leaving the world
> and everything to do with transforming ourselves, here and now.
> (*Socially Engaged Buddhism* 43; emphasis in original)

I point out in the article that the arguments of the disengaged
Buddhists are quite compatible with such a this-worldly position: this
transformation in ourselves, here and now, is [very different
from](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/in-defence-of-mcmindfulness/)
a transformation in social structures. Still, in practice, what
classical disengaged Buddhists like Śāntideva and Aśvaghoṣa advocate
often *is* a withdrawal from the world to some extent. Śāntideva’s
bodhisattva does remain in the world to help get others out of their
mental suffering, but while in the world, he is not of it; he puts no
value on relationships of love, indeed considers them negative.

I reject their rejection of the world. I think there are many worldly
goals and goods that have [value independent of the reduction of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).
Does that mean I then accept political engagement too? Well, [that’s
more
complicated](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/).
I absolutely think the disengaged Buddhists [have a
point](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/),
that political engagement can *increase* our suffering. And I think that
that view is entirely compatible with a this-worldly life. But it may
also be the case that some other values outweigh the reduction of
suffering and make political engagement worthwhile. Whether that is the
case for any given person may depend on the particulars of that person’s
nature as well as her circumstances.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/04/rejecting-santideva's-ethical-revaluation)
