+++
title = "Caught in the act"
full_title = "Caught in the act"
date = "2016-01-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/30/caught-in-the-act/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/30/caught-in-the-act/).

Caught in the act

The fossil record is sparse. Let me try to explain that. We have at most
a few hundred Neanderthal skeletons, most in pretty poor shape. How many
Neanderthals ever lived? I think their population varied in size quite a
bit – lowest during glacial maxima, probably highest in interglacials.
Their degree of genetic diversity suggests an effective population size
of \~1000, but that would be dominated by the low points (harmonic
average). So let’s say 50,000 on average, over their whole range
(Europe, central Asia, the Levant, perhaps more). Say they were around
for 300,000 years, with a generation time of 30 years – 10,000
generations, for a total of five hundred million Neanderthals over all
time. So one in a million Neanderthals ends up in a museum: one every 20
generations. Low time resolution!

So if anatomically modern humans rapidly wiped out Neanderthals, we
probably couldn’t tell. In much the same way, you don’t expect to find
the remains of many dinosaurs killed by the Cretaceous meteor impact (at
most one millionth of one generation, right?), or of Columbian mammoths
killed by a wave of Amerindian hunters. Sometimes invaders leave a
bigger footprint: a bunch of cities burning down with no rebuilding
tells you something. But even when you know that population A completely
replaced population B, it can be hard to prove that just how it
happened. After all, population A could have all committed suicide just
before B showed up. Stranger things have happened – but not often.

