+++
title = "Survival of the Flattest"
full_title = "Survival of the Flattest"
date = "2016-01-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/09/survival-of-the-flattest/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/01/09/survival-of-the-flattest/).

Survival of the Flattest

Genetic canalization is the extent to which an organism is buffered
against the effects of mutations. Waddington said “developmental
reactions, as they occur in organisms submitted to natural selection…are
adjusted so as to bring about one definite end-result regardless of
minor variations in conditions during the course of the reaction”.
Canalization can act to buffer against environmental perturbations, and
selection for resistance to such environmental noise may also produce
resistance to genetic noise. But right now I’m thinking about genetic
canalization.

Up to some point, the effects of not too many, not too serious mutations
would be buffered: those mutations wouldn’t change the phenotype. In the
same way, your typical tractor is not designed to nanometer tolerances:
parts can be somewhat out of spec – up to some limit – without messing
up performance. And that tractor is better than one that did require
nanometer tolerances, which we couldn’t manufacture. A genotype that had
high fitness, but only when everything is perfect, no mutations, could
on average be competitively inferior to one that had lower peak fitness,
but in which that fitness didn’t decline rapidly with increasing
small-effect genetic load – a fault-tolerant design, a fitness plateau
rather than a sharp peak. This has been called ‘survival of the
flattest’.

Remember when I
[talked](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/11/03/degenerate-neanderthals/)
about compensatory mutations in small populations making up for
increased load from inefficient selection? This is the just the long run
of that trend: eventually compensatory mutations develop into
canalization mechanisms.

Canalization is a product of natural selection. There would be stronger
selection for efficient canalization in a species with more genetic
load: in particular, in a species that over the long haul tended to have
fairly low population size. So you might expect to see stronger genetic
canalization in big carnivores than, say, mice. And you would probably
see it in the great apes and hominids as well: I don’t think that we
were ever numerous until recently. Surely primitive, Oldowan-type
hunter gatherers had lower population density than later, sophisticated
hunter-gatherers, who had much improved methods. And those later,
sophisticated hunter-gatherers weren’t exactly overflowing in numbers
themselves.

So, maybe people have strong canalization. It could be that this let
Neanderthals keep the show on the road for hundreds of thousands of
years even though their effective population size was small. And we know
that they *did* keep the show on the road: theory suggests that
anatomically modern humans should have walked right over them on first
encounter (last interglacial) – but that didn’t happen.

It might explain why load doesn’t seem to have much effect on IQ over
most of the range, why we haven’t seen general IQ depression in the
children of old men,

