+++
title = "An Interview with"
full_title = "An Interview with Nilanjan Das"
date = "2016-12-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/05/an-interview-with-nilanjan-das/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/05/an-interview-with-nilanjan-das/).

An Interview with Nilanjan Das

[Nilanjan Das](http://www.dasnilanjan.com/) is currently a post-doctoral
fellow at [UNC Chapel
Hill](http://philosophy.unc.edu/people/nilanjan-das/), but he will be
moving to Shanghai in September of 2017 to take up his post as Assistant
Professor/Faculty Fellow in the philosophy department of
[NYU-Shanghai](https://shanghai.nyu.edu/). Das works primarily on Nyāya,
focusing in particular on their epistemology, although he’s recently
been looking at Buddhist theories of self-knowledge and their
relationship to inference. He has a forthcoming co-authored publication
in *Noûs,* “Transparency and the KK Principle.”

**1. What are you working on right now, and what do you hope to achieve
by it?**

I am currently working on two projects, which might be of interest to
the readers of the Indian Philosophy Blog.

I am interested in the late Nyāya theory of perceptual knowledge.
Recently, psychologists and philosophers have debated whether cognitive
penetration of perception is possible, i.e., whether the contents of
perceptual experience can be directly influenced by our other cognitive
states, e.g., our expectations. In the historical component of my
project, I show how late Naiyāyikas like Raghunātha Śiromaṇi, Harirāma
Tarkavāgīśa, and Gadādhara Bhaṭṭācārya took perception to be cognitively
penetrable in this sense. These philosophers motivated cognitive
penetrability of perception by appealing to a wide range of phenomena,
like perceptual recognition and perception of absence. But my aim is not
just to describe their views. I want to claim that this account of
cognitive penetration can help us solve certain stubborn problems that
naive realists face when it comes to explaining some cases of
non-veridical perception, e.g., cases of total hallucination.

I am also working on Buddhist theories of self-knowledge. In
contemporary epistemology and philosophy of mind, many have come to
favour the view that we come to know our mental states purely by
inference. Call this view inferentialism about self-knowledge. Some
inferentialists, e.g. André Gallois, Alex Byrne and Jordi Fernandez,
have claimed that we know facts about our mental states by inferring
them from observable facts about the external world. Others, such as
Gilbert Ryle, Peter Carruthers, and Quassim Cassam, have claimed that we
know facts about our mental states by inferring them from observable
facts about ourselves, e.g. from our own observable behaviour or inner
speech. By drawing upon certain arguments offered by Dharmakīrti in
*Pramāṇavārttika* and developed by Prajñākaragupta in his commentary
*Vārttikālaṅkāra*, I articulate a general challenge for inferentialism
about self-knowledge.

In both these projects, my primary aim is to ask whether some arguments
offered by Indian philosophers can be useful in addressing open
questions in epistemology and philosophy of mind.

**2. How did you come to study Indian philosophy, and how is it related
to your current position?**

I think I developed an interest in Indian philosophy while I was in high
school. My mother taught Indian philosophy at a college in Calcutta, and
we had books on Indian philosophy—both Sanskrit texts and secondary
texts in English and Bengali—lying around the house. As far as I
remember, the first book on Indian philosophy I read was a beautiful
Bengali introduction to the philosophy of the Cārvākas by
[Dakṣiṇāranjana Śastrī.](http://philpapers.org/rec/SHACP-2) Later, I
took my BA and my MA at Jadavpur University, where almost half of the
curriculum was devoted to Indian philosophy. My time at Jadavpur was
pivotal in my intellectual development. My teachers not only read the
core texts of Nyāya and Vedānta with us, but they also encouraged us to
independently assess the arguments presented in those texts. This, for
me, was an important pedagogical lesson: something I want to take
seriously in the future. I will be joining NYU Shanghai next year as
Assistant Professor. At Shanghai, I hope to offer courses which will not
only introduce students to central debates of classical Indian
philosophy, but will also encourage them to examine why these debates
are relevant to our current theoretical interests.

**3. What advice would you give to students wishing to pursue the study
of Indian philosophy?**

Anyone who wants to pursue the study of Indian philosophy should try to
acquire the skills required to write about Indian philosophy for an
international audience of philosophers. Two skills come to mind. First,
one requires some mastery over the languages in which the primary texts
in the field are written. That almost goes without saying. Second, one
needs some training in philosophy. Often, people discuss classical
Indian philosophy badly, not because they lack understanding of the
texts themselves, but rather because they are not careful enough about
the theoretical concepts they are using to frame their discussion. So,
studying philosophy in general is just as important as learning the
relevant languages.

**4. What have your major intellectual influences been, philosophical or
otherwise?**

My main intellectual influences have been my advisors at MIT, especially
Julia Markovits, Robert Stalnaker, Roger White, and Stephen Yablo. My
interests in epistemology have been shaped by the work of Timothy
Williamson, especially his [*Knowledge and its
Limits*](http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/019925656X.001.0001/acprof-9780199256563).
For my general outlook towards Indian philosophy, I am indebted to Bimal
Krishna Matilal’s work, especially his [*Epistemology, Logic, and
Grammar*](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/epistemology-logic-and-grammar-in-indian-philosophical-analysis-9780199460939?cc=sg&lang=en&)
*[in Indian Philosophical Analysis and
Perception](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/epistemology-logic-and-grammar-in-indian-philosophical-analysis-9780199460939?cc=sg&lang=en&).*

**5. What do you think you’ll do next?**

I want to continue to explore the connection between live questions of
contemporary philosophy and debates in classical Indian philosophy. Here
is one topic that I am planning to work on.

Iteration principles for knowledge and belief have been a topic of much
controversy in contemporary Anglo-American philosophy. Timothy
Williamson has argued against the KK principle, i.e., the principle that
if one knows that p, one is in a position to know that one knows that p.
Inspired by Moore’s observation that it seems infelicitous to assert,
“p, but I don’t believe that p,” others have wondered about the BB
principle, i.e., the principle that if one believes that p, one believes
that one believes that p. Traditionally, these principles are seen as
connected to a controversial Cartesian approach to epistemology and
philosophy of mind. What I find interesting is the fact that arguments
for similar principles have been given by classical Indian philosophers,
e.g., by Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsakas, who do not have a Cartesian approach to
epistemology and philosophy of mind. So, reading these philosophers
might help us discover less controversial, but novel arguments for the
KK and BB principles. That is something that I am hoping to do over the
next year or so.

**6. Where do you think the field should go next, in terms of priorities
and projects?**

I can’t presume to know where the field should go next. However, I do
hope that people engaged in the study of Indian philosophy will try to
increase the visibility of classical Indian philosophy in mainstream
philosophy journals. As far as I know, only a handful of articles on
Indian philosophy have been published in prominent non-specialist
philosophy journals in English in the last decade. To reverse this
trend, we need to produce work that will have a good chance of getting
accepted to these journals.

**7. Finally, a question (originally asked on the 3AM Interview Series):
What books do you recommend to help our readers be taken further into
your philosophical world?**

Robert Stalnaker’s work has influenced my views in both epistemology and
philosophy of mind, so I recommend his
*[Inquiry](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/inquiry)* and *[Context and
Content](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/context-and-content-9780198237075?cc=sg&lang=en&)*.
Fred Dretske’s *[Knowledge and the Flow of
Information](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/knowledge-and-flow-information)*
has been another significant influence. In relation to Indian
philosophy, I have already mentioned Matilal’s *[Epistemology, Logic,
and Grammar and
Perception](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/epistemology-logic-and-grammar-in-indian-philosophical-analysis-9780199460939?cc=sg&lang=en&)*.
I also find Jonardon Ganeri’s *[Semantic
Powers](http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198237884.001.0001/acprof-9780198237884)*
quite inspiring: it’s a great example of how the formal rigour of late
Nyāya can be fruitfully brought into contact with the concerns of
contemporary Anglo-American philosophy. Dan Arnold’s [*Buddhists,
Brahmins, and
Belief*](https://cup.columbia.edu/book/buddhists-brahmins-and-belief/9780231132800)
engages with some parts of Mīmāṃsā epistemology that are relevant to the
debate about iteration principles that I just mentioned.

**Previous interviews in this occasional series:  
**[Anand
Vaidya](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/11/04/an-interview-with-anand-vaidya/)  
[Constance
Kassor](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/30/an-interview-with-constance-kassor/)  
[Matt
Dasti](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/08/20/an-interview-with-matt-dasti/)  
[Shalini
Sinha](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/30/an-interview-with-shalini-sinha-first-in-an-occasional-series/)
