+++
title = "Interpretation vs"
full_title = "Interpretation vs Explication II choosing between Truth and Objectivity"
date = "2016-12-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/29/interpretation-vs-explication-ii-choosing-between-a-truth-and-objectivity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/29/interpretation-vs-explication-ii-choosing-between-a-truth-and-objectivity/).

Interpretation vs. Explication II: choosing between Truth and Objectivity

Thanks to Elisa Freschi and Malcolm Keating for prompting me to post
about interpretation and explication.

In the previous post, titled “I[nterpretation vs. Explication I:
background (Truth and
Objectivity)](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/27/interpretation-vs-explication-i-background-truth-and-objectivity/)”
I set out the logical distinctions we need in view to understand the
difference. In this post I will assume these distinctions. They are
relatively uncontroversial in philosophy, but they have powerful
consequences. The most important consequence is that reason is
objective but it might not be true. Truth is neither necessary nor
sufficient for reason. Understanding the reasonableness of a position
involves no particular perspective, and does not involve sympathetically
seeing the world from the perspective of those who endorse the argument.
What you believe is true is irrelevant to determining whether an
argument is reasonable—this goes for arguments that you endorse too.

## Explication

To explicate a perspective *P—*augustly called a “philosophy”—about
topic *t*, is to *E*:

-   discern the reasons of P that constitute *P*, which explain *P*’s
    use of “*t*” and to arrive at a systematization of *P*’s reasons
    that explains the uses of “*t*.” The systematization of *P’s*
    reasons that entails *P*’s *t*-claims is *P*’s theory of *t*. The
    reasons of *P* may be what *P* explicitly says, or what is entailed
    by *P*.

“Explain” here is synonymous with “entails”. When we come to the theory
of *t* that explain P’s use of “*t*,” we have P’s theory of t that
entails its *t*-claims. (We have to use “explain” when we are talking
about “use” only because use is a pragmatic notion. When we switch to
talk of *t*-claims, we can rely upon logical notions of entailment.) To
arrive at *P*’s theory of *t* is to have rendered explicit what is
implicit, and hence this process is *explication*. The process requires
no sympathy on the part of the explicator, and one can hence be
completely agnostic about the perspective and its reasons and yet
explicate it accurately and proof of this accuracy will be that others
from differing theoretical vantages could also converge on the same
explication of a perspective. For those who confuse reason with truth,
this will seem opaque, but the reasonable is not defined by truth, so we
are at liberty to derive from the reasons constituting a perspective
just that subset of entailed propositions that entail the *t* –claims.
As objectivity is what we can converge on while we disagree, *P*, its
theory of *t ,* and its various *t*–claims are all objective.

The second step is the cumulative product of explication:

-   compare theories of t : what they converge on while they disagree is
    the concept *T*.

We could call this step the *consilience of perspectives*.

So, for instance, to explicate Aristotle’s perspective on ethics is to
look to his reasons that entail his claims about ethics. The theory that
entails all of his claims about ethics is his theory of ethics. This is
to render explicit his theory of ethics.

So, then, when we compare Aristotle’s theory of ethics with the theory
of ethics from contrary perspectives (Kantian Deontology, Millian or
Benthamite Utilitarianism, for instance), what they converge on while
they disagree is the concept of *ethics*, which turns out to be *the*
*Right or the Good*. This is what we *discover* as a matter of the
consilience of perspectives: *this is the first and major step of moral
philosophical research. *Every ethical theory is an account of this
basic concept of *the* *Right or the Good* from some theoretical
vantage. It is the conch, or the elephant grouped by the blind men.
I’m almost tempted to call it the emptiness lacking *svabhāva*, as
though it is completely at the mercy of the perspectives that converge
on it—each converging theory has an account of the *svabhāva* of this
basic concept. What it is for sure is the basic concept at play in moral
philosophy: this is what theories of ethics converge on while they
disagree. Having appreciated the objectivity of this central concept,
philosophers are in a position to generate or propose a presentation of
the objectivity that explains how and why it seems differently for
differing theories, but also why some theories will have problems in
accounting for the basic concept for their account is too partial, which
is to say unobjective. This critical step that moves towards candidate
truths of moral philosophy requires the first steps of explication and
the *consilience* of perspectives. The entire process is one of
discovery and research.

If we explicate Indian philosophy, we would look to each perspective of
Indian philosophy to entail its theory of dharma. Each *darśana* or sub
*darśana* would be characterized by a theory of dharma that entails all
of its uses of “dharma” and by the consilience of perspectives, we
identify the underlying concept of *dharma* as what theories of dharma
converge on while they disagree.

So for instance, I would look to the *Yoga Sūtra* and its entire account
of yoga as providing the reasons that entail all of its few uses of
dharma, but the right theory would entail all of them. I would do the
same for the *Sāṅkhya* *Kārikā*. Immediately I would note that they have
different theories of dharma (for instance Īśvarakriṣna depicts dharma
as leading to heavenly existences but not to freedom, yet the *Yoga
Sūtra* depicts the *dharmameghasamādhi* as the penultimate event prior
to *kaivalya*). I would repeat this process for Jain Dharma (and all of
its subversions) and Buddhists accounts (and of its subversions). In the
Jain case I would note that Dharma is dispositional (often translated as
“Motion”) and correlatively is backed up by the idea that *vīrya*
(virtue) is an essential trait of the *jīva*. Moving on the Buddhist
accounts the dominant theme of avoiding suffering and engaging in
compassion would play an explanatory role on its account of dharma, and
any satisfactory account would have to entail *all* the particular
version of Buddhism’s uses of the term (Edward Conze it seems to me is
one of the few who has come close to a successful account of this,
though I think Goodman is globally right). Moving onto the Pūrva Mīmāṃsā
and other Brahmanic accounts, there is a long tradition starting in the
*Upaniṣad*s of moving to procedural accounts of dharma, made rather
explicit in the texts such as the *Bhagavad* *Gītā*, not to mention most
all of the commentaries on the *Vedānta* *Sūtra*.

When we come to compare theories of dharma, we find it centres on the
same concept as what is involved in debates in moral philosophy: *the*
*Right or the Good*. This is what theories of dharma converge on while
they disagree. We discover this not by assumptions or focusing on the
minutia of particular traditions but by following the debate.

Explicated, there is only one *objective* concept of dharma, not a
million, and each differing *darśana* of Indian philosophy is a unique
take on the common concept. Worth noting, of course, is that we can
apply this process to any term: reality, knowledge, *dravya*, *pramāṇa*
etc. The basic concept relative to these terms would be what competing
theories converge on while they disagree.

What this process indicates is that we only come to appreciate what the
issues are when we look at the corpus macroscopically, and this means
that you can’t merely specialize in one specific tradition or theory to
figure out what the issues of philosophy are. You have to be willing to
look at debates from on top, and this allows a finer appreciation for
what each philosophy has to contribute to debates. Further, sticking to
one tradition is a bad idea for it limits the scope of theoretical
dissent, but it is the dissent that renders the basic concept clear.
Metaethically, the entire process is characterizable as *non-analytic,*
*non-naturalism.* Each theory may have its own definition of “ethics” or
“dharma” and this is nothing but the encoding of the governing theory as
the perspective’s definition of “ethics” or “dharma” So no gain is made
by analyzing the meaning of our moral vocabulary (hence it is
non-analytic). Yet we discover what the concept is via philosophical
(non-empirical, non-natural) means of research into the breadth of
philosophical disagreement.

One of the outcomes of this process, I think, is that there are four
basic theories of ethics: Virtue Ethics, Consequentialism, Deontology —
and Yoga/Bhakti. I didn’t know that until I became really clear about
what explication is about. I used to assume like many that Yoga/Bhakti
is some kind of theism, but that’s a mistake (a separate post on that
soon).

Another outcome or implication of this process is that research into the
history of philosophy is not substantially different from work in
philosophy. The history of philosophy emphasizes explication and the
consilience of perspectives, while the nonhistorical emphasizes
representations of what is objective in an area of debate. All are
projects within philosophy. Research into the history of philosophy is
not a special case of historical research for instance. It doesn’t
become philological or an example of Sanskrit studies merely because
the texts in question are in Sanskrit. We aren’t tracking language, or
manuscripts when we engage into research into the history of philosophy:
we’re tracking philosophical theories and their account of the basic
concept of a debate. These are objective—philosophically objective,
which means that we converge on them while we philosophically disagree.

## Interpretation

Interpretation is by no means the basic disciplinary practice of
philosophy. It does however correspond to common conceptions of what
philosophy is, in the general public.

To interpret some package *P* is for the interpreting subject *S* to
*I*:

-   use *S’* s reasons (or if you prefer, “premises,” “assumptions,”
    “beliefs,” “truths,” and even “*tradition*”) *r*_(S) in the
    explanation of *P*.

So whereas explication requires a careful logical distinction between
the truth of our reasons and their logical merit as constituting valid
inference, interpretation does not. We are supposed to move from what we
as interpreters take to be reasonable or true to an inference about what
a third party perspective claims. This is invalid: the truth of my
beliefs places no constraint on what you can believe if we are
interested in something objective. But if it’s all subjective, then
third parties are reduced to figments of our imagination and then of
course our beliefs would play a role in the determination of third party
views in the way that our beliefs would determine truths about
fictitious characters we make up. And interpretation is subjective: it
relies upon the perspective of the interpreter for the determination of
third party views. It is worth noting that interpretation corresponds
to the unschooled notion of philosophy as a completely speculative
affair that depends completely on the background or perspective of the
philosopher. If interpretation is right as an account of understanding,
we are not tracking anything objective when we are doing philosophy:
it’s all perspective.

On this account, Indian views on “dharma” would be filtered through the
subjective outlook of the interpreter. When “dharma” is used in
accordance with what the interpreter takes to be ethics, then she
understand the use to be ethical. When it is used in accordance with
what the interpreter takes to be metaphysical or ontological, the use is
said to be amoral and metaphysical. In this way, uses of “dharma” in
Indian thought are correlated with theoretical distinctions of the
interpreter.

The result of this nonphilosophical approach is the usual gloss that
“dharma” has many meanings and is used in a “bewildering variety of
ways” (as Gerald Larson puts it). Each use of “dharma” is correlated
with the subjective distinctions of the interpreter. This is the default
approach in what I call Orthodox Indology and I catalogue its profusion
(for a list of such claims, see p.52-55 of the *Bloomsbury Research
Handbook of Indian Ethics*).

The problems with interpretation are numerous.

-   First, it’s completely subjective.

The outcome of an interpretation depends entirely on the beliefs of the
interpreter (unlike the outcome of explication that does not) and hence
a psychological change in the interpreter’s outlook would shift what
Indian uses of “dharma” are counted as ethical and what are not.

-   Second, it fails to distinguish truth and objectivity.

Perhaps, for the sake of argument, your beliefs about ethics are true—as
true as it could be. Further assume that it is objectively true: your
moral outlook is factual. This does not entail what others can believe
about ethics, if the topic is objective, for they could be mistaken. So
even if the Indologist is right in their definition of “ethics” it
entails nothing about what Indians could believe. Yet interpretation
renders the interpreter’s beliefs dispositive of what others could
believe. This is proper if Indian philosophers are figments of our
imagination but if they were and are real, it is inappropriate.

-   Third, because interpreters engage in subjective reasoning, they do
    not distinguish between what is objective (what we can disagree
    about) and what is intersubjective (what we agree on).

Interpreters hence confuse the convergence of objectivity with the
agreement of intersubjectivity and treat the intersubjective as
objective. This is how the politics of privilege and hegemony are
generated: the common cultural and philosophical background of a group
of interpreters serves to create a hegemonic view about what uses of
“dharma” count as ethical and which do not, based entirely on the
culture of the scholars in question.

-   Fourth, because of the third problem, interpretation produces an
    unobjective corpus that confirms the biases of the dominant culture,
    which is then treated as the literature everyone has to master in
    order to properly interpret Indian thought.

&nbsp;

-   Fifth, and perhaps most maddening, interpreters will claim tolerance
    for diversity, falsely: they will criticize explicators for
    understanding Indian discussions of “dharma” as all of them ethical
    for this involves imposing a view about ethics on Indian sources not
    present in the text.

This is mad as the false tolerance depends upon the interpreter assuming
what “ethics” can be about (mostly not what Indians called dharma),
which is an imposition on the freedom of philosophers to disagree. So
interpreters are the ones imposing their views on ethics on to what
Indian philosophers can claim and it turns out that an Indian
philosopher can only have a view that is ethical if it agrees with the
interpreter. The philosophical problem this points too is that
interpreters confuse their *theory* of a term like “ethics” with the
concept *ethics*. So when an alien uses “ethics” according to a
differing theory, these uses are correlated with first person
distinctions of the interpreter and the concepts multiply (hence dharma
is said to have many meanings).

-   Sixth, interpreters will be given to repackaging their own
    incompetence (to see anything but from their own perspective) as a
    conceptual constraint on third parties. (Because they cannot believe
    “ethics” to be anything but *x* they conclude incorrectly that
    Indians cannot be understood as talking about ethics when they deny
    *x*.)

This goes back to Kant’s ironic claim to be endorsing a Copernican
Revolution, when he was merely reinforcing the earlier Geocentrism—see
the preface to the second edition to the *First Critique.* My
intransigence is not a constraint on anyone else.
