+++
title = "Book Review of An"
full_title = "Book Review of An Introduction to Indian Philosophy by Roy W Perrett (Reviewed by Matthew R Dasti)"
date = "2016-12-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/06/book-review-of-an-introduction-to-indian-philosophy-by-roy-w-perrett-reviewed-by-matthew-r-dasti/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/06/book-review-of-an-introduction-to-indian-philosophy-by-roy-w-perrett-reviewed-by-matthew-r-dasti/).

Book Review of An Introduction to Indian Philosophy by Roy W. Perrett (Reviewed by Matthew R. Dasti)

**Roy W. Perrett. *An Introduction to Indian Philosophy.* 249pp*.*
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016. $34.99 (paperback).**

When introducing the wide-range of Indian philosophy to a new audience,
there have been two major approaches: the *schools* approach and the
*topics* approach. The *schools* approach is atomistic; it starts with a
focus on discrete traditions of thought, and only then allows the
student to build awareness of commonalities and shared threads of
concern after she gains familiarity with the individual schools. The
*topics* approach is holistic; starting with large-scale issues or
philosophical controversies, the student develops coherent awareness of
individual schools and figures by learning where they are placed
according to their stances on the broad topics considered. The *schools*
approach was a dominant methodology for a long time, and for good
reason. It has a distinguished pedigree, taking its departure from the
medieval Indian doxographies themselves. One of the best examples is
[Chatterjee and Datta’s *Introduction to Indian
Philosophy*](https://www.amazon.com/Introduction-Indian-Philosophy-Satishchandra-Chatterjee/dp/8129111950),
which despite its Neo-Vedāntic flavoring, is quite useful as an
introductory map of Indian thought. Times have changed, however, and
the pendulum has swung the other way. Recognizing [the historical
vagaries behind the school-bound view of Indian
thought](https://www.amazon.com/Unifying-Hinduism-Philosophy-Intellectual-Disciplines/dp/0231149875/ref=cm_rdp_product)and
realizing just how contingent and biased are the presuppositions behind
the inclusion and “rankings” of schools in traditional lists, the
contemporary academy seems to favor the *topics* approach.

[Roy W. Perrett’s *An Introduction to Indian
Philosophy*](http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/philosophy/non-western-philosophy/introduction-indian-philosophy?format=PB)
is a sterling example of this second methodology, the best available
that I have seen. It provides a synoptic view of the major concerns,
debates, and philosophical positions within the wide expanse of Indian
philosophy, taking its departure from enduring concerns that have
stimulated philosophical progress in India, then tracing how varied
thinkers and traditions respond to such problems and to contrary
positions. As befitting the work of a scholar with the comfortable
authority born of deep, lasting familiarity with the subject, it is
reliable and philosophically acute, exhibiting remarkable economy as it
conveys the essential while avoiding undue prolixity. Indeed—and this
should be underscored—it reads very, very smoothly. This is a rarity for
scholarly literature on Indian philosophy, including, unfortunately,
works meant to serve as an introduction to the topic.

Perrett’s choice of chapter topics does cover the most important
questions in Indian philosophy, and his ordering of chapters is makes
sense from a pedagogical perspective. Starting with a focus on Value (1)
and the goals of life, he helps motivate the entire philosophical quest
by illustrating that Indian thinkers want to understand the world more
clearly because they are convinced it will help us live better lives, up
to and including the attainment of supreme felicity. From here, there is
discussion of epistemology and cognition: Knowledge (2), Reasoning (3),
and Word (4). Then metaphysics, ramping up to axiologically central
features of the world: World (5), Self (6), and Ultimates (7). Along the
way, most of the genre-defining debates in India are discussed (e.g.,
theories of perceptual illusion, determinate vs. non-determinate
perception, the nature of linguistic reference, whether cognition is
self-justifying or not, considerations of the self-luminosity of
consciousness, the existence and nature of the self, the fundamental
reals in the world, the nature of causation, the nature of the ultimate
reality).

Perrett employs several explanatory tools to bring Indian philosophy to
the reader. Often, he offers timely, compact articulations of the core
dynamics at play in the Indian debates, preventing the student from
becoming lost or bewildered. For example, while discussing the world, he
helps the reader make sense of the often bizarre-to-the-uninitiated
claims of Advaita and certain Buddhist schools by calling attention to
revisionary approaches to metaphysics and how they hinge on reasonable
views on the criteria for existence and the nature of causation (Chapter
5 *passim*). He also often identifies broad connections or contrasts
with Western thought, (e.g.) arguing at length for a consequentialist
reading of the Buddhist tradition of ethics (37-42), while framing much
of his discussion of *pramāṇa* theory by its similarities and
differences with Western approaches to epistemology (52-77). This makes
good sense given that the intended readership of the volume will include
students in college courses that may be their only chance to see the
Indian responses to perennial philosophical problems with which they are
familiar from the Western traditions. Elsewhere, while engaging with the
Indian thinkers, Perrett occasionally takes stands on interpretive
matters. For example, he argues that thinkers like Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi,
and Śrīharṣa are “not really skeptics who doubted the very possibility
of knowledge . . .” (76) but rather they are refuting “a particular
mistaken *conception* of knowledge” (71). Even where a specialist may
wish to add some nuance to his claims, Perrett’s take is always
reasonable.

In short, *An Introduction to Indian Philosophy* is highly recommended,
and it is probably the best example of the *topics* approach to
introducing Indian philosophy. Many of the book’s merits were mentioned
above. I would merely reiterate that it has an appropriate blend of
description and analysis, is philosophically sophisticated without
becoming cumbersome, and is exceptionally readable. He also includes
helpful suggestions for the reader at the end of each chapter, helping
students begin to chart their course through the most relevant secondary
literature.

My only significant criticism would be that given how well the volume
reads for an introductory student, it is surprising that Perrett still
includes quite a bit of Sanskrit, too much, it seems to me, for the
novice. Students are likely going to be challenged by the difficulty of
the subject matter already; excessive Sanskrit will either overwhelm or
lead them to skip over and ignore anything italicized and foreign, such
that they will not learn the few Sanskrit terms that they really should.
It seems to me that he could have been more judicious in choosing his
spots for Sanskrit inclusion, by focusing on a few technical terms
(*pramāṇa, mok*ṣa, *brahman*, etc.) that he’d like the student to learn.

The only other criticism—more accurately a concern—has to do with the
*topics* approach in general. When teaching introductory Indian
philosophy in a topical way (as I personally do in the classroom), there
is a danger that students will not grasp the individual schools as
coherent, robust entities, that they won’t really understand why there
are schools at all, and what the stakes are for each of them in the
various disputes. One hopes to avoid an outcome where students only
retain a nebulous mental list of positions taken by these different
traditions on significant issues, or worse, little more than lists of
names and short definitions for each school. To combat this, it helps to
consistently reinforce the core coherence of the various major schools
and why they take the stances they do. Perrett does indeed do this from
time to time, but one could argue that it could have been done more
consistently. Relatedly, while Perrett does provide a concise discussion
of the major schools in his introduction, it may have helped to include
a table or appendix on the various traditions as coherent, bodies of
thought defined by their central concerns, authorities, and texts.



*Reviewed by Matthew R. Dasti,Department of Philosophy,Bridgewater
State University*
