+++
title = "Interpretation vs"
full_title = "Interpretation vs Explication I background (Truth and Objectivity)"
date = "2016-12-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/27/interpretation-vs-explication-i-background-truth-and-objectivity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/12/27/interpretation-vs-explication-i-background-truth-and-objectivity/).

Interpretation vs. Explication I: background (Truth and Objectivity)

Happy belated Solstice to all! I hope everyone is having a good holiday.

Thanks to Elisa Freschi and Malcolm Keating for prompting me to post
about interpretation and explication.

The distinction between interpretation and explication to my knowledge
has not been the focus of much attention in the literature. As I note in
the introduction to the *Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Indian Ethics*,
interpretation is supported and entailed by the dominant approach to
thought in the Western tradition and hence the bulk of what is produced
by this tradition treats interpretation as the epistemological default
for accounting for research. It is however a dud as an account, like its
correlative account of thought (argued and not merely claimed in the
*Handbook*). Explication in contrast is how philosophers read and
understand texts, and it constitutes the first means of philosophical
research. It is transmitted not as a theory but as the basic
disciplinary practice of philosophy. In the Western tradition there
is a historical tension between philosophy and the dominant ideology of
interpretation. What we find in Indology, where interpretation reigns as
a means of studying Indian thought, is a mere outcome of the politics of
the West.

Understanding the difference between explication and interpretation
requires some background logical distinctions to be
explicit—distinctions that will probably not be news to us as
philosophers. The distinctions are between: the objective and the
subjective, and between truth and inference. We can summarize the most
basic distinction of interest as the distinction between truth and
objectivity. I note that the distinction is not new, but yet rarely
something that we draw explicit attention to.

In a subsequent post, I’ll set out the distinction between explication
and interpretation.

## The Objective vs. Subjective

Indian philosophers were fantastic at exploring this distinction between
the objective and subjective and had differing ways of exploring and
representing the distinction (such as the Jain parable of the elephant
and blind men, Nāgārjuna and emptiness, or the depiction of Viṣṇu
holding a conch). The distinction is exemplified by the difference
between a mirror and a reflection. A mirror is something that can be
observed from differing perspectives, and how it appears will depend on
the perspective. But yet it’s the same thing viewed from differing
perspectives. The mirror as the object hence plays the role of
accounting for how we are viewing the same thing, while we disagree
about how it appears. Objects on the whole play this role: they are
what we converge on while we disagree. We can contrast this with a
reflection: the subjective. This is nothing that can be viewed from
differing perspectives. Rather, the reflection that one observes in a
mirror depends entirely upon the perspective, and who and what is
present to view the reflection.

The distinction makes room for two kinds of truths: truths about objects
(that reveal the object in its entirety—what we discern in research by
tracking objects from differing perspectives) and truths about subjects.
We can misrepresent the objective and the subjective and hence there is
room for the objectively false and the subjectively false. The
objective truth about a mirror, for instance, will reveal the properties
of the mirror that allow us to appreciate how it appears differently
from differing vantages (including its reflective properties from one
vantage that renders it as though invisible) and the subjective truth
will be an accurate description of what we see when we look in the
mirror.

## Validity vs. Truth

The second distinction that we need is the distinction between validity
(good inference) and truth.

Validity is the force of a deductive argument that guarantees that the
conclusion has to be true, *if* the premises are true. This is the
relationship of *entailment*. This is the essence of formal reason, and
something that philosophy professors spend a fair bit of time impressing
upon their students, who often like to use the word “valid” for
something like “I agree with that.” This is a mistake. A bunch of true
premises and a true conclusion does not make for validity. So merely
believing what is true does not render one reasonable and hence merely
agreeing that the premises and conclusions of an argument are true is no
guarantee of its validity. Correlatively, a valid argument can have
false premises and a false conclusion. So one can believe falsely and
yet be reasonable and hence one can disagree, completely, with what is
reasonable. Truth is neither necessary nor sufficient for reason. The
idea that truth is essential to reason is a formal fallacy though it
lacks a name. (I call it the fallacy of putting *satya* before
*ahiṃsā—*more on that later.) A valid argument with truth premises is
called a “sound argument.”

For those who want to note that inductive arguments operate according to
differing criteria (inductive arguments need not be valid to be strong),
it’s worth noting that an inductive argument can be strong but fail to
have true premises, and they can be cogent with true premises, yet with
false conclusions (like a good meteorological argument). Here too,
truth is neither necessary nor sufficient for reason.

A valid (deductive) argument is an argument whose validity (it’s
reasonableness) is something that we can converge on from differing
dissenting perspectives. You might agree with the premises for instance,
while I reject them, but we can yet appreciate the argument to be valid
it if it is. The validity of the argument here is objective, like a
mirror: how the argument seems to us (whether we take it to be sound or
unsound) will depend upon our theoretical perspective and yet we can
converge on its validity. But, and importantly, if what we want is a
sound argument (a valid argument with true premises) we have to
establish its validity first, and then determine whether the premises
are true or not. If we try to go first to truth, we confuse the basis of
validity with truth, which is both unnecessary and insufficient for
validity. This is why in philosophy we can make a lot of progress while
being agnostic about philosophical truth: philosophical understanding
begins with discerning the validity of an argument, and having
identified it we are in a position to assess whether the premises or
conclusion are true or not. Being sympathetic and open minded is
importantly not part of this process as the validity of an argument is
objective: what we can see from all perspectives while we disagree.



## Truth vs. Objectivity



Truth and objectivity are not the same. Reason is objective but it might
not be true. Whether and what you believe is true is irrelevant to
determining whether an argument is reasonable. There is no privileged
perspective from which one conducts research into the reasonableness of
an argument: it is apparent from the outside just as the objectivity of
a mirror is determined from the outside. To think that there is a
special perspective to determine the reasonableness of an argument is to
confuse its objectivity with the subjectivity of someone who endorses
it: that is like thinking that we have to determine the properties of a
mirror by looking at our reflection in the mirror. From this angle, you
will miss its objectivity.
