+++
title = "Why I am a Buddhist"
full_title = "Why I am a Buddhist"
date = "2020-06-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/07/why-i-am-a-buddhist/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/07/why-i-am-a-buddhist/).

Why I am a Buddhist

On Facebook, [Seth Segall
commented](https://www.facebook.com/loveofallwisdom/posts/2683423691982997?__xts__%5B0%5D=68.ARAUQx1ouMEt6WOrqWNACMxT64wra52oc2EtejcF0-Z6_NHUwQSqFrkyuNfTWibWW9pcMH_lQ2pJfaKy1q5V1Ib-7QAifn_JYSufd447FOnVQgIlsoEcqDaorDQAgpl71gkRrSXk6P-yvytPxgwkEn1aTOPUXvYKi4ETQnBS7CRz9_hDEcxOH_8aXvhlq4M104vVXnMeN3yClnD9EQQEKI_xdOmBd5IW8yCKsFZFgPFPKFjyUfn6t3dWDpk-E9gyYEUE5RmrLscI4TtP4sHJ63g3SEWpzcffhp1IHPJTLotSGaZpEyUlm26hNh0Hl5ll19bJOOZgN-T2xeJw0G_5Yoxhj5TR&__tn__=-R)
in response to my [posts on Evan
Thompson](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence):

> I agree with all the arguments you have made, but I think there is one
> maining major issue that divides you from Evan that transcends all the
> other issues. That is, as a “lover of all wisdom,” why would you
> define yourself as a Buddhist as opposed to someone who is informed by
> many wisdom traditions but holds a special place in his heart for
> Buddhism—in another words, how is your stance different from a more
> cosmopolitan one that is Buddhist-friendly, but not, strictly
> speaking, Buddhist?

I think I have answered this question before, but there is more to say
on it. For a long time –including the first six years of writing this
blog –I defined myself in just such a way, as Thompson does. Like
Thompson, I went so far as to [say I *don’t* identify as a
Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/zest/).

This all changed near the end of 2014. The immediate cause was the
[story I’ve told
before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/): I was
in the cancer hospital, I heard my wife asked what her religion was, and
I realized that the kind of chaplain I’d want was Buddhist. But
specifically, it was important to me that the chaplain be Buddhist
because of the sort of relationship one has with a chaplain. One needs
to give the chaplain a trust, the sort of trust one must put in a talk
therapist for the therapeutic relationship to work: the trust that the
chaplain may in important respects understand you, your values and your
situation better than you do. The trust is tied to a hugely important
[humility](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/07/monotheists-humility/),
a recognition of our own limits. Buddhists traditionally refer to this
sort of trust as *śraddhā*, a term often rendered in English with that
much-maligned word *faith*. (I hope that this point will offer further
evidence of why I am [not a “Buddhist
exceptionalist”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/naturalizing-buddhism-and-other-traditions/).)

I believe that something like faith plays a role in a good human life
for a number of reasons, all having to do with our individual limits.
For one thing, we simply don’t have time to learn and know everything;
there are many ideas on which we simply must take the word of reliable
authorities. This is true [with respect to
science](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/10/sabda-and-the-sciences/)
as much as anything else. (Do you believe that matter is made of atoms?
Why?) Trustworthy instruction –the *pramāṇa* of *śabda* – is an
inextricable part of human knowing. But crucial to getting this right is
deciding *who to trust*. In acquiring knowledge about physics, we
non-physicists put our faith in physicists, for the good reasons that
they have studied past discoveries at length and make new ones in ways
that follow reliable systematic methods.

In my case, it turned out that the chaplain question was not the end of
the story. The following months were *rough*. Being the primary
caregiver for a gravely ill person takes an emotional toll on oneself
and on the relationship. My family and closest friends were far away,
and I needed to spend enough time on caregiving that it was difficult to
get out and talk to anyone. (This all took place during a winter when
the Boston transit system shut down for a prolonged period because of
heavy snow.) It was hard to know where to turn.

Where did I turn? Above all [I
read](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/06/the-practice-of-reading/).
Lover of all wisdom that I am, I sought out wisdom from many traditions
in the hope that it would be constructively relevant. Zhu Xi and Paul
Griffiths both identified the importance of reading *with* faith,
reading in such a way that you make it a part of yourself. And I soon
discovered that I didn’t have that faith in many of the traditions whose
works I was reading. I couldn’t trust a Christianity that said the world
was basically good, nor could I trust Daoism (and that’s a story for
another time).

But Buddhism was a different story. When I picked up Śāntideva’s
Bodhicaryāvatāra – a text I’d read countless times before, having done
my dissertation on it –suddenly [its relevance hit me in a completely
new
way](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/06/the-practice-of-reading/).
Right in the first verses Śāntideva noted that “goodness (*śubha*) is
weak indeed forever, but the strength of badness (*pāpa*) is mighty and
terrible. What other good thing could overpower it, if it weren’t for
perfect awakening mind?” This verse spoke to my situation like never
before, and I devoured most of the book again in that night. Śāntideva
was offering me advice I could trust.

This situation put a lot in perspective for me. One can, and I do,
*love* all wisdom, but [one can’t *know* all of
it](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/12/choosing-a-few-traditions/).
Still less can one *inhabit* all of it. The many traditions of wisdom
disagree with each other greatly, and one must choose where to stand
–though the language of choice can [itself be
misleading](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/02/belonging-rationally-to-a-tradition/).
One must discover which traditions one finds persuasive enough to have
faith in. This can be multiple traditions, and indeed it nearly always
is. Alasdair MacIntyre sometimes suggests one must pick a single
tradition to inhabit, but even he is happy to accept contemporary
biologists’ word that humans evolved from chimps –a faith in
considerable tension with his professed Thomism. And indeed, the more
traditions we do inhabit, the more likely we are to encounter
contradictions.

In my case, the tradition that nourished me personally, the one I was
able to put my trust in, was Buddhism – including both Theravāda and
Mahāyāna. I recognized that I might hold some beliefs at odds with the
traditional Buddhism I was reading –[beliefs I’ve
discussed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/on-being-buddhist-and-distinctively-buddhist/)
in the debate with Thompson –but in that period I bracketed them, put
them aside, because I needed to put my faith in a single place. Since
then I have worked on defining more clearly what my personal beliefs are
(and thus my posts since 2015 have been both more to do with Buddhism,
and more constructive, than the early ones that explored a wider range
of traditions). Were I to be faced with a similarly trying situation
again, I’d be clearer about the limits of my Buddhist faith – but it
would still be there.

So in those days I took comfort from [praying to
Mañjuśrī](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/praying-to-something-you-dont-believe-in-redux/)
as a personification of Buddhist wisdom, even though I didn’t and don’t
believe Mañjuśrī exists. I came to refine those prayers into a nightly
seven-part [*anuttarapūjā*-like
prayer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/06/my-buddhist-practices/),
in which I could take stock of the ways I needed improvement. That was
helpful enough that I *still do it*, five years later – which means I
take refuge in buddha, dhamma and saṅgha every night. It was *after* all
this that I [started meditating
regularly](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/of-mindfulness-meditation-buddhist-and-otherwise/)
–but I still do that too, in a practice
([Headspace](https://www.headspace.com/)) that is officially secular but
whose Buddhist roots clearly show.

When a research study on young women’s cancer experiences asked me to
share mine as a partner, it asked where I had turned to cope, providing
a variety of options from friends and family to alcohol and other drugs.
The answer that most described my coping mechanism was “religion and
spirituality” –an answer that would have completely boggled my
20-year-old self.

I don’t find a pure cosmopolitanism helpful even in theory; one has to
recognize some traditions are closer to the truth than others. But where
one must really move beyond cosmopolitanism is in practice –in order to
have faith. I have good reason to put my faith in the Buddha –to take
refuge.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/why-i-am-a-buddhist)
