+++
title = "Responses on humanity,"
full_title = "Responses on humanity, rebirth, and a minimalist model"
date = "2020-06-21"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/21/responses-on-humanity-rebirth-and-a-minimalist-model/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/21/responses-on-humanity-rebirth-and-a-minimalist-model/).

Responses on humanity, rebirth, and a minimalist model

Seth Zuihō Segall wrote a [helpful
response](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/endorsing-and-rejecting-the-views-of-the-modern-west/#comment-40961)
to [my
review](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/endorsing-and-rejecting-the-views-of-the-modern-west/)
of his *Buddhism and Human Flourishing*. Seth’s[¹](#footnote1) response
makes four points, groupable in two categories that correspond to the
division of my original post: the first two points, roughly, have to do
with endorsing modern Western views, the second two with rejecting them.
I will move roughly from (what I take to be) our points of greatest
agreement to our points of greatest disagreement.

So I will begin with the fourth and last of Seth’s points, which is the
one where I think we agree most. This point is about transcending the
constitutive conditions of our humanity: a key point at issue between
Śāntideva and Martha Nussbaum. As I noted in my review, I do actually
stand with Nussbaum and with Seth against Śāntideva on this question: I
do not think we should try to transcend these conditions. My concern was
that this point needs to be argued, we can’t simply assume Nussbaum is
right – because if she is right, then Śāntideva is wrong, and I think
it’s important to be clear about that.

I agree with Seth that human nature is not infinitely malleable, and we
cannot just shape people into a new form – but that’s not at the heart
of my disagreement with Śāntideva, because I think he shares that view.
*Most* people are not bodhisattvas, at least not in this life, and we
can’t expect them to be so. But *we*, we agents aiming to be better, can
still try to transcend our humanity, and, Śāntideva thinks, we should. I
don’t believe that that is the case, because I believe there is an
inherent worthiness to goals [beyond the removal of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).
[In my response to Evan
Thompson](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/)
I’ve said more about why, and I’ve been appreciating the way both that
dialogue and this one have helped me deepen such arguments.

On point 3, I don’t have an objection in principle to a “minimalist
model” that avoids dispute on certain points controversial to its
interlocutors. I think that [Jacques Maritain’s approach to
rights](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/02/rights-are-instrumental/),
which led to the creation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
takes up such a model. And in the context of the Universal Declaration,
the advantages of a minimalist model are significant: they can build on
preexisting agreement on supposed rights for the practical purpose of
presenting violations of those rights. In such specifically practical
contexts, the advantages of a minimalist model are clear. It’s in a
philosophical context where I think it is important to go deeper – for
one typically does not go very far in philosophical discussions before
one encounters differences with deeper roots, often metaphysical ones.

That, perhaps, brings us to the other two points. Regarding point 1
(arguments on rebirth): Seth claims that the evidence against rebirth is
not as strong as the evidence against creationism or anti-vaxxing. That
is a tricky point. The evidence suggestive of rebirth collected by the
likes of [Ian Stevenson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_Stevenson),
though controversial, does matter. But I want to reiterate a point I
made [with respect to Jan
Westerhoff](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/):
even if Stevenson’s evidence *did* somehow indicate rebirth happened
–in a way that goes against many fundamental presuppositions of
contemporary psychology and would require a drastic reevaluation of many
of its established theories –it would still give us no reason to
believe that rebirth happens in the way that traditional Buddhist theory
needs it to, where being good gives us better future lives. We have
*zero* evidence for that. Moreover, it does seem to me that we have a
great deal of evidence for the bodily nature of consciousness, such that
if rebirth even existed in the way Stevenson suggests, it would
constitute such an anomaly for the entire neurobiological research
program of contemporary psychology that that program would become
[degenerating in Lakatos’s
sense](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/06/the-middle-ground-in-philosophy-of-science/);in
Kuhn’s terms, it would require a dramatic paradigm shift in the way the
entire discipline of psychology now works. I have enough [trust in
biological and psychological
authorities](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/10/sabda-and-the-sciences/)
to reject such a view at present – but all the same, Seth has led me to
realize I have not explored the evidence myself in as much detail as I
should have. Does Stevenson’s evidence require a complete rethinking of
neuropsychology? Seth seems to think that it might; I am doubtful, but I
admit it does merit closer examination.

I suspect that it is on point 2 (others’ embrace of a traditional model)
that Seth and I the biggest disagreement, and I think that is the point
that is at the heart of my original objections. For that reason I will
give that point its own post, next week.

1 It’s always tricky to know when to use first or last names on a
scholarly blog, with someone one is personally on a first-name basis
with. Since his response was informal, I think the informality is called
for here as well.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/responses-on-humanity,-rebirth,-and-a-minimalist-model/)
