+++
title = "Vādirājatīrtha and"
full_title = "Vādirājatīrtha and Doctrinal Development in Dvaita Vedānta"
date = "2020-06-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/04/vadirajatirtha-and-doctrinal-development-in-dvaita-vedanta/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/04/vadirajatirtha-and-doctrinal-development-in-dvaita-vedanta/).

Vādirājatīrtha and Doctrinal Development in Dvaita Vedānta

Hello everyone,

I am Anusha Rao, a doctoral student in Religion at the University of
Toronto. My thanks to Elisa and all the other board members for the
opportunity to guest post here this month! I’d like to introduce my
research in this post, and I would be delighted to receive feedback and
comments.

I work on dualist Vedānta (Dvaita) in early modern South India and the
links forged in this system between narrative, theology, and philosophy.
Dvaita Vedānta, founded by Madhva in the thirteenth century, is one of
the three important Vedānta schools of South India, and argues for an
unchanging difference between God (who, for Madhva, is the deity Viṣṇu),
and individual selves. Dvaita Vedānta is understudied, partly because of
the radical and eccentric interpretations of scriptural passages by
Madhva, and partly because of the long-held misconception that Advaita
is synonymous with all Vedānta.

I am especially interested in the post-Vyāsatīrtha period in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Lawrence McCrea and Valerie Stoker
have done crucial work in demonstrating Vyāsatīrtha’s role in the rising
influence of Dvaita Vedānta in early modern South India, both through
his political influence in the Vijayanagara polity and his formidable
polemical texts that deployed Navya-nyāya and Mīmāṃsā to substantiate
Dvaita doctrines that had previously received little attention.

We know very little, however, on the productive period following
Vyāsatīrtha, which saw a concerted attempt by thinkers such as
Vijayīndratīrtha and Vādirājatīrtha to engage other sectarian groups in
debate and extend the influence and appeal of Dvaita Vedānta by
popularizing it through other genres of writing, both in Sanskrit and in
Kannada.My current research focuses on the doctrinal development in
Dvaita Vedānta at this point, with a particular emphasis on the
sixteenth-century scholar Vādirājatīrtha’s magnum opus,
the*Yuktimallikā*, an independent work committed to establishing the
truth of the core doctrines of Dvaita Vedānta—the difference between God
and the self, the ontological reality of the world, the idea of Viṣṇu as
the Vedāntic Brahman, etc.

Vādirājatīrtha is known for his writings across genres: philosophical
texts such as the*Yuktimallikā*and the*Nyāyaratnāvalī*, commentaries
on Madhva and Jayatīrtha, devotional hymns in Sanskrit and Kannada, and
the epic poem*Rukmiṇīśavijaya*, based on the marriage of Kṛṣṇa and
Rukmiṇī. Vādirājatīrtha’s versatility has been compared to that of
Veṅkaṭanātha from the Viśiṣṭādvaita tradition. In addition,
Vādirājatīrtha is accepted as equivalent in stature to Madhva by some
sections of the Mādhva community, an honour not accorded to any other
thinker within the tradition.

The*Yuktimallikā*or*Jasmine Vine of Reasoning*presents
Vādirājatīrtha’s arguments in favour of core Dvaita doctrines in verse
through five sections, entitled*saurabhas*or fragrances:
the*Guṇasaurabha*,*Śuddhisaurabha*,*Bhedasaurabha*,*Viśvasaurabha*and*Phalasaurabha*.
Each of these sections concerns a specific doctrine that he wishes to
defend. Vādirājatīrtha’s characteristic style is light and playful: he
takes jibes at his opponents while using technical concepts from Mīmāṃsā
against them through an appeal to the commonsensical and the theological
rather than the technical and philosophical. In this, his writings
differ vastly from Vyāsatīrtha, and I would argue that their intended
audiences are markedly different. I am working on the implications of
precisely this kind of approach—In what way do the specific social and
theological concerns of Vādirājatīrtha shape this “commonsensical”
approach to philosophy that is a direct contrast to Vyāsatīrtha’s? How
does such an approach find expression across other non-technical,
literary genres, and how does it, in turn, bring about doctrinal and
institutional changes within Dvaita Vedānta?
