+++
title = "Vādirājatīrtha’s Use of"
full_title = "Vādirājatīrtha’s Use of Mīmāṃsā Principles"
date = "2020-06-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/13/vadirajatirthas-use-of-mima%e1%b9%83sa-principles/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/13/vadirajatirthas-use-of-mima%e1%b9%83sa-principles/).

Vādirājatīrtha’s Use of Mīmāṃsā Principles

In this post, I will look at two instances in*The**Jasmine Vine of
Reasoning*(*Yuktimallikā*) where Vādirājatīrtha, a prominent
16^(th)Cent. CE scholar of Dvaita Vedānta, uses principles from Mīmāṃsā
to bolster his arguments. Mīmāṃsā, one of the six traditional *darśana*s
in Indian philosophy, is based on using a set of principles/maxims to
determine the meaning of prescriptive statements in the Vedas. Since the
Vedas are regarded as authorless in this system, Mīmāṃsā thinkers came
up with interpretive rules or principles (*nyāya*s) to be followed by
readers in order to understand the meaning of Vedic prescriptions
without depending on authorial
intention.[^(\[1\])](//40301DC7-DAC0-416D-B75A-A49EC67112E4#_ftn1)These
principles of Mīmāṃsā are used across a broad range of Sanskrit
intellectual disciplines including Vedānta.

When Vādirājatīrtha invokes rules from Mīmāṃsā, he sometimes uses these
rules in a casual way, framing arguments that are unlikely to be
directed towards convincing interlocutors of his stance on the
issue(more on that below). In these instances,Vādirājatīrtha’s
approach in the debate appears to be wholly polemical, since he does
notengage with the*prima facie*view (*pūrvapakṣa*) in a dialogue
based on mutually accepted premises regarding Mīmāṃsā. Instead,he
implies that he disagrees with some of the fundamental premises of
Mīmāṃsā, but nevertheless uses these principles to argue for the
superiority of Dvaita Vedānta. Vādirājatīrtha accepts these rules only
hypothetically, just to show that the interlocutor who followed them
would have to fall in line with the Dvaita view. It is obvious that the
interlocutor that Vādirājatīrtha critiques in these passages is an
adherent of Advaita Vedānta, as we will go on to see. Vādirājatīrtha’s
criticisms assume that the interlocutor accepts Mīmāṃsā principles. This
assumption is in accordance with the notion that Advaita scholars accept
Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā where it concerns matters relating to empirical/pragmatic
reality (*vyāvahārika*).

In*The Jasmine Vine*,Vādirājatīrtha gives the reader an
autobiographical note on why he came to accept Dvaita doctrines (which
he refers to as Tattvavāda) by listing his primary objections to Advaita
(which he refers to as Māyāvāda). These terms have dual connotations—
Māyāvāda refers to the Advaita doctrine that the world is illusory
(*māyā*), but also implies that Advaita is itself an illusory doctrine.
Similarly, Tattvavāda refers to the Dvaita doctrine that the world is
real, but also implies that Dvaita is the doctrine that upholds reality.
Vādirājatīrtha presents his reasoning for why Dvaita is superior to
other systems of thought in the following way.

*parasmāt pūrva-daurbalye niṣedhād vidhibādhane/  
yato mahāgrahas teṣāṃ sarveṣāṃ viduṣām api //*

*tatpūrva-sarva-rāddhānta-siddhārthānāṃ niṣeddhari /  
pare ca tattvavāde ‘smin garīyasi bharo mama //*(*YM 1.21-22*)

*Since all these scholars \[of Māyāvāda\] are insistent that (a) the
earlier \[injunction\] is weaker than the later one, and (b) that the
prohibition \[negative injunction\] blocks the prescription \[positive
injunction\], my praise goes to Tattvavāda which is greater \[than all
of them\], \[because\] (a) it is later than the established conclusions
of all the previous doctrines and (b) it negates them.*

Here,Vādirājatīrtha is clearly, though not explicitly, invoking the
principle of*apaccheda*in Mīmāṃsā (Jaimini VI.5.49-50), according to
which, when there is a conflict between two independent prescriptions,
the later one blocks the earlier one. The determination of which
prescriptions are earlier and later is not based on chronological
sequence, but on a variety of factors. Here Vādirājatīrtha refers to
Dvaita as the subsequent prescription on account of it being the
culmination of all doctrines and being unrefuted by later doctrines.

Vādirājatīrtha also invokes the rule that the negative injunction blocks
the positive injunction to argue that Dvaita is superior to all other
philosophical systems because it negates or blocks previous systems of
philosophy. This is very interesting, because the rule that a negative
injunction blocks a prescription does not appear to be accepted by
Mīmāṃsa thinkers and is presented as a*prima facie*view that is
refuted in
the*Śābarabhāṣya*(X.8.5).[^(\[2\])](//40301DC7-DAC0-416D-B75A-A49EC67112E4#_ftn2)The
commentaries on*The Jasmine Vine*justify this by interpreting
prohibition (*niṣedha*) to mean the negative statement that Brahman has
no attributes (*nirguṇatva*) and the prescription (*vidhi*) to mean the
statement that Brahman has attributes (*saguṇatva*). Vādirājatīrtha’s
statement would then mean: “Because these scholars (of Advaita) are
insistent that a) the subsequent prescription blocks the earlier one,
and b) that the negative statement about Brahman’s lack of attributes
blocks the positive statement about Brahman possessing attributes…” This
way, the commentators attempt to resolve the problem of accepting
a*prima facie*view as Mīmāṃsā doctrine. To me, this instance shows
that Vādirājatīrtha is using these arguments casually in a polemical way
and does not intend the Mīmāṃsā principles he is using to be extended to
a rigorous philosophical dialogue on the soundness of Advaita doctrines.

Moreover, the rules about the injunctions only apply in the case of two
statements from the*śruti*s, where both are regarded as authoritative,
rather than statements from two different systems that present different
worldviews. Additionally, Vādirājatīrthastates that it is his opponents
who insist on these rules regarding injunctions, implying that he does
not regard these rules as indispensable or perhaps even important. He
simply accepts the Mīmāṃsā rule hypothetically to argue that it would
still support the Dvaita position.

Later in the text, Vādirājatīrtha explains how statements from*śruti*s
that apparently speak of Brahman as having no attributes can be
interpreted by narrowing their scope down (*saṅkoca*). He offers one
specific possibility that I would like to highlight here:

*kapiñjalādhikaraṇa-nyāyānusaraṇād api  
ananta-suguṇa-cchedāt triguṇa-cchedanaṃ varam // YM 1.794*

*Even by following the principle of the kapiñjalādhikaraṇa, it is better
to do away with three guṇa*s*rather than to do away with infinite guṇas
\[good attributes\].*

The principle of the*kapiñjalādhikaraṇa*(Jaimini XI.1.38-46) explains
that when the exact quantity of an object is not specified in Vedic
injunctions, the plural number in the verb must be assumed to indicate
three objects. Since words can be conjugated in the dual in Sanskrit,
three is the minimum number that can be conjugated in the plural.
Therefore, assuming that the plural refers to three objects when no
specific number is provided allows for parsimony in the extrapolation
that is inevitable. Here, Vādirājatīrtha argues that statements that
negate the existence of attributes in Brahman without specifying the
number of attributes negated, may be interpreted in accordance with this
maxim to negate three*guṇa*s—referring, of course, to the three*guṇa*s
of*sattva*,*rajas*, and*tamas*that are products of*prakṛti*.

Here too, it is easy to see the multiple objections an interlocutor
could make about the application of this maxim in this specific case.
BNK Sharma, who is generally sympathetic to the Dvaita argument, terms
this suggestion
“cute”,[^(\[3\])](//40301DC7-DAC0-416D-B75A-A49EC67112E4#_ftn3) implying
thereby that it is not to be considered seriously. I am intrigued by
Vādirājatīrtha’s use of the word ‘even’ (*api*) in the verse, which
seems to advance this as an alternate interpretation that may or may not
be meant seriously. Like the previous argument, this too seems to accept
Mīmāṃsā rules hypothetically just to indicate that they would ultimately
support the Dvaita position.

These uses of principles from Mīmāṃsā pose the question of who
Vādirājatīrtha’s intended audience was—Was he writing primarily for
disciples and other scholars internal to the tradition, who already
accepted his premises? Additionally, what was the attitude of
post-Vyāsatīrtha scholars of Dvaita Vedānta towards Mīmāṃsā? Did they
apply it merely as a useful argumentative tool, or did they think it
possible to reconcile portions of Mīmāṃsā with Dvaita doctrines?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^(\[1\])](//40301DC7-DAC0-416D-B75A-A49EC67112E4#_ftnref1)Freschi,
Elisa, Agata Ciabattoni, Francesco A. Genco, and Björn Lellmann.
“Understanding prescriptive texts: rules and logic as elaborated by the
Mīmāṃsā school.”*Journal of World Philosophies*2, no. 1 (2017)., 48.

[^(\[2\])](//40301DC7-DAC0-416D-B75A-A49EC67112E4#_ftnref2)My thanks to
Elisa Freschi for pointing this out.

[^(\[3\])](//40301DC7-DAC0-416D-B75A-A49EC67112E4#_ftnref3)B N
Krishnamurti Sharma,*History of the Dvaita School of Vedanta and Its
Literature*, Vol. 1 (Motilal Banarsidass Publishers, 1960)., 423.
