+++
title = "Cherry Picking the Bodhi"
full_title = "Cherry Picking the Bodhi Tree A Response to Lele (Guest Post by Evan Thompson)"
date = "2020-06-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/).

Cherry Picking the Bodhi Tree: A Response to Lele (Guest Post by Evan Thompson)

[*Why I Am Not a
Buddhist*](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300226553/why-i-am-not-buddhist#:~:text=In%20lucid%20and%20entertaining%20prose,and%20religion%20are%20fundamentally%20different.&text=Smart%2C%20sympathetic%2C%20and%20intellectually%20ambitious,place%20in%20our%20world%20today.)
is mainly a philosophical critique of Buddhist modernism. I criticize
certain widespread misconceptions about Buddhism, and about religion and
science, that Buddhist modernists promote. My aim is to spark better
conversations about these topics among Buddhists and non-Buddhists
alike. I thank Amod Lele for undertaking such a conversation [in his
original posts about the book and his subsequent ones replying to my
response](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/).

Here I would like to summarize and assess how things stand in our
conversation from my perspective. 

Lele’s main point in his [eight-post
reply](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/)
is that my critique of Buddhist modernism doesn’t apply to his form of
eudaimonistic Buddhism. As he says, he doesn’t accept Buddhist
exceptionalism (the idea, prevalent in Buddhist modernism, that Buddhism
is uniquely rational and empirical among the world’s religions), he
rejects the idea that empirical science can establish the normative
validity of eudaimonistic Buddhism, and he doesn’t try to put his novel
and modern Buddhist ideas into the mouth of the so-called historical
Buddha. So, his eudaimonistic Buddhism doesn’t suffer from these
Buddhist modernist faults. In addition, he acknowledges and values the
radical and challenging aspects of the Buddhist tradition, though he
doesn’t accept them all.

I agree with Lele about all of this. Bringing these points about
eudaimonistic Buddhism into clear view is a useful upshot of our
conversation.

Nevertheless, significant disagreements between us remain. Lele
describes his recasting of Buddhist concepts as congruent with their
traditional meanings, whereas I see him as cherry picking and eliding
incongruities. Cherry picking Buddhist sources and eliding incongruities
between traditional understandings and modern revisions of Buddhist
concepts are typical Buddhist modernist traits. For this reason, I see
Lele’s eudaimonistic Buddhism as still falling within the scope of my
critique.

Our disagreements are especially evident in our exchange about karma, so
I’ll focus on that part of the conversation.

I assert that the problem of accounting for why bad things happen to
good people lies at the core of the formation of the concept of karma.
Lele states, however, that the core of an ethical or philosophical
concept isn’t to be found in its origins (the reasons for its initial
appearance) but rather in how the concept functions in ethical or
philosophical texts. In addition, the ethicized idea of karma (good
mental actions lead to good outcomes, and bad mental actions lead to bad
outcomes) first appears in the context of answering the question of what
happens to a person after death (*Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad* 4.4.5;
[Olivelle
1998](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-early-upanishads-9780195124354?cc=ca&lang=en&),
p. 21). In short, Lele says I’m wrong about how we should go about
determining the core of the concept of karma, I’m wrong about its core
function in traditional Buddhist philosophical texts, and I’m wrong
about the question behind the concept’s formation.

Let’s start with the concept of karma in Buddhist philosophical texts.
Lele claims that its core is eudaimonistic, whereas I think it’s
eschatological. Eschatology in general and karmic eschatology in
particular are concerned with rationalizing why bad things happen to
good people and good things happen to bad people. According to karmic
eschatology, in the long run—in the next life—people will receive the
good results of their good actions, and the bad results of their bad
ones. Without this eschatological core, the eudaimonistic aspect of
karma—that good mental actions bring about good results—has no warrant
and motivation for traditional Buddhist philosophers. This is abundantly
clear in Śāntideva.

[Lele cherry picks Śāntideva’s
*Bodhicaryāvatāra*](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/26/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/)
(*Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life*). Śāntideva holds (1) that
good actions develop good habits that make our lives go better, and bad
actions develop bad habits that make our lives go worse; and (2) that
developing such habits is what results in better and worse rebirths.
Lele proposes to drop (2) and retain (1). But if our aim is to give a
coherent reading of Śāntideva, this kind of cherry picking won’t work.
The main reason is that, for Śāntideva, (1) requires (2) for its warrant
and motivation. In other words, without the backdrop of the karmic
eschatology, the belief that good actions make things go better in this
life is not sufficiently supported. Rather, its warrant and motivation
drain away.

For Śāntideva, this life is one in a beginningless series, in which
everyone has been related to everyone else in countless ways. This
rebirth cosmology underwrites the mind-expanding Mahāyāna narrative in
which all beings strive over countless aeons to be happy and every
sentient being has been your mother. This narrative is powerful,
inspiring, and motivating. It gives you the strength to counteract anger
with compassion and to recognize your own faults. Thus, in chapter 6 on
the virtue of patience (the chapter from which Lele quotes), Śāntideva
writes: “In the past, I too have inflicted such pain on sentient beings;
therefore, I, who have caused harm to sentient beings, deserve that in
return./Both his weapon and my body are causes of suffering. He has
obtained a weapon, and I have obtained a body. With what should I be
angry?” (6:42-43; [Wallace & Wallace
1997](https://www.shambhala.com/a-guide-to-the-bodhisattva-way-of-life-2164.html),
p. 66). Towards the end of the chapter, Śāntideva adds: “since my
adversary assists me in my Bodhisattva way of life, I should long for
him like a treasure discovered in the house and acquired without effort”
(6:107, Wallace & Wallace 1997, p. 73). ([Crosby and Skilton’s
translation](https://global.oup.com/ukhe/product/the-bodhicaryavatara-9780199540433?cc=ca&lang=en&)
has “enemy” instead of “adversary.”)

These statements, and the metaphysical and normative framework they
express, give you a way to understand and respond to all the bad things
that happen to you in this life, even if they seem undeserved. The
passage helps you to reappraise them as being also good things. They
give you an opportunity to practice forbearance and compassion, which
are inherently good, and thus make your life internally better. When you
cultivate these virtues good consequences will accrue to you, if not in
this life, then in a future one, so eventually your life will also be
externally better. Most importantly, the bad things are also good things
because they give you an opportunity to arouse *bodhicitta*, the mind
that strives to awaken, and to practice the perfections that constitute
the *bodhisattva* path.

In these ways, for Śāntideva, the karmic eschatology supports and
permeates the conviction that good habits make our lives go better.
Remove that eschatology, and his philosophical arguments fall apart.

Let me turn now to the question of how we should determine the core of a
concept. Lele’s method is exegesis of philosophical texts. In my view,
this isn’t the right method for a concept like karma. Trying to
determine the core of the concept of karma by looking at how the concept
functions in Buddhist philosophical texts by Śāntideva or Vasubandhu or
Dharmakīrti is like trying to determine the core of the concept of God
by reading Anselm or Thomas Aquinas. You get rarefied, intellectual
abstractions, Buddhological or theological, as the case may be. Of
course, these abstract conceptions are meaningful for their respective
intellectual traditions and for philosophy more generally. But only
intellectuals, especially philosophers and theologians looking at things
from inside their own tradition, would mistake such abstractions for a
concept’s concrete, functional, and living core.

In the case of god concepts, we have evidence from anthropological and
cognitive scientific studies of Hindus and Christians that people don’t
adhere to “theologically correct” conceptions when they think about gods
or God in relation to the world and their own lives—when they reason
about divine intervention, for example ([Barrett & Keil
1996](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1388144?seq=1); [Barrett
1999](https://brill.com/view/journals/mtsr/11/4/article-p325_1.xml)).
Studies of how people think about karma—about what it is and how it
relates to their own lives—provide similar evidence ([White et al.
2017](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/2153599X.2016.1249921);
[White et al.
2018](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0146167218808502); [White
& Norenzayan 2019](https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2019-58919-001)). In
other words, there are generally large gaps between one or another
preferred theological or philosophical rendition of a religious concept
and its actual psychological and social instantiations.

For these reasons, textual exegesis and philosophical analysis are
inadequate for understanding the driving core—the beating heart and
lifeblood—of concepts like karma, God, salvation, liberation, awakening,
and suffering. Instead, we need analyses of concepts that are
genealogical—that trace a concept’s origins and conditions of
possibility—as well as studies from cognitive science and anthropology
of how concepts actually function psychologically and socially. In the
case of karma, such studies indicate that the concept is fundamentally a
way to handle the problem of why bad things happen to good people and
vice-versa ([White et al.
2017](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/2153599X.2016.1249921);
[White et al.
2018](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0146167218808502); [White
& Norenzayan 2019](https://psycnet.apa.org/record/2019-58919-001)).

It’s important, in this context, to distinguish between inside versus
outside perspectives on religious or soteriological concepts, or between
“descriptivist” versus “redescriptivist” accounts of religious discourse
(to use [Brent
Nongbri’s](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300216783/religion)
terms). If we’re talking from a position inside the *Bṛhadāraṇyaka
Upaniṣad* and our aim is to describe what the text says (or takes itself
to be saying), then we should say that the sage Yājñavalkya presents an
ethicized concept of karma in answer to King Janaka’s question about
what happens to a person after death. Nevertheless, from a position
outside the world of the text, using historical, anthropological, and
cognitive scientific methods and evidence, we can redescribe the text as
grappling with the question of why people are born into strikingly
different fortunate and unfortunate circumstances, and why people
experience strikingly different fortunes and misfortunes in their lives.
This is the question that the ethicized idea of karma is supposed to
answer.

This line of thought is why I linked to Obeyesekere’s book [*Imagining
Karma*](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520232433/imagining-karma) in
my earlier response to Lele. Obeyesekere explains how the ethicized
concept of karma, due to its origins, formation, and cultural and
historical conditions of possibility, is fundamentally an eschatological
concept.

So, for the reasons just mentioned, I stand by my claim that the
underlying question that drives the formation of the concept of karma is
why bad things happen to good people (and good things happen to bad
people).

What happens if you wish to reject the eschatological core of the
concept of karma while preserving the concept’s eudaimonistic aspects?
If you’re a Buddhist who doesn’t find rebirth credible but wishes to
keep the idea that there is a relationship between cultivating good
mental states, bringing about good consequences, and helping others to
do the same, then you face a very difficult problem with the concept of
karma. You don’t automatically get eudaimonism when you remove rebirth
from the karmic eschatology, as you would if the core of the concept
were eudaimonistic. On the contrary, precisely because the core is
eschatological, you wind up having to invent what is in effect a new
concept. (In my view, this is what [Dale
Wright](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/files/2011/01/wright01.pdf)
does.) You also have to advance additional reasons to justify
eudaimonism in the face of other options, such as recasting karma in
consequentialist terms, as [Mark
Siderits](https://www.routledge.com/Personal-Identity-and-Buddhist-Philosophy-Empty-Persons-2nd-Edition/Siderits/p/book/9781472446459)
and [Charles
Goodman](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/consequences-of-compassion-9780190205324?cc=ca&lang=en&)
do. One reason philosophers disagree about how to articulate Buddhist
ethics today is precisely because there is such a profound incongruity
between the concept of karma, central to traditional Buddhist ethics,
and typical, modern academic sensibilities.

Buddhist modernists need to face facts. Are you cherry picking what you
like and rejecting what you don’t like? Then don’t claim to be congruous
with your sources. Or do you want your revisionist project to be
congruous with the tradition? Then don’t cherry pick. Trying to have it
both ways is another example (among the many others detailed in my book)
of how Buddhist modernists want to have their cake and eat it too.

The last point I wish to make concerns the idea of authenticity. In my
[earlier
response](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
to Lele I wrote: “If we’re going to recast the Buddhist idea of
liberation in modern terms, then I submit we should understand it as
involving a profound reconfiguration of our existence as governed by the
norm of authenticity, not simply as a change to our mental states and
traits as psychology conceives of them.” Please note that this sentence
is conditional. It also doesn’t deny conceiving of liberation as
entailing a change to those aspects of the human mind on which
psychology focuses, but rather says that this focus is limited.

[Lele
responds](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/02/eudaimonist-buddhist-modernism-and-the-norm-of-authenticity/)
that an existentialist norm of authenticity doesn’t fit more easily with
traditional Buddhism than does a psychological notion of well-being,
because authenticity conflicts with the Buddhist doctrine of non-self:
“Traditional Buddhism would tell us there is, and can be, no such thing
as an authentic self.”

But the version of authenticity I’m mentioning isn’t Sartre’s or Charles
Taylor’s. It’s [Keiji
Nishitani](https://www.ucpress.edu/book/9780520049468/religion-and-nothingness)’s
and [Stephen
Batchelor](https://groveatlantic.com/book/alone-with-others/)’s
Zen-influenced version, which is conceptualized precisely in terms of
the realization of non-self. It’s also not strictly speaking correct
that traditional Buddhism tells us there is and can be no such thing as
an authentic self, because, for example, the Mahāyāna “Great Final
Nirvana Sutra” (*Mahāpariṇirvāna Sūtra*) states that all sentient beings
possess the Buddha nature and that Buddha nature is the self. Here
everything turns on exactly what we mean by “self.”

Finally, when I introduce authenticity, I describe it as a facing up to
the question of “how we choose to lead our own lives given our lack of
any fixed nature or essence, and in the face of our inevitable death.”
Lele himself describes [just such a moment in his own
life](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/) when he
writes, “[sitting in the waiting room of a cancer clinic, I suddenly
realized that if I was to have a chaplain to help me face death, I would
want that chaplain to be a
Buddhist](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/05/19/on-being-buddhist-and-distinctively-buddhist/).”
So, although Lele may not mention authenticity explicitly, he embodies
it.

Thanks again to Lele for continuing the conversation and to the other
editors of *The Indian Philosophy Blog* for making this space available
for it. (Thanks also to Bob Sharf and Sean Smith for helpful comments
and discussion.)
