+++
title = "Classical and nondual"
full_title = "Classical and nondual mindfulness"
date = "2020-06-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/14/classical-and-nondual-mindfulness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/14/classical-and-nondual-mindfulness/).

Classical and nondual mindfulness

Ron Purser’s critique of modern mindfulness is thoroughgoing, and
extends beyond [chastising its skepticism of political
engagement](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/in-defence-of-mcmindfulness/).
Purser also criticizes modern mindfulness on other grounds, grounds that
I think are considerably closer to the views of classical (early)
Buddhist texts.

In particular, Purser’s article “[The myth of the present
moment](https://www.academia.edu/8070322/The_Myth_of_the_Present_Moment)”
(from the journal *Mindfulness* 6:680–686) points to a central element
of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) and other modern
mindfulness practices which is not present in the classical texts.
Namely: Jon Kabat-Zinn, the founder of MBSR and [modern medical
mindfulness](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/of-mindfulness-meditation-buddhist-and-otherwise/)
generally, [defines
mindfulness](https://www.mindful.org/jon-kabat-zinn-defining-mindfulness/)
as “awareness that arises through paying attention, on purpose, in the
present moment, non-judgementally”. So a key goal of modern mindfulness
practice is “reducing thoughts and ruminations of the past and future,
which keeps us from being in the present moment.” (Purser 682) Purser
notes that this focus on the present moment is exemplified in the common
introductory practice (included in [BU’s mindfulness
workshop](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/on-mindfulness/)) of
mindfully paying attention to the experience of slowly eating a raisin.

Purser rightly notes that this present-moment approach to mindfulness
deviates from classical Pali texts
([sutta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sutta_Pi%E1%B9%ADaka)s and
[abhidhamma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abhidhamma_Pi%E1%B9%ADaka))
in at least two ways. For one, there is nothing “non-judgemental” about
the practice of mindfulness in the classical texts. The [Satipaṭṭhāna
(Foundations of Mindfulness)
Sutta](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/nyanasatta/wheel019.html)
is typically taken as the core text for mindfulness practice. There, the
practitioner – specifically described as a monk –becomes aware of
mental hindrances like anger and sluggishness arising and passing away,
but never questions that they *are* hindrances, negative states that one
would be better off without. Judgement is a core part of the practice,
integrated into the practice’s wider ethical framework.

Second, classical mindfulness practice is not focused on being in the
present moment, the here and now. “The present moment, like any other
mental object, is seen for what it actually is—impermanent,
unsatisfactory, and lacking self-nature.” (Purser 684) The goal is to
see all objects as having these “three marks” (*tilakkhana*), allowing
one to become detached from all of it.

I agreed with critiques like Purser’s for a long time: modern
mindfulness meditation seemed far removed from what I thought to be real
Buddhism. But I have begun to change my mind on this for a variety of
reasons. Key among these are the works of John Dunne, possibly the most
acute scholar I know on Buddhist meditation and its implications
–particularly his 2011 article [“Toward an understanding of non-dual
mindfulness”](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14639947.2011.564820)
and 2015 chapter [“Buddhist styles of mindfulness: a heuristic
approach”](https://www.johnddunne.net/uploads/9/8/5/6/9856107/dunne_j_mindfulness_heuristic.pdf).

Dunne acknowledges wholeheartedly that modern MBSR-type practices
diverge from classical Buddhist tradition. But that does *not* mean that
they are modern inventions, fabricated of whole cloth for colonial and
postcolonial concerns. After all, there were over two thousand years
between the composition of the earliest Buddhist texts and modern
colonialism, and a lot of Buddhism can happen in that time.

Dunne’s point is to distinguish between the classical understanding of
mindfulness, found in the suttas and abhidhamma as well as traditional
Mahāyāna thinkers like Śāntideva, and a different “nondual style” that
begins in India with
[Dharmakīrti](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dharmakiirti/) and the
[Yogācāra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yogachara) tradition, but
reaches its full flowering outside India in “the Mahāmudrā and Dzogchen
traditions of Tibet and the Chan traditions of China; and through
Chinese Chan, Nondual styles appear in Japanese Zen and Korean Seon
Buddhism.” (Dunne 2015: 259) And modern mindfulness’s pronounced
divergences from classical Buddhism turn out to be considerably less
pronounced from nondual Buddhism.

As a key example of nondual practice, Dunne examines the Ocean of
Definitive Meaning (Nges don rgya mtsho), a sixteenth-century Tibetan
text by [Wangchuk
Dorje](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wangchuk_Dorje,_9th_Karmapa_Lama),
the Ninth Karmapa. Wangchuk Dorje’s text recommends both of the features
we have discussed in contemporary mindfulness. It tells us to stay in
the present moment: “Do not chase the past; do not invite the future;
rest the awareness occurring now in a clear and nonconceptual state.”
And it urges a non-judgemental approach to thoughts that arise in
meditation: “Some say that one should deliberately suppress thoughts to
be abandoned, but if one does so, then it will just increase
conceptuality and it will be difficult for concentration (*samādhi*) to
arise.” (Dunne 2015: 264-5) So we see this approach arising in Tibet
before 1624, when the first Jesuit missionaries and hence Western
influence got there.

Purser, much to his credit, recognizes that “Here-and-nowism” is not
only a modern or Western phenomenon: “it was quite prevalent in 8th
century China, promoted to the laity as a meditation method that
promised quick results, with no requirements for doctrinal study or
ethical training.” To that point he responds: “Zen reformers such as
Dahui and later Hakuin in Japan, however, castigated such methods on the
grounds that they easily lead to an imbalanced state of ‘meditation
sickness,’ in which case the meditator becomes attached to a dull
stillness or peaceful bliss states, with little concern for the
suffering of the world.” (Purser 683)

I don’t think that this castigation should be taken as definitive,
however. The critique that one has “little concern for the suffering of
the world” – ie of people other than oneself –is a stock Mahāyāna
polemic against early and Theravāda Buddhism. That is, it can be, and
has been, directed against the classical Pali traditions that Purser
himself refers to. It’s worth noting in this regard how Dunne claims
that “clear elements of a Nondual approach” appear in contemporary
Theravāda tradition, especially in the Thai forest tradition of
Buddhadasa Bhikkhu. I generally consider myself a Theravādin, and in my
own meditation practice I have observed Wangchuk Dorje’s point about a
non-judgemental approach to be *correct*: the attempt to suppress
harmful thoughts and emotions intentionally is less effective than
simply observing their arising non-judgementally and letting it fall
away. In general I’m not sure how much a critique like Dahui’s and
Hakuin’s can stick without being a critique of non-Mahāyāna Buddhism in
general.

Neither Dunne nor Purser are attempting to resolve the
Theravāda-Mahāyāna divide, and I’m not going to try to do that here
either. My point is simply to say that there’s no reason that
[Hakuin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hakuin_Ekaku) should get the last
word on the question. It may be worth noting here [Brian Victoria’s
point](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zen_at_War) that Hakuin thought a
warrior’s lifestyle was better than a monk’s for Buddhist practice; this
is not necessarily someone we should want to take as our ethical
lodestar.

In that last regard, I might reiterate a point I made in an [earlier
response to
Purser](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/mcmindfulness-and-engaged-buddhism-the-twin-innovations/):
the detachment of nondual or contemporary mindfulness from traditional
Buddhist ethical systems may prove a point in its favour. When
traditional practitioners like Hakuin place mindfulness in an ethical
framework, their framework may well be one that we practitioners today
disagree with. The Satipaṭṭhāna Sutta continually specifies that it is a
*monk* doing its practice, so its ethical framework is specifically a
monastic one, one that we cannot follow insofar as we remain laypeople.
So likewise, [I do not
accept](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/)
the traditional metaphysical-ethical view that all things of the world
are *dukkha* and therefore to be avoided; I think the reduction of
*dukkha* should be [one aim among
many](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/).
And the politically engaged Buddhism that [Purser elsewhere
advocates](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/12/mcmindfulness-and-engaged-buddhism-the-twin-innovations/)
may well be a [greater
departure](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)
from premodern Buddhism tradition than nondual mindfulness is. In each
of these respects, the decentring of ethics from nondual mindfulness
(allowing it to be viewed as a
[technique](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/when-is-a-philosophy-a-technique/))
may well be a plus.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/classical-and-nondual-mindfulness/)
