+++
title = "Ajātaśatru: The King of Kāśī"
date = "2021-04-24"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/04/24/ajatasatru-the-king-of-kasi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/04/24/ajatasatru-the-king-of-kasi/).

When one hears the name Ajātaśatru, immediately the personality that
comes to one’s mind, considering a certain amount of awareness with
Indian history, is that ever indomitable fifth century BCE Haryaṅka
dynasty monarch of Magadh, Ajātaśatru. But, do you know that there was
another Ajātaśatru? A king whose tales of wisdom were considered
important enough to be specifically mentioned in the sacred Vedic
literature by its composers. A king who reigned in a different time and
a different place. This blogpost is about that Ajātaśatru, who was a
king of Kāśī.

![***Painting of Varanasi by Satheesh Kanna (Source:
[fineartamerica.com](https://fineartamerica.com/featured/varanasi-2016-01-satheesh-kanna.html))***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/varanasi-2016-01-satheesh-kanna.jpg?w=900)

**Background**

The information about ancient India particularly in the pre-Buddha
period can be gleamed from the enormous body of our very sacred Vedic
literature. In this case, the information is furnished from two
Upaniṣads – the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad and the Kauṣītaki-Brāhmaṇa
Upaniṣad. The Upaniṣads give us various examples where kings *i.e.*
Kṣatriyas as teachers take an important part in the intellectual life of
the country.¹ Various examples of this are present in the Upaniṣads
like- King Janaka of Videha (probably the most famous example of this),
who counters sage Yājñavalkya in an argument as a result of which
Yājñavalkya has absolutely no hesitation in receiving instructions from
him. Though, on later occasions, Yājñavalkya himself taught Janaka on
various important topics.²

The other examples are of the Pāñcāla king Pravāhaṇa Jaivali who as per
Chāndogya Upaniśad taught scholars like Śīlaka, Dālbhya, Śvetaketu and
also his father Uddālaka on subjects like the doctrine of rebirth. King
Aśvapati Kaikeya, King Pratardana, King Jānaśruti are also mentioned for
their intellect. Mookerjee mentions how the Āruṇis, father and son, once
sought the teachings of King Citra-Gāṅgāyani.³ And in the list of such
intellectually gifted kings was one Ajātaśatru, the king of Kāśī, whose
discussions with the learned sage and very distinguished Brāhmaṇa
scholar Dṛpta Bālāki Gārgya⁴ form the topic of today’s post.

**Bālāki Gārgya**

Sage and scholar Bālāki was the son of Balāka⁵ and belonged to the
family/clan of Garga and that’s why he was called Gārgya Bālāki. In the
time that he lived, he became famous as a man of great reading and was
known as a very learned scholar in the scriptures in several countries
and to several peoples like Uśīnara, Satvat-Matsyas, Kuru-Pāñcālas, and
Kāśī-Videha.⁶ In the Upaniṣads, he is given the epithet of Dṛpta meaning
proud. Such esteemed scholars imparted their knowledge and used to have
conversations and discussions with various personalities including
kings. And so it happened that one day, Bālāki approached King
Ajātaśatru of Kāśī and told him that *“I will tell you about Brahman.
(brahma te bravāṇīti*).*“⁷* Thus started the intellectually stimulating
discussion between a king and a scholar.

**The Conversation**

There are actually two versions of the conversation that happens between
Ajātaśatru and Bālāki. While a very detailed version is mentioned in the
Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad, a slightly different and somewhat shorter version is
mentioned in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad. Whereas Gārgya offers sixteen
definitions of the Brahman in the Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad which are disagreed
upon by the king Ajātaśatru, sage Gārgya offers only twelve in the
Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad. Here, we are going to discuss the conversation
that has been explained in the Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad.

***“There are found many differences between both the recensions in the
order of sequence and the counter-clarifications of Ajātaśatru. The
basic thought underlying can be designated as the superiority of
Prāṇa-Brahman over the forces and the phenomenon of nature (the Puruṣas
of Gārgya) and over the psychical organs in man.”***^(***8***)

As stated above, when Bālāki told the king that he will elucidate about
*Brahman*, the king said:

***“taṁ hovāca ajātaśatruḥ sahasraṁ dadma iti,  
etasyām vāci janako janaka iti vā u janā dhāvantīti.”***^(***9***)

This can be translated as:

***“To him, Ajātaśatru then, said: ‘A thousand cows we give to you.’ At
such a speech as this verily, indeed, people would run about saying,
Janaka, Janaka.”¹⁰***

The king here offers a gift of thousand cows at such an occassion when a
learned Brāhmaṇ has decided to impart knowledge to him like the famous
king of Videha-Janaka who had become proverbial not only due to his own
intellect but also due to his magnanimity to the learned Brāhmaṇas.

Now the narrator of the Upaniṣads himself visualizes various phenomenons
which work as a table of contents, so to say, a sort of clue words of
the subsequent conversation before he continues on the main points of
the speech. These are as follows:

***“āditye bṛhac, candramasy annam, vidyuti satyam, stanayitnau śabdo,
vāyāv indro vaikuṇṭha, ākāśe purṇam, agnau viṣāsahir iti, apsu teja ity
adhidaivatam; athādhyātmam: ādarśe pratirūpaśchyāyāyāṁ dvitīyaḥ,
pratiśrutkāyām, asur iti śabde mṛtyuh, svapne yamaḥ, śarīre prajāpatiḥ,
dakṣiṇe akṣiṇi vācaḥ, savye’kṣiṇi satyasya.”¹¹***

“In the sun the great, in the moon food, in lightening truth, in thunder
sound, in wind Indra Vaikuṇṭha, in space fullness, in fire the
vanquisher, in water light, thus with reference to the divinities. Now
with reference to the self: in the mirror the reflection, in the shadow
the double, in the echo life, in sound death, in sleep Yama (the lord of
death), in the body *Prajā-pati*, in the right eye speech, in the left
eye truth.”¹²

Now Bālāki said to the king, “The Spirit (or the person *i*.*e*.
puruṣas) in the Sun, on him indeed do I meditate. To which the king
replies, “Do not make me converse on him. I meditate on him who is the
great, clad in the white raiment (bright-robed), the supreme, the head
of all beings. He who meditates on him thus becomes indeed supreme, the
head of all beings.”¹³

And in this way as sage and scholar Bālāki continues to give his focus
of meditation i.e. the persons *(puruṣa)* in the various phenomenons,
the king of Kāśī continues to give his counter-points. When the sage
says he meditates on the person in the moon, the king says “Do not make
me converse on him. I meditate on him as the self of food (or
nutrition). He who meditates on him thus becomes, indeed, the self of
food.” Deussen explains this-“The moon is *annasya Ātmā*, the self of
nutrition, so far as he, by virtue of his waxing through consuming
souls, and by virtue of his waning through its being consumed owing to
the descent of souls, is the prototype of that eats and is eaten.”¹⁴

Thus it is explained that under whatever qualities we meditate on the
Supreme we ourselves become possessed of those qualities.¹⁵

When Bālāki says that he meditates on the person in the lightning, the
king replies that he meditates on him as the self of truth and those who
meditate on him become self of truth. When the sage says that he
meditates on the person in the thunder the king counters and asks to not
make him converse. He says that that he meditates on him as the self of
sound and those who meditate on him themselves become self of sound.
When the learned scholar mentions the air, the king says that he
meditates on the air as Indra Vaikuṇṭha, the unconquered army and those
who do meditate on him indeed, become unconquerable *(parair jetum
aśakya-śīlah*)¹⁶ and conqueror of others. In the same vein when the sage
mentions the space, the king says that he meditates on him as the full
non-active, unmoved *Brahman* and those who do as such become filled
with off-spring, cattle, fame, radiance of Brahma knowledge and the
heavenly world and reaches full term of life.¹⁷

When Bālāki mentions his focus of meditation the fire, the king counters
it saying that just as he does, those who meditate on him as the
irresistible, themselves become irresistible. To the sage’s mention of
water, the king says to not make him converse on this and that he
meditates on him as the self of light. Those who do as such themselves
become the self of light. And in this way, the sage and the king end
their conversation on the divinities.

Now the sage mentions the focus of his meditation in the self, to which
the king is prompt in replying to not ask him to converse and that he
himself meditates on them. The sage mentions that he meditates on the
person in the mirror, the king says that he meditates on him as the
“reflected likeness” *(pratirūpaḥ*) and those who do as such, *“a very
likeness of him is born in his off-spring.”* When Bālāki says that he
meditates on the person in the shadow, Ajātaśatru answers that he
meditates on him as the inseparable second and those who do as such
“*obtains from his second (the wife) and becomes possessed of his second
(putra pautrādibhir bhavati).”*

When the learned Brahman mentions that he meditates on the person in the
echo, the king counters that he meditates on him as the life and those
do as such do not pass into unconsciousness before their time. To
Bālāki’s mention of the person in the sound, the king says that those
who meditate on him as death just like he does, they do not die before
their time. To the scholar’s mention of the person who, while asleep,
moves about in a dream as his focus of meditation, the king says that he
meditates on him as King Yama and those who do as such, *all here is
subdued for his excellence (śraiṣṭhayāya)*. The deep sleep has been
compared as being in the state of Brahman, the dream sleep has been
compared in the preceding stage of staying with Yama.¹⁸

When the scholar mentions that he meditates on the person who is in the
body in him, to that Ajātaśatru replies, that he meditates on him as the
*Prajāpati* (the lord of creation) and those who do as such, become
increased *(prajāyate)* with *offspring, cattle, fame, the radiance of
sanctity, the heavenly world, and reach the full term of life.*¹⁹ When
Bālāki says that he meditates on the person in the right eye, the king
counters that he meditates on him as the self of speech, fire and light
and those who do as such become the self of all these. And when the sage
says that he meditates on the person in the left eye, the king as usual
says, “Do not make me converse on him.” He says that he meditates on the
left eye as the self of truth, lightning and light. Those who do as such
themselves become the self of all these.

***tata u ha bālākis tūṣṇīm āsa, taṁ hovāca ajātaśatruḥ, etāvann u
bālāka iti, etāvad iti hovāca bālākiḥ,..***^(***20***)

***“After this Bālāki became silent. Then Ajātaśatru said to him, ‘Thus
far only (do you know), O Bālāki?’ ‘Thus far only,’ replied Bālāki.***

Then Ajātaśatru explains to the sage that only Him (the creator), the
maker of these persons *(puruṣa)* whom you have mentioned, *he of whom
all this is the work, he alone is to be known.* Then Bālāki with
graciousness and with his inherent interest to know more, approaches the
king and asks him to accept the sage as his pupil. Ajātaśatru is
understandably surprised and says that this goes against the nature that
a Kṣatriya should receive a Brāhmaṇa as a pupil but the king’s interest
to teach and the scholar’s interest to learn is such that the king
accepts the proposal and thus the king takes the scholar’s hand and
takes him to a person who is sleeping. The king says, *“Where in this
case, O Bālāki, has this person lain, what has become of him here, from
where has he returned here? But Bālāki didn̍t know this. To this
Ajātaśatru gave his explaination:*

In man are channels or arteries called the ***Hitā***, that extend from
the heart and surround the body (some scholars interpret the body here
as pericardium i.e. the sac that contains the heart). These channels are
as minute as the hair split thousandfold and are filled with a thin
essence- white, black, yellow and red. In these one remains while asleep
and sees no dreams. And then he becomes one with *Prāna*, the
life-breath. And then enters in him the speech with all the names, eye
with all forms and ear with all the sounds, the mind with all the
thoughts.

When he wakes up, as if sparks fly all around from the blazing fire, the
same way out of the Ātman, all life forces i.e. the speech, eyes, ears
and Manas come forth as per their location, from these life forces come
forth the divinities, *(Agni, Sūrya, Diśah, Candramāh)²¹* and from them
come forth the worlds (names, forms, sounds and thoughts). Just as a
razor is concealed in its case and the fire in the fireplace, in the
same way, *Prajñātman* has entered the body as the self, down to even
the hair and nails. And on this self, the organs (the other selves) are
depended like the servants are depended on the chief. Like this
relationship of inter-dependence between a chief and his servants, this
relationship of inter-support also exists between the self (Prajñātman)
and those other selves.²²

As long as Indra didn’t understand the Self, the *Asuras* could
overpower him but after he had known, he could overpower and thus defeat
the *Asuras*. He gained victory, supremacy, independence and sovereignty
over all gods and all the creatures. In the same way, when man attains
this knowledge of the Self, he repels all evil and gains supremacy and
sovereignty over all beings-he who knows this, yea, he who knows this
*(paryeti ya evaṁ veda, ya evaṁ veda)*.²³

And this is how a such a captivating conversation on the meaning of the
Self happened between a king and a scholar.

**The Envious King**

But as learned as the king Ajātaśatru was and as sharp as his intellect
was, he evidently was envious of the king of Videha- Janaka. Such
magnificent was the patronage by Janaka that the king complained. He
said that all the learned men of his time were going to that famous king
of Videha and were settling in his court. He complained that he, the
king of Kāśī could not find any learned men to patronize.²⁴ The king was
certainly envious of Janaka.

**Ajātaśatru – A Brahmadatta?**

There emerges some important evidence that provides us hints as to the
dynasty to which king Ajātaśatru belonged. This fact has also been
mentioned in a previous post of mine – [Who were The Brahmadattas of
Kāśī
?](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/08/08/who-were-the-brahmadattas-of-kasi/)
Raychaudhuri suggests that Ajātaśatru of Kāśiis in all probability the
same as that king of Benares who has been mentioned in the Uddālaka
Jātaka as a Brahmadatta. The Brahmadatta dynasty was very famous and
important enough to be mentioned in the Purāṇas and the Mahābhārata.

**Ajātaśatru’s Son**

Some more information is provided by the Vedic literature regarding this
family. There is a mention of a son and successor of Ajātaśatru named
Bhadrasena Âjātaśatrava²⁵, who as per Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa was bewitched
by Uddālaka Āruṇi.

**Conclusion**

Such was the time period and such were the personalities in ancient
India where learned Brahmanas use to spread their wisdom and knowledge,
where kings also had intellectual discussions on such deep philosophical
subjects and the ideas were exchanged in such stimulating environment.
One cannot help but be proud of such legacy!

**References**

1.  Mookerji, R. (1944). GLIMPSES OF EDUCATION IN ANCIENT INDIA.*Annals
    of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,**25*(1/3), 63-81.
    Retrieved April 22, 2021, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/41688549> p. 77.
2.  *ibid.* p. 76
3.  *ibid*. p. 77
4.  *ibid*. p. 78
5.  Paul Deussen, [*Sixty *Upaniṣads** *of The Veda Part
    One*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.191073/page/n91/mode/2up)*.* p.
    51
6.  Radha Kumud Mookerjee, *[Ancient Indian
    Education.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.107490/)* p.
    118, 134
7.  S. Radhakrishnan (Editor) *[The Principal
    Upaniṣads.](https://archive.org/details/dli.csl.7296/page/n781/mode/2up)* p.
    184
8.  Deussen, *Sixty *Upaniṣads** , p. 51, 52
9.  S. Radhakrishnan (Editor) *The Principal Upaniṣads.* p. 784
10. *ibid*.
11. *ibid*.
12. *ibid*.
13. *ibid*. p. 785
14. Deussen, *Sixty *Upaniṣads** , p. 53
15. S. Radhakrishnan (Editor) *The Principal Upaniṣads.* p. 785
16. *ibid*. p.786
17. *ibid*.
18. Deussen, *Sixty *Upaniṣads** , p. 55
19. S. Radhakrishnan (Editor) *The Principal Upaniṣads.* p. 788
20. *ibid*. p.791
21. Deussen, *Sixty *Upaniṣads** , p. 57
22. *ibid*. p. 58
23. S. Radhakrishnan (Editor) *The Principal Upaniṣads.* p. 791
24. Radha Kumud Mookerjee, *Ancient Indian Education.* p. 117, 141
25. H. C. Raychaudhuri, [*Political History of Ancient India from
    Accession of Parikshit to the Extinction of the Gupta Dynasty.* p.
    36](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)

