+++
title = "Intellectual Ambergris"
full_title = "Intellectual Ambergris"
date = "2014-01-21"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/21/intellectual-ambergris/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/21/intellectual-ambergris/).

Intellectual Ambergris

[Previously](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/11/27/focus/), I’ve
talked about the relationship between certain flavors of nuttiness and
high achievement in math and physics. There are other such
associations. Poets, and some other kinds of creative artists, are more
likely than average to be manic-depressive. Actually having
schizophrenia does not seem to be especially common among people in
creative professions, but some studies claim that they are more likely
than average to have close relatives with schizophrenia.

Creativity has sometimes been associated with infectious diseases. Some
thought that tuberculosis induced a kind of creative euphoria (*spes
phthisica),* although I don’t put much stock in it. More plausibly,
syphilis, which definitely does affect the brain, has been suspected of
triggering a kind of genius. In *Rats, Lice, and History*, Hans Zinsser
talked about the possible impact of effective chemotherapy on syphilis:
“This might be a loss to civilisation: it has often been claimed that
since so many brilliant men have had syphilis, much of the world’s
greatest achievement was evidently formulated in brains stimulated by
the cerebral irritation of an early general paresis. We omit reference
to specific instances of this among our contemporaries only to avoid,
for our publishers, the vulgar embarrassment of libel suits.”

There are other examples, but you get the gist. One of my pet peeves is
people claiming that such things are adaptive, which is almost certainly
untrue. They can occasionally be useful to society – sometimes, the
idea that only a nut would have is valuable. In rare cases, useful to
the individual (when you win the Nobel prize and suddenly acquire many
new friends) – but any allele that turned you into a manic-depressive
poet would decrease in frequency every generation, not least when
carried by someone forced to spend his life as a hard-scrabble farmer,
like most people over the past few thousand years. Mutational pressure,
sand in the gears, is a far more likely explanation. As for the idea
that personal creativity confers vast reproductive payoffs, **on
average,** it is to laugh.

I compare this kind of intellectual product to ambergris, a
highly-valued product of the “inglorious bowels of a sick whale.”

