+++
title = "Adaptive Neanderthal"
full_title = "Adaptive Neanderthal admixture"
date = "2014-01-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/30/adaptive-neanderthal-admixture/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/30/adaptive-neanderthal-admixture/).

Adaptive Neanderthal admixture

Finally, there are papers out on the long-term consequences of
Neanderthal admixture – one by Sriram Sankararaman in Nature, the other
by Benjamin Vernot in Science.

The general picture is that anatomically modern humans exiting Africa
mixed, to a degree, with Neanderthals. Some of the Neanderthal alleles
were neutral, some were disadvantageous in modern humans and were lost
fairly rapidly, and a few had favorable fitness consequences and have
become common. All that was highly likely a priori. I would say it was
obvious, if that word meant anything. It should have been the default
assumption from 1927 on, after Haldane calculated the probability of
success for a single copy of an advantageous allele. Wasn’t, though.

Exactly which kinds of Neanderthal alleles would give advantage was less
obvious. I suspected that Neanderthals would be resistant to local
pathogens, and that such genetic defenses could easily pay off in modern
humans moving into Eurasia. It looks as if some of that happened –
there is a good chance that some common HLA alleles in Eurasians
originated in Neanderthals, and some Neanderthal variants involved with
defense against viruses have become common.

I thought that anatomically modern humans might have picked up alleles
that dealt better with the big swings in day length characteristic of
northern latitudes. In an earlier talk, Sakararaman mentioned a common
Neanderthal version of the CLOCK gene in Europeans, but that doesn’t
show up in the paper, so maybe that turned out to be a mistake.

It looks as if both Europeans and East Asians have picked up Neanderthal
versions of several keratin filament genes, involved in hair and skin
formation. Not fixed, but pretty common. This might have something to
do with the non-kinky hair found in most Eurasians.

Some of these common Neanderthal alleles may have some effect on the
central nervous system, but as usual, we have such a poor understanding
of gene function that it’s hard to tell. A Neanderthal variant of TANC1
is common in Europeans, and that gene is thought to regulate dendritic
spines and excitatory synapses. Looking at the broader question, an
unusual number of selected Neanderthal alleles were found that are
associated with major depression. So maybe those alleles affected mood
regulation. Perhaps depression is part of a strategy for dealing with
long winters.

There are gene deserts in which you find very few Neanderthal alleles,
presumably because those alleles didn’t work well in modern humans.
There is a dearth of testes-associated gene, not too surprising because
they evolve particularly rapidly and are therefore more likely than
average to be incompatible with a sister group that diverged some time
ago. The area around FOXP2 is such a desert: Neanderthals were perhaps
worse at speech, or any rate different in some way that didn’t mesh.

There are some signs of reproductive incompatibility with modern humans,
but obviously not enough to prevent adaptive introgression. David Reich
suggests that Neanderthals were “at the very edge of being biologically
incompatible”. I doubt that, for two reasons. First, the known cases
of species intersterility in primates all took longer to develop.
Bonobos and chimps manage, and they’ve been separated something like
800,000 years. In addition, there is evidence that African
hunter-gatherers (Bushmen and Pygmies) picked up some genetic material
from an unknown archaic group, one that split off considerably earlier
than Neanderthals, something like 900,000 years.

Some Neanderthal haplotypes are risk alleles for various diseases. Chris
Stringer said “Studies have also already been published which show that
humans outside of Africa are more vulnerable to Type 2 Diabetes, and
that is because we bred with Neanderthals, while those who stayed inside
Africa didn’t.” Of course that is not actually true. In the US, blacks
have Type 2 diabetes rates that are about twice as high as whites. Pima
Indians have incredibly high rates, but they have almost exactly the
same amount of Neanderthal ancestry as Europeans. I would bet that the
selective environment of the past few thousand years matters more than
Neanderthal ancestry, or the lack of it. That said, Neanderthal alleles
can play a role in that selective process.

In our book, we suggested that the big bang of the Upper Paleolithic,
the dramatic increase in cultural complexity seen in Europe some 40,000
years ago, might have been triggered, at least in part, by an influx of
adaptive Neanderthal alleles. Right now, from the evidence in these
papers, I’m not seeing a strong case for that. Of course we only
understand what half these genes are doing, so the fat lady hasn’t
finished singing, but we may well be wrong. Of course that dramatic
increase in cultural complexity did happen, and for that matter, it is
still true that average IQ scores are quite low in sub-Saharan Africa
and its diaspora. But IQ scores are also low in populations such as
Australian Aborigines that have about the same amount of Neanderthal
admixture as other people outside of Africa – so at minimum the story
is more complicated.



