+++
title = "Korak"
full_title = "Korak"
date = "2014-01-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/25/korak/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/01/25/korak/).

Korak

If the common mutation of SLC24A5 confers an advantage other than
increased vitamin-D production, evidence might show up in a mixed ethnic
group, formed from one population with a high incidence of the
interesting SLC24A5 variant and another with little or none. You could
look at the overall admixture fraction – say, 50% African and 50%
non-African – and see if the SLC24A5 variant is more common today than
you’d expect from the original admixture proportions (which will be
easily determined from looking at neutral loci).

This has already been
[done](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929712002716)
for Ethiopia. There, in the Semitic and Cushitic populations, where the
estimated proportions of African and non-African ancestries are
approximately equal, SLC24A5 is significantly more common than you would
expect.

Those populations live up on the plateau, over a mile high and within
ten degrees of the equator. There’s enough UV to roast a goat. Somehow
I doubt if Vitamin D is paying the freight here.

As for those who assume that sexual selection must be driving that
increase – show me the time machine. I don’t know if there was any such
preference over the past three thousand years in Ethiopia and neither do
you. This is used as an excuse to avoid looking at the biochemical
details and trying to find out what’s actually happening. If I hear it
again, I may have to call the elephants.

Next, someone should do the same for the Deccan plateau, which ought to
be easy.

