+++
title = "Teaching Asian"
full_title = "Teaching Asian Philosophical Classics A call for papers"
date = "2019-09-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/08/teaching-asian-philosophical-classics-a-call-for-papers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/08/teaching-asian-philosophical-classics-a-call-for-papers/).

Teaching Asian Philosophical Classics: A call for papers

The APA Committee on Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and
Philosophies seeks participants for a **roundtable panel on how to teach
Asian philosophical text** at the AAPT-APA Teaching Hub at the 2020 APA
Pacific Division meeting, **April 8–29, 2020, in San Francisco**, CA.

Teaching a pre-modern philosophical text presents special challenges to
both the instructor and the students. Teaching classics from non-Western
traditions compounds the difficulty. This panel is designed to convey
the experiences of instructors who have taught Asian philosophical
classics with the purpose of easing the way for others who would like to
do the same but aren’t sure how to do it or even where to begin.

Regardless of your own background in Asian philosophy, if you have
experience teaching Asian philosophical classics and would like to share
that experience for the benefit of others, we welcome your participation
in this roundtable panel. We seek a range of backgrounds and expertise,
from the Asianist who has a competent command of relevant languages to
the metaphysician, epistemologist, etc., who has explored Asian texts as
a supplement to more canonical texts. The aim of the panel is to bring
teachers into conversation about useful ways of teaching Asian
philosophical classics. What has worked and what hasn’t? What
difficulties have you encountered in finding, researching, or conveying
the material of Asian classics? How is teaching an Asian classic
distinct from teaching other texts? Which texts have you found useful?
How have you helped students access a distinct set of concepts and
intellectual contexts?

We envision a 3-hour panel with five approximately 20-minute
presentations and a full hour for discussion among panelists and
audience members.

Submissions: Proposals prepared for anonymous review of 250 words should
be sent to Brian Bruya, Chair of the APA Committee on Asian and
Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, at bbruya@emich.edu with
the subject line “TH Submission: Asian Classics.” In the body of the
email, please include your name, institutional affiliation (if any),
position (if any), and contact information. Attach to the email
proposals that address to the following items: 1) the text or texts that
you have taught, 2) the subject matter and level of the course in which
each text was taught, 3) your own background in Asian philosophy and
language with regard to both formal training and informal study, 4) an
abstract of your proposed presentation.

**Deadline** for Proposals: ~~September 3, 2019~~. Extended to
**September 10!**

Selection of Presenters: late September 2019

Questions about this session should be directed to Brian Bruya at the
address above. A stable version of the call will live on the CTP page of
the APA website:http://www.apaonline.org/group/teaching, where you can
find additional information about other Teaching Hub calls, the CTP’s
Facebook page, and our committee’s activities.

By submitting a proposal, you commit to participating in the panel at
the APA Pacific Division Meeting (April 8–29, 2020) should your proposal
be selected.

The AAPT-APA Teaching Hub is a series of interactive workshops and
conversations designed specifically for philosophers and created to
celebrate teaching within the context of the APA divisional meetings.
Jointly organized by the APA Committee on the Teaching of Philosophy
(CTP) and the American Association of Philosophy Teachers (AAPT), the
Teaching Hub aims to offer a range of high-quality and inclusive
development opportunities that address the teaching of philosophy at all
levels, pre-college through graduate school.

For general information about the AAPT-APA Teaching Hub, please check
out the AAPT website and Facebook page and the CTP website and Facebook
page. For more specific information about the Teaching Hub at the 2020
Pacific APA meeting in San Francisco, California, please contact Renée
Smith at rsmith@coastal.edu.

(pointed out by Monika Kirloskar)
