+++
title = "Is mindfulness"
full_title = "Is mindfulness meditation a problem for Christians?"
date = "2019-09-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/29/is-mindfulness-meditation-a-problem-for-christians/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/29/is-mindfulness-meditation-a-problem-for-christians/).

Is mindfulness meditation a problem for Christians?

As mindfulness meditation practices become [ever more popular and
widespread](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/on-mindfulness/),
their claim to be a [“non-sectarian
technique”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/when-is-a-philosophy-a-technique/)
takes on progressively greater importance, [just as it does with
yoga](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/yoga-in-the-news/). By
claiming their practices to be secular techniques, teachers not only can
promote the practices to adherents of Abrahamic traditions; they can
also aim to avoid the legal restrictions placed on “religion” –though
they can then also be taxed, and even [treated as a competitive
sport](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/11/yoga-in-the-news/).

But that’s not the only problem. The concept of “religion” is famously
difficult to define, and I’ve often expressed my view that it [hurts our
inquiries](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/on-the-grounds-of-religion-or-belief/)
[more than it
helps](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/across-traditions-or-within-them/).
Generally speaking, I think, the less we employ the category, the
better. Unfortunately, that is not an option in a place like the United
States –and probably most other places in the world –in which the
concept of “religion” is enshrined into law. In particular, the
[Establishment
Clause](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Establishment_Clause) of the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution reads: “Congress shall make
no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free
exercise thereof…” And in the past few decades the US Supreme Court has
taken this to mean that a “religious activity” cannot be taught in
public schools – [even as an optional
elective](https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/505/577/#tab-opinion-1959089).
Thus the US law as it stands cannot exist without some sort of attempt,
however bad it might be, to define “religion”.

What that means, in turn, is that the claims of mindfulness instructors
to be teaching “nonreligious” techniques do not get a free pass: just
because you *say* it’s non-religious, doesn’t mean it is. This becomes
pretty clear with something like [Goenka vipassanā
courses](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/10/the-innovations-of-s-n-goenka-1930-2013/),
which claim to be a mere technique but include not merely quotes from
the Buddha but chanting from Buddhist *sutta*s, and request that
practitioners refrain from any other religious practice while they are
trying the “technique” out. None of this is a problem for the likes of
the [mindfulness program in Boston University’s
IS&T](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/on-mindfulness/), because
BU is a privately funded institution and therefore is allowed to teach
“religion” as it chooses; it even has a school of theology. But for
*public* schools, including public colleges, it is a different matter:
if mindfulness meditation is legally defined as a “religious” activity,
then it cannot legally be taught in public schools. That is a major
reason why its teachers have defined it as a secular technique – but
your *saying* something isn’t “religious” is not enough to establish
that it *actually* isn’t, according to US law. And so, entirely
unsurprisingly, [Christian groups are now suing
schools](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2019/07/10/conservative-legal-groups-are-suing-public-school-yoga-mindfulness-programs-this-explains-why/)
that teach mindfulness. The main surprise to me is that it took them
this long.

I am not particularly interested in the particular American legal issues
involved in this challenge, including the legal definition of
“religion”. More interesting and important to me – as a philosopher, a
Buddhist, and a practitioner of mindfulness meditation – is this
question: whatever the law says (in the US or anywhere else), *should*
Christians, as Christians, be objecting to mindfulness practices in the
first place? Including even ones that bill themselves as secular
techniques? The fact that these practices have Buddhist *origins*
shouldn’t be the issue. Rather, the question is: is there something
about the practices *themselves* that would undermine a Christian’s
Christianity by practising them?

The first point that comes to mind in answering that question is a
distinction I drew between Buddhism and Christianity with respect to
science: that [the most important science for Buddhism is
psychology](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/whose-religion-which-science/),
whereas for Christianity it is cosmology (including natural history).
Buddhists have not traditionally believed in evolution or a Big Bang,
but to adopt belief in these different cosmologies is not particularly
problematic for Buddhists because they are somewhat orthogonal to the
key Buddhist teachings. So one could conversely make the claim that
because mindfulness practices are psychological in orientation, they are
less at odds with Christian belief.

That is not the end of the story, however. For *some* cosmological
elements do make a difference to Buddhism: a large portion of the Śikṣā
Samuccaya describes the torments one might face in the hells, and if it
turns out there *are* no hells, that would make a significant difference
to Śāntideva’s outlook. And so too there is at least one psychological
belief that is at the core of traditional Christianity. And that is the
existence of a *soul.*

Early Christians followed the common Greek view that the soul (*psychē*)
was a person’s essence; [Origen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Origen)
established a view that has endured among Christians since then, that
the soul is *immortal*. It is this immortal soul that can be saved or
unsaved. And while I think the idea of an essential and immortal soul is
not *incompatible* with mindfulness practice, it does at least stand in
significant tension with it. I noted that Buddhists and qualitative
individualists [share the
beliefs](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/02/how-can-you-be-yourself-if-there-is-no-self/)
that any self which exists is divisible, mutable and heteronomous; one
of the things that makes this shared view significant is it is *not*
typically shared by Christians.

A key element to mindfulness practice is disidentification: one notices
one’s thoughts and emotions as they surface, and observes them from a
distance. In so doing, one comes to observe one’s mind, one’s self, as a
divided entity, [reducible into
parts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/07/the-atomized-buddhist-individual/).
One takes an approach which Augustine would have associated with his
Manichean foes: where [the soul is not one
thing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/deconstruct-the-subject-deconstruct-the-object/)
but the battleground for a struggle between good and evil intentions.

That doesn’t mean one *can’t* practise mindfulness meditation as a
Christian – or even that mindfulness meditation must mean one ceases to
believe in an immortal soul. But the mindfulness approach, which
explicitly comes out of Buddhist non-self, is explicitly in tension with
the unified immortal essence postulated by most Christians. I think
Christians would do well to at least be cautious around it.

To be fair, most Christians –like most Buddhists –probably engage in
practices that are even more theologically problematic without a second
thought. That doesn’t mean that it’s a good thing for them to do so. If
we are to take our traditions seriously, we need to think through
practices that may stand at odds with them.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/is-mindfulness-meditation-a-problem-for-christians)
