+++
title = "Don’t give a paper"
full_title = "Don’t give a paper"
date = "2019-09-01"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/01/dont-give-a-paper/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/01/dont-give-a-paper/).

Don’t give a paper

Studies of Indian philosophy often rightly call attention to the varied
genres in which they are composed: the sparse pith of the Yoga Sūtras,
Śaṅkara’s expositing his own views as commentary on someone else’s, the
Milindapañhā’s dialogue evocative of Plato’s Socrates. Such differences
call to mind Martha Nussbaum’s famous claim in [Love’s
Knowledge](https://www.amazon.com/Loves-Knowledge-Essays-Philosophy-Literature/dp/0195074858)
that “Style itself makes its claims, expresses its own sense of what
matters.”

As is far too often the case, though, the gaze that modern Western
academics apply to distant places and times is one they steadfastly
[avoid turning on
themselves](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/12/academias-details/).
We are far too reluctant to think about differences of genre in our own
composition.

Most notably: the venues of scholarly productivity come in at least two
completely different genres. There is the written article or book,
subjected to peer review and editorship, with its hypertextual
infrastructure of footnotes and its bibliography. And there is the oral
presentation, at a conference or workshop, of a work-in-progress with
that citation infrastructure omitted, delivered to a room at a single
time and place who can then begin a Socratic and dialogical
back-and-forth.

So why do we insist on acting as if these two venues are the same?

If there is one phrase I would like to see excised from the vocabulary
of academic practice, it is the use of “giving a paper” to describe an
oral presentation (as opposed to “giving a presentation” or “giving a
talk”). I am *giving a paper* when I take my written document – my paper
–and put it in someone else’s possession, in print or by email or by
sharing a Google Doc. (The use of “paper” to describe a document that
circulates primarily in electronic form is of course also outdated and
inaccurate, but this quirky usage seems to me to have far fewer
deleterious consequences.) An oral presentation, on the other hand, is
not “giving a paper”. Or at the very least, it *shouldn’t* be.

At a typical academic conference, the audience of a presentation is
composed almost entirely of people who either have a PhD or are in the
process of getting one. I think it is therefore reasonably safe to
assume that one’s audience is literate. Why, then, would we ever think
it a helpful use of our scarce time together to *read the paper to the
audience*, as if they were somehow incapable of doing that themselves?

As recently as the early 1990s, such an act could be justified by the
great difficulty of *circulating* written papers. To give your paper –
in the literal sense – to even a ten-person audience would require the
drudgery and snail’s pace of printing out ten copies and mailing it to
all of them. No such barrier remains when the same act can be
accomplished with the Send button on an email (or even more easily, the
Share option on a Google Doc).

Given that all this is the case, no purpose is served any longer by
standing in front of the audience and reading the text of a paper. If
you want to “give a paper” to your audience, just obtain their email
addresses, press the Send button and call it a day. When an audience has
taken considerable effort and expense to get in the same room as the
presenter, they are owed something more than what they could have just
received via email.

The ideal alternative is one that a few forward-thinking scholarly
associations have already embraced. (Well done,
[ACLA](https://www.acla.org/),
[PCR](https://papers.aarweb.org/content/psychology-culture-and-religion-unit)
and [CURA](http://www.bu.edu/cura/)!) That is: circulate the papers by
email *before* an in-person presentation session, so that that session
is then devoted entirely to the kind of dialogue that can only happen
when people are together in a room.

That ideal is not always achievable for a couple of reasons –especially
since it does add a time commitment for the audience, which they may
well not be able to meet. But failing it, there is still a far better
option than the futile exercise of reading a paper aloud: one can still
rectify names and make one’s presentation be a *presentation*. That is,
one treats it as the dramatic presentation it is – such that the text
one has in front of oneself is not the verbatim text of the paper, but
point-form reminder prompts from which one can speak spontaneously and
explain the paper’s ideas from the heart, in a way that connects with
the audience and makes the most of an oral format. And one does far
better atall that, in turn, if one *rehearses* beforehand, running
through the presentation to see what works and what doesn’t.

Is rehearsing a performance is more work than just reading a paper
you’ve already written? Of course it is. Just like writing a paper with
references is more work than writing a paper without them. You still
have to do it. And I would argue that it is similarly the scholar’s
responsibility to give a presentation in an engaging way designed *as* a
presentation, if that scholar is bothering to give a presentation at
all.

And under no circumstances should the moderator of a panel or the
conveners tell panelists anything to the effect of “if you want
questions you should wrap up shortly, but otherwise you can keep going –
it’s up to you.” A question period is not optional! The questions are
the point of collecting the audience in the room in the first place.
Without them, you could have circulated the written paper and left it at
that. Telling an academic presenter that questions are optional is like
telling a commercial pilot that it’s optional to reach the destination.
Without them, you have wasted everyone’s time. Ensuring the audience’s
ability to ask questions is at the core of a moderator’s responsibility.
(Naturally, if the moderator is pre-tenured or a graduate student, she
may be justifiably terrified to enforce any rules on a more senior
panelist – and this is a reason why pre-tenured people should never be
moderators for panelists more senior than they are.)

It is notoriously difficult to change academic institutions, including
conferences. That is [not always a bad
thing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-justifiable-conservatism-of-the-humanities/):
given that most of the changes in academia in my lifetime have been for
the worse, faculty have many reasons to be hidebound. Their conservatism
often helps prevent the latest destructive fads promoted by managers who
don’t know or care about humanistic learning. But some changes *are* for
the good, and I think it inarguable that a move away from the
read-a-paper model would be one. Fortunately, that move does not have to
happen at an institutional level. As individuals, we have the ability to
make our presentations rehearsed and engaging, and to ensure questions
as moderators. In that way, we can begin this change with ourselves.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/dont-give-a-paper)
