+++
title = "On mindfulness"
full_title = "On mindfulness"
date = "2019-09-15"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/15/on-mindfulness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/09/15/on-mindfulness/).

On mindfulness

The term *mindfulness* is ubiquitous in English-language discussions of
Buddhism –and beyond, in secular meditation techniques. When I [first
encountered Buddhism in
Thailand](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/),
the English word “mindfulness” was central to my understanding of the
tradition. My journals in 1997 described mindfulness as “the Buddhist
virtue”, and identified it with “detachment from negative emotions, the
ability to sit back and go ‘Y’know, there’s really no reason to be
pissed off about this here.’” It was not a word I encountered anywhere
outside my own study of the tradition.

Seventeen years later, I realized that “mindfulness” had become
mainstream when my hospital had [prescribed mindfulness meditation for
my
insomnia](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/of-mindfulness-meditation-buddhist-and-otherwise/).
It has already become considerably *more* mainstream in the few years
since. A couple years ago I participated in a new and popular
mindfulness program through my employer, Boston University. I should
stress that this program had nothing to do with the religion or
philosophy departments, the Center for the Study of Asia, the Buddhist
students’ organization, or any other such Buddhism-related part of the
university. No, it was offered through *Information Services and
Technology*, as part of my day job assisting professors to teach with
technology – whether they are professors of chemistry, public health,
hospitality administration, or anything else. IS&T sponsored [Greg
Topakian](https://www.harvardpilgrim.org/portal/page?_pageid=848,9429992&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL),
an excellent mindfulness instructor from [Harvard Pilgrim Health
Care](https://www.harvardpilgrim.org/public/home), to teach us
meditation practice in the hopes that it will benefit IS&T as an
employer and us as employees – on the theory that it can benefit *any*
employer and *any* employees.

[![A Portuguese book called "Mindfulness para Totós", translating the
English "Mindfulness for
Dummies".](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/mindfulness-para-totós.jpg)](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/mindfulness-para-totós.jpg)The
use of the word goes well beyond such meditation programs, to the point
that packages of the tasty
[BarkThins](https://www.amazon.com/Bark-Thins-Dark-Chocolate-Almond/dp/B01GPFRFF6)
chocolates describe them as “a mindful way to snack”. The word
“mindfulness” is now so ubiquitous that books in other European
languages leave the *English* word untranslated. The Portuguese
apparently consider “mindfulness” enough of an import, not merely from
Asia but from the English-speaking world, that they can best let other
Portuguese know what they are talking about by using the English word
rather than any Portuguese equivalent.

Such a ubiquitous concept deserves a closer look. My former colleague
[Erik
Braun](http://religiousstudies.as.virginia.edu/faculty/profile/ecb2j),
in a talk at Harvard a little while ago, claimed that the English word
“mindfulness” is a coinage of [T.W. Rhys
Davids](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Rhys_Davids), the compiler
of the Pali Text Society Dictionary. Rhys Davids, for reasons he did not
tell us, used “mindfulness” to translate the Pali word *sati*,
equivalent to Sanskrit *smṛti*. *Sati* and *smṛti* typically have a
sense of “memory”, of “keeping in mind”. “Mindfulness” is not a bad
translation of this word, just an idiosyncratic one.

As Jay Garfield notes in his [article on mindfulness and
ethics](https://info-buddhism.com/Mindfulness-and-Morality-J-Garfield.html#t0),
the term “mindfulness” also can be (and is) used to translate the
similar concept of *sampajañña* (Pali)/*samprajanya* (Sanskrit). The
distinction between these two is not always clear. Garfield claims that
in Sanskrit Mahāyāna texts, *smṛti* “involves the fixation of attention
on an object” and *samprajanya* “comes to include the careful
maintenance of that attention and of the attendant attitudes and
motivations”. I think that’s a helpful way of thinking about the
distinction. I’m not sure it’s spelled out in exactly that way in
Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra, which is the main subject of the article
(and though Garfield acknowledges the distinction is made differently in
Pali texts); perhaps Garfield is drawing it from [Tsong kha
pa](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/tsongkhapa/), whom he quotes
later in his article.

However we slice the distinction between them – whether we translate
either or both of them as “mindfulness” in English – Śāntideva is pretty
clear that *smṛti* and *samprajanya* are quite *important*, as Garfield
correctly shows. Śāntideva proclaims that even [violently rutting
elephants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musth) – a terror which his
audience would have experienced firsthand – are not as dangerous as the
uncontrolled mind. But “if the mind-elephant is bound on all sides by
the rope of *smṛti*, then all fear ceases and perfect goodness arrives.”
(BCA V.2-3) So he urges us to take all effort to guard both our *smṛti*
and our *samprajanya*. (V.23) Mindfulness matters.

What might be more surprising to modern eyes, though, is that for
Śāntideva this mindfulness is not primarily about meditation. The
Bodhicaryāvatāra has a chapter on *samprajanya* and a chapter on
meditation (*dhyāna*) – and they are *different chapters*, entirely
separate from each other. The *samprajanya* chapter makes a very brief
reference to *dhyāna* in the sense that one should reflect or meditate
on the particular idea that “the Buddhas and bodhisattvas have unimpeded
vision everywhere” – that they can see everything we’re doing. (V.31-2)
But this point is there to support the chapter’s bigger concern: the
careful control of bodily comportment, moving in a cautious and
deliberate way at all times. As far as the six perfections of the
bodhisattva go, *samprajanya* has to do not with *dhyāna* but with
*śīla* – that restrained good conduct which many render into English
simply as “morality”.

[Ron Purser](https://cob.sfsu.edu/directory/ronald-purser) reminded me
on Facebook a little while ago that the Noble Eightfold Path of the Pali
suttas distinguishes right mindfulness (*sammāsati*) from right
concentration or right meditation (*sammāsamādhi*). The [Satipaṭṭhāna
Sutta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satipatthana_Sutta) is often taken
now as a core text for “mindfulness meditation”, and two things about it
are worth noting. One, significant parts of the text are not about the
kinds of sitting practices we refer to as “meditation”, but about
awareness spread through daily life: “a monk knows, when he is going, ‘I
am going’; he knows, when he is standing, “‘ am standing’…” And two, the
various practices in it are called the *foundations* of mindfulness
(sati-patthāna), not mindfulness itself. Meditation, then, is one means
to the real goal of controlling our attention.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/on-mindfulness/)
