+++
title = "Luzia woman"
full_title = "Luzia woman"
date = "2018-01-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/22/luzia-woman/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/22/luzia-woman/).

Luzia woman

[Luzia woman](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luzia_Woman) is an 11,500-year-old
funny-looking skeleton found in a cave in Brazil. According to Wiki,
“Her facial features include a narrow, oval cranium, projecting face and
pronounced chin, strikingly dissimilar to most Native Americans and
their indigenous Siberian forebears. Anthropologists have variously
described Luzia’s features as resembling those of Negroids, Indigenous
Australians, Melanesians and the Negritos of Southeast Asia. Walter
Neves, an anthropologist at the University of São Paulo, suggests that
Luzia’s features most strongly resemble those of Australian Aboriginal
peoples.

There are a large number (81) of similar skeletons at this site, ranging
from around 11,500 to 7,000 years old.

from the PNAS [article](http://www.pnas.org/content/102/51/18309.full):
“The results obtained from all multivariate analyses confirm a close
morphological affinity between SouthAmerican Paleoindians and extant
Australo-Melanesians groups, supporting the hypothesis that two distinct
biological populations could have colonized the New World in the
Pleistocene/Holocene transition.”

This is right in the area where we find the pseudo-Andamanese,
Australo-Melanesian genetic signal.

If those skeletons really do look like Australo-Melanesians, it’s not
because they carry a 2% admixture. They would have to be mostly
Australo-Melanesian. Which means that they got there first.

Since there are so many skeletons of this kind, there should a fair
chance that at least one will have useable DNA, particularly since we’re
getting better aDNA recovery.

I wonder if this isn’t already underway.

