+++
title = "The Long Divergence"
full_title = "The Long Divergence"
date = "2018-01-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/09/the-long-divergence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/09/the-long-divergence/).

The Long Divergence

I just finished [The Long
Divergence](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691156417/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=the10000yeaex-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=0691156417&linkId=512317072bac955b3e6a5cb7ba616a5f),
by Timur Kuran, which tries to explain the Middle East’s economic
backwardness. It’s a path-dependence argument: mistakes were made, and
one thing led to another.

His thesis is that particular features of local culture and Islamic law
inhibited modernization. He argues that these factors inhibited the
development of complex sub-state organizations, in particular the modern
business corporation. He blames factors that tended to disperse wealth:
the egalitarian Islamic inheritance system and polygyny. Today they
wouldn’t matter to a corporation, but in the past they interfered with
concentration of assets that would have been useful in establishing
larger-scale concerns. He thinks that the Quranic ban on interest was
mostly an irritant, routinely evaded, but it didn’t help.

He talks about the mysterious trend in which non-Muslim minorities
became ever wealthier and more influential over the past couple of
centuries, even though they were supposed to be second-class citizens.
Trade was dominated by religious minorities (Greeks, Armenians, and
sometimes Jews), as well as new sectors of the economy like insurance
and finance. Also in new industries: “In major cities, water,gas,
electricity, telephone, tram, and subway services were founded mostly
through foreign capital, and the managerial staff was overwhelmingly
non-Muslim.”

Around the same time commercial treaties with Western nations were
becoming more and more disadvantageous to Moslem countries. Relatively
so: Westernization itself had many benefits, and the Moslem world in
this period certainly didn’t show any sign of internally generated
progress. Any more than it does today.

To recap, Kuran thinks that features of Islamic culture led to
organizational stagnation, while Europe was developing advanced economic
institutions. On the other hand, even Saudi Arabia has banks nowadays,
but the Saudis don’t show any particular entrepreneurial flair, to put
it mildly. The institutions and customs Kuran blames have been
superseded (mostly), but backwardness persists. Kuran wonders: ” Might
this book have overlooked certain deeper causes of backwardness?” Good
question.

Do I find his thesis convincing? No. The Middle East fell behind in
*everything*, not just organizational complexity. I don’t think it’s all
because they failed to create their own Fuggers or East India Company.
Look at this
[timeline](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_science_and_engineering_in_the_Islamic_world)
of science and engineering in the Islamic world: everything **stops**
several hundred years ago.

Kuran’s book does a decent job of describing Islamic stagnation – part
of it, anyhow – but it doesn’t explain it.

I guess it’s up to me. One more to add to the list.

