+++
title = "Generalized Homeopathy"
full_title = "Generalized Homeopathy"
date = "2018-01-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/24/generalized-homeopathy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/01/24/generalized-homeopathy/).

Generalized Homeopathy

Back in the early 1800s, some nut \[ Samuel Hahnemann \] conceived the
idea that all effective medicines, in large doses, produce symptoms in
healthy individuals similar to those of the diseases they cure. He
advocated treatment using extremely diluted versions of those drugs –
often so diluted that the preparation did not contain a single molecule
of the original drug. This was of course complete nonsense. It was also
quite effective: people had significantly better outcomes when treated
with homeopathic medicine than conventional therapies.

You see, on average, conventional medicine was worse than useless in
those days, as it had been for thousands of years. Doctors killed more
people – a lot more – than they cured.

While homeopathic medicine was a sophisticated way of doing nothing at
all – and thus vastly superior to conventional medicine.

The success of homeopathic medicine did not last. For one thing, it
sounded ridiculous. The idea that infinitely-diluted substances had
potent effects was unbelievable. Also, its rivals learned from
homeopathy’s success. Some people in conventional medicine began to
realize that it was usually harmful and some of their most stupid
therapies became less common. Some MDs moved all the way to therapeutic
nihilism – the idea that it is impossible to cure people through
treatment. Close to true at the time. Later, with the development of
anatomy & physiology, and in particular germ theory, effective therapies
were developed, eventually putting many areas of medicine in the black.

However, there are other fields that could benefit from homeopathy’s
example. Simply look for disciplines that are, on average, worse than
useless. Academic fields that have net negative predictive power, fields
that produce graduates that are less effective than barflies. We could
construct alternative, low-cost approaches that succeed by doing nothing
at all.  
They’d inflict less harm, and they would also be considerably cheaper.

Examples are left as an exercise for the reader. Remember that even
while doing nothing, you have to pretend to do something, cause you
gotsta get paid.

