+++
title = "On the passing of EO"
full_title = "On the passing of EO Wilson"
date = "2021-12-28"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/12/28/on-the-passing-of-e-o-wilson/"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/12/28/on-the-passing-of-e-o-wilson/).

On the passing of E.O. Wilson

E.O. Wilson, one of the great biologists of the age, has fallen to the
noose of the king, the black son of Vivasvān. He lived a long,
productive, and eventful life, just 8 years shy of a century. He was a
major influence on our scientific development. We learnt of kin and
group selection and r- and K-selection from reading his classic tome,
“Sociobiology: The New Synthesis” in our youth. The introduction to
these concepts of the evolutionary theory kept brewing in our minds, and
we kept thinking about the molecular consequences of the same. In the
13th summer of our life, we studied the immunoglobulin domain and the
generation of antibody diversity in jawed vertebrates. It was then that
first connections clicked into place. We realized that must be general
evolutionary parallels between the immunological molecular machinery for
self-non-self discrimination and the apparatus relating to kin-nonkin
discrimination in social contexts. A few years later, we read John
Maynard-Smith’s “Evolutionary Genetics”, which we were lucky to borrow
shortly after its publication. By then, we were armed with some agility
in calculus; thus, the mathematical framework provided by Maynard Smith
allowed us to apprehend some key ideas of the selective process relating
to the logistic growth curve and related issues. These also came
together with the ideas of Pāṇini/Patañjali on linguistic systems and
those of Shannon regarding the relationship between [entropy in
statistical mechanics and linguistic
strings](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2018/12/29/1859-ce-and-beyond-some-reflections/).
Finally, one fine evening it all came together, and we realized the
foundations of understanding the imprints of the selective processes we
first learnt of from Wilson’s book on the information in biological
macromolecules. Exploring this story has kept us occupied to this date.

We found our journey to be somewhat ironic when we learnt much later of
the famous clash between J.D. Watson and Wilson when they were both at
Harvard University. Old Jimmy felt that molecular biology had made
Wilson’s type of biology (“stamp collector” science) unimportant. Watson
is famously reputed to have said: “Smart people didn’t go into ecology …
It’s not intellectually demanding.” While we also feel a degree of
intellectual kinship with Watson, there is a palpable aspect of Wilson’s
statement regarding Watson — “the most unpleasant human being I have
ever met” — in molecular biology. Indeed, molecular biology has quite a
share of the “most unpleasant” people you can meet outside of a street
in some rough city of the world. We believe that some of this culture
stems from the founder of that science Watson himself. While we admit
this is a subjective and anecdotal impression (we do not have controls
to say if scientists are more or as nasty in experimental physics or
organic chemistry), it cannot be denied that the cultural defects of
modern molecular biology are reflected in the mounds of fake results and
credit stealing (best termed plagiarism) corrupting scientific
publications from the constricted highways of the magazines and to the
toxic byways of preprint servers. Even more troubling for the
foundations of the science is the triumph of the Watsonian metaphor over
the Wilsonian call for consilience — something that deeply resonates
with the Hindu tradition of knowledge. Wilsonian consilience was put to
practice by his late friend, the great entomologist, T Eisner, who
brilliantly brought together the study of biological conflicts with an
exploration of the chemical virtuosity of insects. Thus, we have
numerous practitioners of the modern branches of biology, championed by
old Jimmy, who lack an understanding of the foundational ideas of their
science — imagine physicists practicing their science with only a
smidgen of knowledge of the Lagrangian or the Hamiltonian. It would
indeed do the science good if the practitioners were to pay more sincere
attention to the Wilsonian philosophical outlook. However, this may not
come to be for other reasons that intersected with Wilson’s journey
through life (see below).

Kin selection was discovered by J.B.S. Haldane and elaborated in a
proper theoretical framework by W. Hamilton. Wilson’s seminal
contributions to hymenopteran biology were critical in establishing kin
selection on a firm footing. However, ironically, Wilson tended to have
a soft corner for group selection, which eventually became a full-blown
attack on kin selection as the explanation for eusociality in his last
years. He sought to provide this idea with a mathematical foundation
with the help of Nowak and Tarnita. We feel that much of that
complicated mathematics is probably more a smokescreen than real fire
and does not displace kin selection, at least in the contexts that were
close to him — eusociality as reported in arthropods or the mole rats.
Nevertheless, unlike many other biologists, we do think Wilson had a
point regarding the place of group selection in social systems. To a
degree, this might have been critical in human sociality, much like the
[hypersocial ants that Wilson had
studied](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/03/16/ramblings-on-sitters-and-foragers-multiplicity-of-males-caste-and-transnationality/).
The lineage as a whole provides a way to understand this. Men unrelated
to great leaders like Chingiz Khān or Shivājī sacrificed their lives for
them. In return, these leaders ensured the survival of their offspring.
Say they had not sacrificed themselves for the new group identity forged
by the Khān, they might have been wiped out in entirety like the many
bands on the steppe before them. Thus, while the Khān got to propagate
his genes to leave an oversized genetic imprint that stands out even
today, these men might have raised the probability of the survival of
their lineage from 0 to something small but non-zero. Our investigations
suggest that group selection might have a role in the stability of
bacterial biofilms too.

This brings us to an important point elaborated by Wilson: the
superorganism. The same genome is differentially expressed to generate a
diversity of castes that dramatically diverge in appearance, size, and
behavior. This provides a striking illustration of a molecular
principle, namely the use of epigenetic regulatory processes to add
information over and beyond that encoded in the four bases of DNA. Thus,
different parts of the same code are unveiled in different individuals
making them look almost as if they were different species. This led to
the formulation of the evolutionary hypothesis of how epigenetic
regulation in eukaryotes might provide the initial “capacitance” for
changes that might then be hardwired into the genome. At the social
level, it showed the remarkable success and stability of the caste
system as an evolutionary strategy. It has repeatedly emerged in
multiple
[hymenopterans](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/10/05/a-note-on-tales-of-fratricide-warfare-cannibalism-and-incest/)
and the cockroach-like clade. Thus, it should not be a surprise to see
it emerge in humans though we can only be considered nearly eusocial.
Nevertheless, the basic principle of a superorganism with castes can be
seen as applying to our societies. That is how our ancient social
theorists saw the varṇa system — the 4 varṇa-s (mirroring the numbers of
castes seen in arthropods) are seen as [aṅga-s of the metaphorical
puruṣa](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/09/16/the-purusha-and-the-superorganism/)
who is the society. The stability of these castes for over 90 million
years in hymenopterans should serve as food for thought to the
left-liberals who strive to have it abolished. This should be placed
against the backdrop of the many evolutionary successes of the
hymenopterans and isopterans, which anticipated some of those that we
pride ourselves on, like the [discovery of farming or
antibiotics](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2014/04/20/the-first-farmers/).

This finally brings us to what brought Wilson and Watson back together.
Wilson was one of the first to face the assault of the navyonmatta-s —
the left-liberals with deep connections to the H-haters of American
school led them — Lewontin, Gould, Kamin, and Rose, among others. They
orchestrated a band of thugs, the predecessors of the kālāmukha rioters
of the American gardabha-pakṣa, to attack Wilson. Watson was a member of
the old mleccha guard and, like his collaborator, F. Crick, saw the
reality of genetic differences between ethnicities. This made him an
enemy of navyonmāda, driving him close to his old foe, Wilson. In the
end, the first wave of navyonmāda orchestrated by the uparimaragata
left-liberals failed to storm the scientific branches of academia
completely. Instead, due to the lack of Wilsonian consilience in the
Occidental academe, it festered on in the non- and less- scientific
domains of the same. In the end, it has to be kept in mind that both
Wilson and Watson belonged to the mleccha elite. Their fortress is still
pretty strong despite being sapped by navyonmāda. Wilson was a quiet
personality. He generally maintained a dignified public profile, kept
writing his books, and moved to other areas of interest. Thus, the
navyonmatta-s lost interest in him. In contrast, Watson has an abrasive
personality who liked to focus on the most uncomfortable of human
genetic differences in a public and, sometimes, crude way. This resulted
in his fall from grace as an American hero. In the end, Wilson’s
personality offers a better model to emulate than Watson. He was
productive until late into his long life. He explored a range of ideas
brought many of them to the public with elegant writing. However, this
would have only been possible in the height of the mleccha academic
ecosystem. Even if one had the genetic wherewithal to emulate a Wilson,
it would be tough to achieve the same in the absence of that type of
ecosystem, which is now under threat from navyonmāda.

