+++
title = "Some words on mleccha"
full_title = "Some words on mleccha cartels"
date = "2021-12-26"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/12/26/some-words-on-mleccha-cartels/"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2021/12/26/some-words-on-mleccha-cartels/).

Some words on mleccha cartels

An embedded anthropological study of social substructures is vital to
grasp some of their features that seem baffling to the outsider or the
“uninitiated” insider. Much of what we will be talking about here has
been said in some form on these pages before, and some of it will
necessarily be vague for the mleccha and his agents are still in control
of the world. Yet, we felt it is worth recording this as there is no
guarantee that the whole story can be said in plain language. If the
time does come when it can be told in such a way, then the tendency will
be to focus on the distracting specifics rather than the general
significance, and the focus will be through the lens of inter-personal
feelings rather than objectivity. Another point to note is that in the
past decade navyonmāda, whose long fuse was smoldering for decades,
finally exploded on the world scene along the lines its founders wanted.
This means that the old lenses used to view the mleccha are no longer a
perfect fit — cognizance should be taken of the deep divergences within
the mleccha world. Nevertheless, as we have often remarked before, there
is an alignment of the preta, garden variety liberal and nayonmatta
positions when it comes to the H. Indeed, this is a continuation of the
deep anti-H sentiment in the mleccha world, especially among the
āṅgla-gaṇa, which goes back to over a century and a half. For example,
the popular mahāmleccha mouthpiece, the Washington Times, was as anti-H
a century ago as today. Hence, despite the deep schisms within the
mleccha worlds, like those between the overt Abrahamisms, there is a
common pith (much like the marūnmatta scientist, Al Bīrūni, had remarked
regarding the Hindu-s and the Yavana-s).

Over the past few years, two H (they not educated about H traditions but
do not tilt against them either. Their knowledge of Indian politics is
next to non-existent), whom we know well, brought us in contact with
three influential mleccha organizations. The power of two of them, while
extensive, is in no way directly related to national- or geo- politics,
and their influences are relatively domain-specific. The third has a
more local character but exerts considerable influence on one of the two
bigger organizations. We will hereinafter refer to them as “cartels,”
but it should be emphasized that they do not trade in recreational
substances or weapons or the usual things the word cartel is commonly
used for. However, we learnt that they operate very similar to cartels.
To be clear, we are not a member of any of the three though our H
contacts are. They entered those cartels through either prolonged pro
bono service or playing middleman in key access networks for powerful
mleccha insiders. In the process, they learnt how to play in those
circles via mlecchānusāra. In short, it involves an elaborate process of
delegation while claiming credit for oneself. The lower-ranked
individuals actually doing the dirty work are paid primarily with
“biscuits” like those tossed to the faithful dog Tom for fetching a
stick. The mlecchānusāra has a subtlety to it, despite seeming simple to
the naive onlooker. Indeed, a couple of such naive V3s thought they
could play the boss-mleccha but ended up much like the nāpita mimicking
Maṇibhadra.

While our H contacts are insiders, they still felt that there were
deeper secrets that only the mleccha and mūlavātūla players could
access. However, they got one key perk — immunity to random attacks from
the thugs (see below). A prathamonmatta insider brought to the attention
of one of our contacts the case of a non-H deśīya who entered the cartel
by presenting himself as a “traditionally oppressed and excluded
minority.” However, after some study, we realized that it was only half
the story. He had a long track-record of serving the mleccha by playing
middleman in important networks like our other H contact. There is a
particular knack to the whole thing that these two individuals have
mastered. It is probably how arms dealers operate. A śūlapuruṣa and a
kṛśapuruṣa, who are high-level players in one of these cartels, and with
deep moles in the other two, revealed to us some of their deeper
dealings. The śūlapuruṣa knew well that we are an outsider with no means
of harming the cartels. He had also gotten a big favor from us (to be
open, a calculated action on our part that benefited us) and thought a
return favor might be to reveal some secrets of his power. The
kṛśapuruṣa had also benefited from us (at no particular cost or gain to
us); however, he also felt some kind of “ethical discomfort” about the
cartel of which he is a deep insider. Thus, they ended up revealing some
of the actions that went on within.

One key feature of these cartels is the multi-leveled defensive layering
like the prākāra-s of maṇḍala bristling with deities capable of
deploying all manner of weapons. The outer facade is carefully painted
to present a picture of being “free and fair”. However, in reality, it
is anything but that. But how is that facade maintained? The main
element of this is the first layer of the system — a large body of
“peripherals”, who are not members of the cartel and know nothing of its
inner workings. However, they are dependent for their survival on the
exclusive products of the cartel and have fear and admiration for the
cartel leaders, much like a low-ranked individual might have for the
![\\alpha](https://s0.wp.com/latex.php?latex=%5Calpha&bg=ffffff&fg=333333&s=0&c=20201002)
player. These peripherals are the ones who buy and use the cartel
products and are occasionally given some small rewards for doing so.
Whenever survival is hard, it is possible to easily earn the gratitude
of those in the struggle by giving them a few tidbits that seem like
encouragement or moral support. The second element of this involves the
cartel members choosing a few individuals from among the peripherals for
two kinds of things: (i) those who would do advertisements of the
virtues of the “free and fair” system operated by the cartel and show
how their products are chosen entirely due to merit in a competitive
Turkish bazaar. (ii) The second set of individuals are chosen for doing
the hard and dirty work of running the cartel’s production systems —
sapping and utterly boring job if one were to have an avenue to lead a
free and self-respecting life. The cartel members pay these chosen
peripherals for these jobs a little more in terms of the “biscuits” they
toss to them. The first mechanism is closely related to the “toolkit”
approach in geopolitics that is used widely in social and legacy media
and national destabilization activities of the navyonmatta-s (often
backed by duṣṭa-sora and the like). Thus, at the whistle of the managers
from Sora’s organization, the peripherals will start yelling
“dog-whistle” and claim that the imaginary H canine is shredding them.

The next layer is that of the “thugs” who are again not cartel members
but offer their services for the cartel. These thugs themselves are
individuals of lower intelligence than the cartel members or the
peripherals. Thus, they do not pose a significant danger to the cartel
members by themselves as they cannot easily organize a rebellion against
the cartel. Moreover, being good-for-nothings, they strongly depend on
the cartel for their very survival. Coming from the lower rung of the
social ladder, they are full of resentment and get great satisfaction
from acts of vandalism and violence (even of the metaphorical kind).
This feeds into their fantasies of being maverick vigilantes doing their
part for the “noble cause”. Often these types are high on navyonmāda and
have time on their hands to offer themselves for “policing” on behalf of
the cartels. They perform two operations: (i) intimidation of the
peripherals who may start discovering the cartel’s ways, fall out of
line, or show independence. (ii) they attack those producers who lead
lives independently of the cartels so that they cannot sell their
products in the open market. These attacks are orchestrated such that
they appear rather random, and the independent producers are left
wondering what hit them and who is behind the attacks. The result is to
force the independents into being subservient peripherals or be entirely
driven out of the business. These tactics have a mirror in political
navyonmāda, such as the kālāmukha thugs of the gardabha-pakṣa among the
mahāmleccha. It also resembles the tactics of marūnmāda, where the
kaffrs (=independents) are offered the option of either losing their
foreskin or their head.

The next notable layer is made up of cartel insiders, who form the
cartel’s public face. Among the mahāmleccha and their satellites, the
keyword is “diversity”. Usually, the individuals in this layer are
chosen so as to hide any signs of ethnic enrichment in the cartel. The
members are there to create the illusion that anyone can “make it” and
that the cartel does not really have any exclusive principles beyond
pure merit. The cartels we are talking about includes a large number of
true believers of navyonmāda, but most members would hardly give up
their yachts or sprawling villas for the kṛṣṇa on the street for whom
they proclaim unreserved love. Hence, they pay great attention to
camouflaging this with effusive public declarations of the creed of
navyonmāda. This layer also features the appointed spokespeople who
direct the advertisement activities of the peripherals — e.g., updating
the toolkit and setting agendas for them. A related layer is one of
“managers” who interface with the thugs and peripheral workers and set
goals for them.

An essential aspect of the system is an elaborate chain of scapegoating.
If something bad happens and the cartel comes under fire (e.g., their
egregious mistakes during the Middle Kingdom corruption or the
uncovering of major sexual misconduct by a member), this chain ensures
that the fuse does not burn all the way to the cartel members. Thugs and
peripherals might be immolated with little remorse as sacrificial
victims as long as the cartel’s interests and inner circle are
preserved. Thus, it is hard to pin the blame on the cartel — it will get
pinned on to someone lower down in the elaborate chain of scapegoats,
and that little tentacle will be amputated like that of a Hydra leaving
the rest of the animal intact to regrow it. If due to a major mishap,
the blow-back happens to breach the inner rungs of the cartel, then
scapegoating action follows along ethnic lines. Those ethnicities with
strong internal bonds quickly close their ranks to protect and secrete
away their tainted members leaving the loosely bonded ethnicities to
take the blow. The H fall in that latter category as most H members of
these cartels have a poor sense of religious solidarity and have a
tendency to splinter along the lines of their deśa-bhāṣā. Indeed, an H
player from one of the said cartels, who had achieved extraordinary
power, thought himself to be immune to attack. However, his rivals
trapped him using the perennial device of seduction by women. Thus
exposed, he had no ethnic network to shore him up for when in power he
thought he was one of the mleccha-s and shunned the H. Thus, without an
ally, the mleccha-s and others closed in to finish him off. In contrast,
when a mūlarogin was exposed for a major scandal affecting the core
principles of the cartel, he was quickly encapsulated by his ethnic
network and after a while rehabilitated with an advertisement campaign
with high production values. So much so that a peripheral who spoke to
us of his case was surprised that he could even have engaged in
wrongdoing. A small cīna peripheral and an H thug were chosen and duly
offered up as the bali-s that wiped away the enas of our mūlarogin.

Once one gets acquainted with these systems and is freed from
self-censorious fear of being called a “conspiracy theorist”, one
realizes that the same model is duplicated in the mleccha world across
organizations diverse in size and domain of action. To our knowledge,
the H have not been able to read these well and have mostly been overrun
by them — the H commoner tends to believe the stated objectives of the
respective cartels (we have seen H repeatedly do so with utter
sincerity). The Cīna-s have realized their existence and, with their
growing power, tried to penetrate them to a degree by bribery and
seduction. They have definitely had a degree of success for their
efforts, especially given that they have more or less captured certain
other critical domains of mleccha production.

An author who experienced and described the collapse of the Soviet Rus
empire said that it is not entirely bad to live a life in the margins.
The basic argument is that a gale might uproot the oak at the center of
the plot but do little to the pinkweed growing on its margins. Having
led such a life ourselves, we agree with such an assessment for the most
part. On the plus side, the margin-dweller is less-affected by
catastrophic collapses and upheavals that the cartels might engineer. On
the downside, this option is not easy for most as they have to make
bigger gambles to sustain their families. However, we have observed that
above-average but not supersmart individuals can sustain good family
lives as long as they have small but reasonably talented marginal
leaders. However, herein lies a potential danger. The cartels realize
that such nucleations have the power to trigger marginal revolutions
that can eat into their pie. Thus, the cartels try their best to quash
these even threatening life in the margins. We suspect that the
following factors will only make it easier for them to put down marginal
revolutions: (i) the cartels gaining exclusive control of the world of
the internet (e.g., culminating in the overthrow of the Nāriṅgapuruṣa
among the mahāmleccha). (ii) The rise of an internet-only generation
with short attention spans and a tendency to acquire knowledge from
secondary sources. (iii) the belief that unreal gratifications can be
achieved. (iv) the rise of “meta-software” that accesses the lives of
people, which they have wholly surrendered to the cartels (the details
of that might be a story for another day). The only thing that remains
unclear is the timeline for this action to play out.
