+++
title = "PostDoc (2+3ys) on Yoga,"
full_title = "PostDoc (2+3ys) on Yoga, Ayurveda Alchemy"
date = "2015-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/08/postdoc-23ys-on-yoga-ayurveda-alchemy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/08/postdoc-23ys-on-yoga-ayurveda-alchemy/).

PostDoc (2+3ys) on Yoga, Ayurveda Alchemy

I am posting the following announcement on behalf of [Dagmar
Wujastyk](https://uzh.academia.edu/DagmarWujastyk), who recently won an
ERC project (that is, an amazingly competitive project funded by the EU,
for which the chances of success are really low, lower than 10%, but
which grants you up to six years of work with a team on the project you
designed) and is looking for a member of her team:

We are offering a full-time position (2yrs+3yrs) as postdoctoral
research assistant to contribute to the ERC Starting Grant project
“**Medicine, Immortality, Moksha: Entangled Histories of Yoga, Ayurveda
and Alchemy in South Asia**.” The project is located at the department
for South Asian, Tibetan and Buddhist Studies of the University of
Vienna. The position is to be filled from 1st July 2015 or at the
earliest possible time until 30th June 2017, with the possibility of a
further three years extension. The gross salary for the full time
position will be in the range € 49.644,00 — € 55.003,20 per annum.

Candidates must hold a **PhD** degree in Indology, South Asian studies
or related fields. Eligibility criteria include excellent knowledge of
**Sanskrit and/or classical Tamil** and interest in medieval yoga
literature. Experience in working with manuscripts, expertise in
haṭhayoga literature, Tamil (Siddha) medical literature, ayurvedic
literature and rasaśāstra literature would be advantageous.

The successful candidate will work as part of a team of three
postdoctoral researchers in an ERC-funded project that will examine the
histories of yoga, ayurveda and rasaśāstra from the tenth century to the
present, focussing on the disciplines’ health, rejuvenation and
longevity practices. The goals of the project are to reveal the
entanglements of these historical traditions, and to trace the
trajectories of their evolution as components of today’s global
healthcare and personal development industries. Please refer to the
project’s website [ayuryog.org](http://ayuryog.org) for further details
on the project.

The successful candidate´s research will focus on the influence of
ayurveda and rasaśāstra on haṭhayoga traditions and/or Siddha medicine
between the twelfth and the eighteenth centuries, translating and
analysing haṭhayoga/Siddha texts from that period.

**Applications should include copies of degree certificates, curriculum
vitae, a one page motivation statement, and list of publications (if
applicable)**. Please **email** applications in the form of a single PDF
to Dr. Dagmar Wujastyk (d.wujastyk(at)gmail.com), quoting “AYURYOG
application” in the subject line. The deadline for applications is the
**1st of May 2015**. For further information on the project, please
refer to the project website at ayuryog.org.
