+++
title = "Translation question"
full_title = "Translation question balancing use of gendered pronouns and historical fidelity"
date = "2015-04-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/29/translation-question-balancing-use-of-gendered-pronouns-and-historical-fidelity/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/29/translation-question-balancing-use-of-gendered-pronouns-and-historical-fidelity/).

Translation question: balancing use of gendered pronouns and historical fidelity

When I was a new Sanskrit student, one of my first teachers, a female
Sanskritist, told me that she didn’t agree with the idea of introducing
female pronouns while translating Sanskrit texts (excepting, of course,
when the original Sanskrit is in the feminine case or contextually about
women). To paraphrase her remarks “when our authors are clearly speaking
about men, or about activities that were performed only by men, it is
mere political correctness and historically inaccurate to use ‘she’ or
‘her’.”

Her point seemed strong to me, and still does in many ways. We wouldn’t
use “she” when translating a passage about the duties of kings for
example, or of the duties of male Brahmins. But what about cases where
our authors would likely use masculine examples yet the situation is in
fact gender neutral? In these cases, our classical authors may have
naturally used men for their generic examples owing to their own habits
and biases. As translators, are we supposed to represent their own
practices by using masculine pronouns as well, trusting that our reader
understand that this is the most faithful way to translate their work
(among other things, not blaming us for sexist language)? Or, in the act
of translation, do we introduce more balanced language, understanding
that translation into “our” language means respecting our own, less
sexist conventions?

An example, pulled almost at random from what I have in front of me, of
something I am tinkering with.

> Why would one want to inquire about something that is not properly
> known? Because she thinks “I will avoid, pursue, or remain indifferent
> toward an object that is known in truth.” (*Nyāya-bhāṣya* *1.1.32*)

I here use “she” given the context of the passage, which describes
anyone who is interested in systematic inquiry into something. Curiosity
is gender-neutral! This may depart from the *sensibility* of the
original authors, but not–I would hope–in a way that violates the
historical integrity of the translation.

In short, then, when faced with introducing pronouns in English to
translate Sanskrit, my current attitude is to stick with masculine when
the activities in question would in fact only have been performed by
men, but otherwise, blend masculine and feminine pronouns as I would in
my other writing.

How do you approach this issue? Any suggestions or reflections on
navigating it?

(Note: personally, I find hybrid “s/he” stylistically cumbersome, and
ungendered pronouns distracting, but I’d rather not debate the issue of
using them vs. my current practice of blending “he” and “she” as much as
the basic point above regarding historical fidelity vs. avoiding sexist
use of pronouns.)
