+++
title = "Arthāpatti and the"
full_title = "Arthāpatti and the Kevalavyatirekin anumāna"
date = "2015-04-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/28/arthapatti-and-the-kevalavyatirekin-anumana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/28/arthapatti-and-the-kevalavyatirekin-anumana/).

Arthāpatti and the Kevalavyatirekin anumāna

In the *arthāpatti* reading
[group](http://malcolmkeating.blogspot.co.at/2015/01/reading-manameyodaya-on-skype.html)
we are currently reading the chapter on *arthāpatti* of Śālikanātha’s
*Prakaraṇapañcikā*. As already
[discussed](http://elisafreschi.com/2015/02/26/why-are-postulation-arthapatti-and-inference-not-the-same-thing/),
Śālikanātha differentiates *arthāpatti* from *anumāna* insofar as in the
latter the *gamaka* \`trigger of the cognitive process’ is doubted,
whereas, it is not so in the case of the *anumāna*, which can only start
once the *hetu* ‘logical reason’ is certainly ascertained. At a certain
point, however, Śālikanātha discusses whether the *arthāpatti* could not
be understood as a *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*, an inference based only
on negative concomitance.

At first sight, the text passage does not seem particularly difficult,
but entangling its intricacies has kept me busy for a long time —and the
results are still not satisfying. The main problems are:

1.  How exactly can one formalise a case of *arthāpatti* as a
    *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*? What are the two absences at stake?
2.  Does Śālikanātha accept or reject the *kevalavyatirekin anumāna* in
    general?
3.  If he does not reject it, what is the problem in the formalisation
    of *arthāpatti* as *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*?

The standard case of *arthāpatti* being discussed is the following one:

> Devadatta, who is known to be alive, is not home. Thus, he is outside.

The text passage starts by presenting an opponent, who maintains that
*gṛhābhāva* \`the absence from home’ is the trigger for the *bahirbhāva*
\`being outside’, because it is not otherwise possible
(*anyathānupapadyamāna*). Here the problem seems to be just that the
absence from home alone (i.e., without causing one to doubt about
whether Devadatta is alive) is not enough to be a trigger. There is
still no mention of the *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*.

The *siddhāntin* answers that this analysis does not apply, because it
is not true that the *gṛhābhāva* is not otherwise possible (if this were
an inference, we would say that the *hetu* is *asiddha* \`not
established’). Why not? Here the discussion turns into a discussion of
whether the *arthāpatti* can be read as a *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*
since the *siddhāntin* assumes that *gṛhābhāva* could be a trigger only
if it could be verified that it is otherwise impossible and this could
only be verified through a *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*. The *siddhāntin*
thus states that *gṛhābhāva* is not otherwise impossible because it is
impossible to verify an absence in all possible *loci* of concomitant
absence (*vipakṣa*) of *hetu* and *sādhya* and the fixed relation
between *hetu* and *sādhya* needs to be first ascertained through their
concomitant presence (*anvaya*). This seems to be a critique of the
*kevalavyatirekin anumāna*, insofar as the *vipakṣa*s are endless, and I
would be happy with the idea that the *arthāpatti* cannot be described
as a *kevalavyatirekin*, because a *kevalavyatirekin* is not a valid
*anumāna*, since one never achieves certainty and at most high
probability. But the problem remains, that is, what are the absences at
stake? Does this amount to say that we cannot check whether the absence
from home lacks consistency in all possible cases but the one of being
outside? Or that we cannot check whether the absence from home is always
concomitant with the absence of something else? If the latter, what
could be this something else?

However, Śālikanātha then goes on explaining that, if the fixed
relationship has been ascertained, then the fixed absence of the *hetu*
is ascertained in relation to the *sādhya*‘s absence (i.e., it has been
ascertained that the absence of the *hetu* necessarily leads to the
absence of the *sādhya*):

> *avadhārite hi tasminn arthāpattyā sādhyābhāve hetvabhāvaniyamo
> ‘vasīyate*.

This would not make sense if we were to conceive the ascertainment
mentioned at the beginning of the sentence as something deemed to occur
through *anvaya*. In fact, once the *niyama* has been established
through *anvaya*, we just have a normal *anumāna* and do not need
*arthāpatti* at all. Thus, the sentence must rather mean “In fact, if
the relation has been ascertained, then it is through *arthāpatti* that
the fixed absence of the *hetu* is ascertained in reference to the
absence of the *sādhya*. Going back to our example, what are the two
absences at stake? The absence of *gṛhābhāvopapatti* leads to the
absence from home, i.e., to the being outside? Or is the first absence
the *gṛhābhāva* itself? Or is Śālikanātha not really concerned with that
since his main concern is instead to say that *arthāpatti* is not an
*anumāna*, because *kevalavyatirekin anumāna*s are not valid (since
ultimately they only work if the connection between *sādhya* and *hetu*
has already been established through an *anvaya*) and *arthāpatti* is
not identical with the straight *anvaya*-based *anumāna*?

For further posts on *arthāpatti*, see
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/tag/arthapatti/).  
(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
