+++
title = "(Relatively) Recent"
full_title = "(Relatively) Recent History EB Cowell’s Preface to the Kusumāñjali"
date = "2015-04-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/23/relatively-recent-history-e-b-cowells-preface-to-the-kusumanjali/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/23/relatively-recent-history-e-b-cowells-preface-to-the-kusumanjali/).

(Relatively) Recent History: E.B. Cowell’s Preface to the Kusumāñjali

In preparing for the fall term, I have been looking through translations
of Udāyanācarya’s*Kusumāñjali.*The one excerpted in
Radhakrishnan’s*Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy*(mentioned in some
earlier posts here as*not*a good starting point) is by E.B. Cowell,
translated in 1864. I checked out the entire booktodayfor a closer
look, and, upon opening to the preface, scowled. While perhaps it is
possible for a translator to do justice to a textwithlow esteem for
the author, I think it is unlikely that approaching a philosophical text
with prejudice will allow a translator to do her best work.

So, while I will choose the translation I use on its merits, knowing
what Cowell has to say about Indian philosophy in general is a red flag.
After talking about the “quaint Oriental disguise” in which familiar
(Western) arguments for the existence of God are found,he says,

> The Kusumāñjali is as much inferior to the tenth book of Plato’s Laws
> or the twelfth of Aristotle’s Metaphysics, as Hindu philosophy itself
> is to that of Greece…

(I’ve attached a scan of the opening paragraph of the preface for fuller
context if you want to get more annoyed.)

Why post this, other than to share my ire? Well, I think it’s an
important reminder thatnot very long has passed–just over 150
years—since this kind of prejudice was accepted so openly that it could
form the opening preface to a translation! We have developednew ways of
talking about the quaintness and curiosity of Indian philosophy, but
similar attitudes remain. One has only to take a look at the manner in
which encyclopedias and surveyarticles treat Indian philosophy–as an
aside to the Really Important Work done in Western philosophy.

Now, we owe a lot to scholars like E.B. Cowell, who wasthe first
professor of Sanskrit at Cambridge, translated Persian as well as
Sanskrit texts, and who is responsible for our having
Fitzgerald’sEnglish translations of the*Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.*So
this is not to say that one cannot do excellent and even groundbreaking
work in spite of one’s blind spots. However, as we have been recently
discussing approaches to Indian philosophy as a whole, I thought this a
relevant point of reflection.

**Aquestion for discussion, then**–in giving texts to introductory
students, would you include such prefatory material, and why/why not? I
imagine the answer is, as in most things, that context is important. So
perhaps explain when you might and when you might refrain?

![](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2015/04/kusumanjari.jpg)

(Cross-posted on my personal blog.)
