+++
title = "The blurry boundary"
full_title = "The blurry boundary between premodern and modern"
date = "2015-04-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/26/the-blurry-boundary-between-premodern-and-modern/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/04/26/the-blurry-boundary-between-premodern-and-modern/).

The blurry boundary between premodern and modern

I’ve been thinking a lot lately about two excellent books on very
different topics, both of which I’ve written about at Love of All Wisdom
before: [Andrew Nicholson’s *Unifying
Hinduism*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/01/a-synthesis-beyond-orientalism/),
and [Brian Tierney’s *The Idea of Natural
Rights*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/03/the-history-of-rights-ii/).

The idea of human or natural rights has often been taken as something
nearly eternal, dating back into antiquity. More careful scholarship,
most notably [that of Michel
Villey](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/03/the-history-of-rights-i/),
shows us it is not that. Villey takes the work of William of Ockham as a
breaking point, a sharp rupture from the previous world that had no
concept of rights, which brings in a very different metaphysics where
rights now play an important role. The brilliance of Tierney’s work is
to qualify this point, showing a gradual transition from the world
before Ockham to the world after him. It preserves Villey’s basic point
that rights do not go back to antiquity, but shows that the boundary
between premodern and modern is much blurrier than previous scholarship
had imagined.

The idea of Hinduism has often been taken as something nearly eternal,
dating back into antiquity. More careful scholarship, most notably that
of Wilhelm Halbfass and Heinrich von Stietencron, shows us [it is not
that](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/did-hinduism-exist/).
Halbfass takes the work of Rammohun Roy as a breaking point, a sharp
rupture from the previous world that had no concept of Hinduism, which
brings in a very different metaphysics where Hinduism now plays an
important role. The brilliance of Nicholson’s work is to qualify this
point, showing a gradual transition from the world before Roy to the
world after him. It preserves Halbfass’s basic point that rights do not
go back to antiquity, but shows that the boundary between premodern and
modern is much blurrier than previous scholarship had imagined.

I hope I’ve made the point: there is a strong analogy between what
Tierney and Nicholson each have produced, despite their dramatically
different subject matter. I have no reason to believe there is a
specific homology; I’d be surprised to hear that Nicholson had read
Tierney or vice versa. Nor do I have reason to imagine a common
methodological ancestor to the two of them – though if there turns out
to be one, I want to read it right away! But there is nevertheless a
major commonality: what was thought to be a sharp break between the
medieval and modern worlds, turns out in retrospect to be a more gradual
transition in which the modern emerges out of the medieval. The writers
both make this point in spite of the obvious major differences in the
context of their subjects (the 14th century and the 19th, a
non-colonized society and a colonial subject).

Now it has sometimes been said that comparative philosophy is too ready
to look for easy similarities that mean nothing of significance. (The
many modern Indian works with titles like *Rāmānuja and Hegel* can make
for easy targets of such criticism.) When one identifies a similarity
like the above, it is important to ask: does this similarity *matter*?

I think it does. It certainly does for my own philosophical project.
Why? Because a key philosophical task I have set myself is to bring back
some of the ancient and medieval worlds into the modern, recover some of
the wisdom that is so easily lost. But it is much more difficult to do
that if the premodern and modern worlds turn out to be a radical rupture
from each other, where never the twain shall meet.

Much recent work supposes the two worlds to be just that, especially in
the colonial context. The [works of Donald
Lopez](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/05/on-the-genealogy-of-buddhism-and-science/)
are among the most influential and symptomatic of the genre of scholarly
work that indulges in veiled ridicule of modern Asian traditions,
treating them as silly and pretentious attempts to dress up modern ideas
in premodern garb. I think I have made [my distaste for that
genre](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/08/the-double-standard-of-misinterpretation/)
clear in the past, and I salute the efforts of Nicholson and [David
McMahan](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-story-of-buddhisms-descent/)
to complicate its smug story.

I have had far more sympathy for the attempts by the likes of Villey and
Alasdair MacIntyre to historicize the concept of rights. Rights claims
can be very frustrating to a philosopher, since [they are so often based
on assertion and not
argument](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/03/whats-wrong-with-rights/).
I have long been tempted by the story that Villey and MacIntyre tell,
one that says rights were woven of whole cloth as the modern era began
to emerge, whether by Locke or Grotius or Ockham. I have never been as
anti-modern as Villey or MacIntyre, but I have been tempted to buy this
portion of their story: that rights are a confused modern concept, one
that is best abandoned in favour of more adequate premodern ones.
Tierney makes me realize it is not so simple; rights have deep roots in
medieval concepts of natural law and divine command, roots that still
inform modern rights discussions even when we don’t realize it (and,
importantly, even when we do not accept ideas of natural law or divine
command). Likewise it can be easy to dismiss the thuggish violence
carried out today in the name of “Hinduism” as a modern phenomenon with
no relation to traditional India, but Nicholson reminds us that matters
are more complicated than that.

In all of these cases – rights, Hinduism, [Yavanayāna
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/2009/07/yavanayana-buddhism-what-it-is/)
– it can be exciting to identify a break between past and present, and
feel ourselves smarter than those in the present who claim an
authenticity that doesn’t exist. But it isn’t that simple. Those who
have adopted these concepts have done so for a reason. The ideas of
rights and of Hinduism, deriving from ideas present in an older world,
have helped people make sense of a new world emerging. Those ideas can
still be deeply problematic, to be sure, and it’s well worth questioning
them. But if we recognize that the modern innovators had one foot in the
old world as well as one in the new, it becomes that much easier to
imagine a synthesis between the older and newer worlds.

In other words, these historical understandings are important not merely
to history but to philosophy. There’s a sense in which the methods at
issue here follow G.W.F. Hegel and Martin Heidegger, both of whom make
history central to philosophy. Why? Hegel and Heidegger agree that we
have to start where we are, and where we are is always constituted by
history. Heidegger (following Nietzsche) traces history backwards, to
uncover the wrong presuppositions that underlie our modern views. Hegel,
by contrast, traces it *forward*, to understand the reasons why our
society now is the way it is. There is a sense in which Halbfass and
Villey are following a Heideggerian method, Nicholson and Tierney a
Hegelian one. I don’t think any of these thinkers understand themselves
this way (except Halbfass, who acknowledges an intellectual debt to
Heidegger). But I do think it’s a helpful way to understand the movement
of their thought, and what it can do for us as constructive
philosophers.

\[[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/04/the-blurry-boundary-between-premodern-and-modern)\]
