+++
title = "What do I obtain if"
full_title = "What do I obtain if I refrain from eating onion (and so on)?"
date = "2014-12-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/26/what-do-i-obtain-if-i-refrain-from-eating-onion-and-so-on/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/26/what-do-i-obtain-if-i-refrain-from-eating-onion-and-so-on/).

What do I obtain if I refrain from eating onion (and so on)?

In the case of the Śyena and the Agnīṣomīya rituals, violence is once
condemned and once allowed, causing long discussions among Mīmāṃsā
authors. Similarly, the prohibition to eat *kalañja*, onion and garlic
is interpreted differently than the prohibition to look at the rising
sun. Why this difference?

The latter is interpreted as a *paryudāsa*-negation (i.e., one which
enjoins something, through negating a specific aspect of it, like in the
case of “Bring a non-Brahmaṇa, which entails that one has to bring some
other human being), whereas the former is interpreted as a
*prasajya*-negation (i.e., a sheer prohibition, which does not enjoin
anything positive, like “Do not go out!”). This difference entails also
a different relation with possible results, insofar as the prohibition
to look at the rising sun, since it is interpreted as a prescription,
entails a result, whereas the prohibition to eat *kalañja* is a sheer
prohibition and as such cannot entail any result at all.

The more general problem regards the mental aspect of actions, and it is
dealt with in Kumārila’s *Tantravārttika* ad 6.2.19–20:

***Pūrvapakṣin***: The negation involved in *na kalañjaṃ bhakṣayet* is a
*paryudāsa*-type of negation. Thus, it means that one should not eat
*kalañja*, but one should eat \[something else\].

***Uttarapakṣin*** No. It is a *prasajya*-type of negation. What is
enjoined is the prohibition to eat, specified by *kalañja* (nothing
positive is enjoined).

***Pūrvapakṣin***: No, this non-eating specified by *kalañja* should be
performed by whoever wishes to achieve a result. (thus, something
positive is in fact enjoined).

***Uttarapakṣin***: How can one perform “non-eating”?

***Pūrvapakṣin***: The non-eating is the mental (*mānasa*) activity
consisting in the non-eating, In fact, when one does something, one
needs first to decide (*saṅkalpa*) to undertake it. Also in the case of
non-activities. one first decides and then avoids \[doing something\].  
Moreover, the mental activities are more internal (*antaraṅga*) \[to the
action\], and thus they are the first thing to be enjoined (I identify
this principle regarding *antaraṅgatva* as a separate *nyāya*).  
It is like in the case of “One should not look at the rising sun”, the
only difference being that in the case of the sun a condition is
mentioned (one should not look at the *rising* sun, but one is allowed
to look at the sun in any other case), whereas in the case of the
*kalañja* the prohibition is permanent.

***Siddhāntin***: The case of “One should not look at the rising sun” is
different, since in that case what is at stake is a distinct vow (the
Prajāpati-vow), the observance of which is positively enjoined.

***Pūrvapakṣin***: How could one distinguish the two cases?

***Siddhānta***: The case of “One should not look at the rising sun” is
a vow, and vows obviously involve the mental decision (to keep them), so
that something positive is enjoined in that case.

The *kalañja*-prohibition, by contrast, is not introduced as a vow, thus
the negation is directly connected with the fact of being to be done.

**Long story short, keep on avoiding to eat onion (or drink wine, or eat
pork…), since this is prohibited in the Sacred Texts, but you will not
get any reward through that.**

On the Mīmāṃsā way of structuring arguments, see
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/12/15/conveying-prescriptions-the-mima%E1%B9%83sa-understanding-of-how-prescriptive-texts-function/).
On the hermeneutic principles in Mīmāṃsā, see
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/12/22/hermeneutic-principles-in-mima%E1%B9%83sa/).
On the problem of the Śyena and of violence in the Veda, see
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/08/16/when-sacred-texts-prescribe-violence/).

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
