+++
title = "Somewhat vague worries"
full_title = "Somewhat vague worries about classification and Indian Buddhist ethics"
date = "2014-12-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/17/somewhat-vague-worries-about-classification-and-indian-buddhist-ethics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/17/somewhat-vague-worries-about-classification-and-indian-buddhist-ethics/).

Somewhat vague worries about classification and Indian Buddhist ethics   

Mary is a doctor who volunteers often. She works in low income clinics,
and travels to foreign nations to treat epidemics. If you ask her why
she’s willing to sacrifice her time, she might grip your arm while a
look of intensity enters into her usually gentle eyes. “What could be
more important than lessening suffering?” she would say. “Pain is the
worst thing that can happen to us. We have an obligation to eliminate
as much of it as we can.” If I said these kinds of things I wouldn’t
deeply mean them, but I don’t doubt Mary’s sincerity since she has
risked her life on more than one occasion to volunteer during highly
contagious epidemics.

It’s temping to say that Mary is a consequentialist with proclivities
towards a hedonistic position about well-being. A consequentialist
claims that we should maximize good consequences, and a hedonist
believes pain and suffering are ultimately what makes a life go better
or worse. So we might at least want to say there’s a deep
consequentialist and (negative) hedonic strand in Mary’s beliefs. I
think this is probably wrong. Elements of foundational normative
theories, like consequentialism and hedonism, mark out the deepest
conceptual elements of a theory of right action and a theory of
well-being. These conversations take place in a particular region of
philosophical space, and it’s not clear to me that Mary has ever entered
that region.

One way to make this point is to see what Mary’s reactions are to the
traditional thought experiments used to challenge consequentialism.
Since I know my hypothetical subject better than you, you’ll have to
take my word that a look of horror enters her face when she’s asked
about cutting up a patient to save lives by dividing his organs. I
think this is not so much evidence of her implicit deontic commitments,
but suggests she has not yet moved reflectively into that conceptual
territory where consequentialisms and deontologies can be distinguished.

There is an easy confusion between intrinsic value and importance that,
I think, can cloud our thinking about cross-cultural classification.
Something can have intrinsic value, that is value of itself, and not be
very important. This is the case when something has very little
intrinsic value; the pleasure of eating a tic-tac has just a bit of
intrinsic value for the average hedonist. (It has a bit more for me,
since I really enjoy orange tic-tacs!) On the other hand, something can
have only instrumental value, but be so important that we would give our
lives for it. A hedonist might believe a revolution is worth dying for,
not because of the intrinsic value of freedom, but because of the pain
tyranny causes.

When we turn to Buddhist ethical texts, there is no doubt that they
place enormous importance on ending suffering. Via the last paragraph,
it’s less clear to me what (if anything) this tells us about what things
they hold possess intrinsic value. But I’m also trying to motivate a
more general worry via the Mary example. We might point to certain
passages in Buddhist texts that seem to have consequentialist (or
whatever) under/overtones. But it seems to me that when we do
foundational normative theory, marking out at the deepest conceptual
level what makes an action right or wrong, or what makes a life go well,
we might need more than this. It seems as though we need some evidence
that the authors in question had moved into that peculiar philosophical
space where we speak carefully enough, and mark certain conceptual
distinctions that allow us to pry apart the mere valuing of pleasure
(for instance) from the philosophical claim that pleasure alone, at the
deepest level makes a life go well. Often, we talk about pleasure and
pain, satisfying goals, consequences, obligations and other moral terms
without moving into the space of foundational moral theory. This
invites the question of what counts as evidence that Buddhists (etc.)
had entered into that space, or should enter it, or how they would react
if they did enter it and so on.

None of this is to disparage the insightful and pioneering work done by
contemporary authors like Damien Keown and Charles Goodman, who at times
raise the question of classifying the foundational structure of Buddhist
ethical texts.

I raise some more developed worries against classifying Śāntideva’s
ethical thought in a forthcoming *Philosophy East and West* article (Jan
2015). Relevant here as well is, Michael Barnhart’s “Theory and
Compassion in the Discussion of Buddhist Ethics” (*Philosophy East and
West* 2012) and Jay Garfield “What is it Like to be a Bodhisattva?”
(*Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies* 2012).

Also relevant is Martin Adams article below:

The Consequences of Consequentialism: Reflections on Recent Developments
in the Study of Buddhist Ethics.” In Wading into the Stream of Wisdom:
Essays Honoring Leslie Kawamura. Edited by Sarah Haynes and Michelle J.
Sorensen. Berkeley: Institute of Buddhist Studies (Forthcoming 2012).

Two (incredibly insightful) works that develop somewhat systematic
interpretations of the structure of Buddhist ethics are:

Damien Keown: *The Nature of Buddhist Ethics*.

Charles Goodman:*Consequences of Compassion*.
