+++
title = "Some plans and"
full_title = "Some plans and initiatives for the Indian Philosophy Blog"
date = "2014-12-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/02/some-plans-and-initiatives-for-the-indian-philosophy-blog/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/02/some-plans-and-initiatives-for-the-indian-philosophy-blog/).

Some plans and initiatives for the Indian Philosophy Blog

Elisa, Amod, and I often discuss ways to enhance the Blog and better
serve our readership (both potential and actual). In conversation with
some of our core contributors, here are a few plans we have:

1\. A stable “Resources” page with links to materials that would serve
the research and teaching of our community. We had a thread devoted to
this
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/06/internet-resources-for-indian-philosophy/),
but the idea in play now is something more fixed and visible than a
single thread. I invite everybody to please email me with suggestions
(mdasti@bridgew.edu).

2\. A feature called “Continuing the Discussion” where authors may
respond to reviews, inviting further dialogue and development of their
ideas and work. A number of scholars have mentioned to us that a blog is
the ideal place for this sort of thing to happen, given the limitations
of print-journals to allow for immediate feedback and discussion. Our
blog would be an ideal location for persons in our field to have a voice
in responding to, and engaging in dialogue with reviews and treatment of
their work. For obvious reasons, we will carefully monitor such posts
for tone, avoiding pettiness, but given our successes in this regard so
far, we are confident that this won’t be a problem.

3\. A regular review of published work in Indian philosophy, perhaps
posted semi-annually. This may be the most ambitious part of our plans.
The idea would be to have a thread that would list (and if possible,
link to), recent relevant work in Indian philosophy.

4\. A “Question and Answers” feature, where people may put forth
questions from students or their own questions about issues in Indian
philosophy, and our contributors and readers may chime in to help.

5\. A series of posts dedicated to honest reviews of books. Just as it
happens on Warp, Weft and Way, we could announce that we would be happy
to review books, if they are relevant for the discipline and if we can
find a suitable book review editor to volunteer for our blog.

Please share your thoughts on these proposals below. Most importantly,
we need help, especially with #3 and #5. For #3, we need
curators/editors for different languages (French, German, Japanese,
English, etc.). We would urge anyone who is interested to communicate
with us. For #5, we need a single review editor to identify competent
reviewers and work with them. Such positions will have titles, and will
be noted on the site, being “service to the profession” of the most
cutting-edge kind!

On that topic, generally, for initiatives like these, we need the
community to step up and help. We have many listed contributors, but we
need more people to support the blog through active participation for
these things to materialize.
