+++
title = "Confluence A new journal"
full_title = "Confluence A new journal on comparative philosophy"
date = "2014-12-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/05/confluence-a-new-journal-on-comparative-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/05/confluence-a-new-journal-on-comparative-philosophy/).

Confluence: A new journal on comparative philosophy

How did comparative philosophy evolve in the last sixty+ years? What is
the difference between intercultural philosophy and comparative
philosophy? All the answers can be read in the introductory essay to the
first number of a new journal dedicated to comparative philosophy,
namely [Confluence](http://www.verlag-alber.de/e-journals/confluence/).

The long and learned introductory essay, by Monika
[Kirloskar-Steinbach](http://www.uni-konstanz.de/philosophie/index.php?article_id=72&clang=1),
Geeta
[Ramana](//www.mu.ac.in/arts/social_science/Philosophy/pdf/gramana.pdf)
and James [Maffie](http://www.lasc.umd.edu/InfoFaculty/facultyinfo.php)
(who are also the journal’s editors)is a detailed analysis of the
evolution of comparative philosophy, taking the first number of
Philosophy East and West in 1951 as a departing point and distinguishing
among three phases in this evolution. The phases are to be understood as
expressing a predominant orientation and are not watertight. In the
first phase, philosophers tended to compare ideas of non-Western origin
predominantly with Western ones. In the second phase, the moral role of
the comparative philosopher comes to the foreground, since thinkers
become aware of the need of a moral commitment to an equal treatment of
the ideas one is comparing. Consequently, comparative philosophy reached
beyond the comparison of non-Western ideas to Western ones, and included
also the comparison of non-Western ideas with other non-Western ones.
The third phase elaborates further on the moral character of the ideal
comparative philosopher and on the political impact of her engagement.

Within the discussion, an interesting excursus regards the relation
between the terms “comparative philosophy” and “intercultural
philosophy”. The latter originated among authors of the German-speaking
world as a reaction to the Western-centric perspective of the former.
“Interculturality” in this sense indicates a shared space for
discussion, in which participants are mutually interested in each other
ideas and do not pretend to dictate the terms of the discussion.
However, similar concerns are present also in philosophers who continue
to call themselves “comparative philosophers” and this difference in
names is often only the result of one’s different history.

Another asset of the introductory essay is the long bibliography, which
is a mine of interesting authors and articles bridging philosophers
working on very different areas of research and in different parts of
the world.

A few pages at the end of the essay discuss the role of Confluence
itself within this debate. Confluence aims at hosting discussions of
comparative philosophy and at “making philosophy together”, so that
authors are not forced to publish on Area Studies journals (as it has
often been the case for me, given the general lack of interest of
general philosophy journals for what has been thought beyond Seattle or
Königsberg).

**Thus, think at Confluence the next time you write something on
Comparative Philosophy —and meanwhile download the first issue
[here](http://www.verlag-alber.de/e-journals/confluence/).**
