+++
title = "Ontology is a moot point"
full_title = "Ontology is a moot point if you are a theist"
date = "2014-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/12/ontology-is-a-moot-point-if-you-are-a-theist/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/12/12/ontology-is-a-moot-point-if-you-are-a-theist/).

Ontology is a moot point if you are a theist

A philosopher might end up having a double affiliation, to the
philosophical standpoints shared by one’s fellow philosophers, and to
the religious program of one’s faith.  
This can lead to difficult reinterpretations (such as that of Christ
with the Neoplatonic Nous, or that of God with the Aristotelic *primum
movens immobile*), or just to juxtapositions (the addition of angels to
the list of possible living beings).

A Vaiṣṇava who starts doing philosophy after centuries of religious
texts speaking of Viṣṇu’s manifestations (*vibhūti*), of His qualities
and His spouse Lakṣmī (or Śrī or other names), is in a similar difficult
situation.

A Śaiva like Somānanda or Sadyojyotis might have had a slightly easier
start, given that the Sacred Texts of his school had not yet entered the
philosophical stage. In this sense, these philosophers were free to
interpret their Sacted Texts almost freely (think of Abhinavagupta
monist commentary of a dualist text like the *Paratriṃśikā*). The
boundaries they needed to face were those of their creed, but not of the
external expectations regarding their creed’s theology. The former made
them add further *tattva*s to the Sāṅkhya list, the lack of the latter
made them adaptively reuse the Sāṅkhya framework (see, on this topic,
Torella 1999).

By contrast, Veṅkaṭanātha’s titanic effort of making Viśiṣṭādvaita
Vedānta a robust philosophic system meant that he needed to find his way
between the two competing ontologies of Vedānta and Nyāya, while at the
same time remaining loyal to the distinctive Pāñcarātra theologemes,
which were already known also to philosophers because of their presence
in the Mahābhārata and in Śaṅkara’s *Bhāṣya*

The *Nyāyasūtra* proposes a fundamental division of realities into
*dravya* ‘substances’, *guṇa* ‘qualities’, *karman* ‘actions’, with the
former as the substrate of the latter two. This leads to two
difficulties for Veṅkaṭanātha’s agenda. On the one hand, the radical
distinction between substance and attribute means that, Nyāya authors
imagine liberation as the end of the connection of the *ātman* ‘self’ to
*all* attributes, from sufferance to consciousness. By contrast,
Veṅkaṭanātha, would never accept consciousness to be separated from the
individual soul and even less from God. The other difficulty regards the
theology of Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta. Since the beginnings of Pāñcarātra,
one of its chief doctrines has been that of the manifestations
(*vibhūti*) of Viṣṇu, which are dependent on Him but co-eternal with Him
and in this sense are unexplainable according to the division of
substances into eternal and transient.

To that, Veṅkaṭanātha opposes more than one classification, so that it
is clear that Veṅkaṭanātha’s main point is addressing the above
mentioned problems with the Nyāya ontology, rather than establishing in
full detail a distinct ontology.

The first proposal found in the *Nyāyapariśuddhi* is based on the idea
of a two fold division, into *dravya* ‘substance’ and *adravya*
‘non-substance’ and defines substance as the \`substrate of possible
accidental characteristics’ (*āgantukadharmāśraya*). The attribute
‘accidental’ hints at the fact that a *dravya* is not completely
independent of all its characteristics. Veṅkaṭanātha’s definition allows
him to maintain that some attributes, primarily consciousness, are never
severed from God or from the liberated soul.

The subclassifications goes further, with substance being divided into
inert and alive. The former category includes the *natura naturans* of
Sāṅkhya and time, which is thus no longer a quality (*guṇa*) as in
Nyāya. The latter category (alive substance) includes separate and
heteronomous substances. Within the former are individual souls and God,
whereas the latter includes cognition as essential to God
(*dharmabhūtajñāna*, see the paragraph immediately above) and the
permanent manifestations of God, which are logically dependent on Him,
but have not been created by Him.

The final result is a patchwork ontology, with several elements common
to the other Vedāntic schools, such as the embedment of the Sāṅkhya
structure, but distinctive appears to be the genealogy of the *ajaḍa*
part of the classification, as opposed to the Vedāntic *pariṇāmavāda*
‘theory of the evolution \[of the brahman into the world\]’, —according
to which the brahman is the material cause of the world— and also to the
*māyāvāda* ‘theory of the illusory \[evolution of the brahman in the
world\]’ —according to which only the brahman exists and everything else
is just an illusion. Veṅkaṭanātha’s ontology, in this sense, is not at
all Vedāntic insofar as it has God as its emanation point, but not as
its only component.

The *ajaḍa* part of the classification is, instead, directly connected
to Yāmuna’s stress on *dharmabhūtajñāna* and to Veṅkaṭanātha’s
dissociation of the personal aspect of God from any material ontology.
Noteworthy in this connection is the fact that the *vibhūti*s are
substances but devoid of any materiality. It is in this light that the
concept of God’s body (see the end of
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/10/30/ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADanathas-epistemology-ontology-and-theology/)
post) assumes its significance.

On Veṅkaṭanātha’s approach to ontology, see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2014/10/30/ve%E1%B9%85ka%E1%B9%ADanathas-epistemology-ontology-and-theology/)
post. (cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
