+++
title = "Pygmy Sommelier"
full_title = "Pygmy Sommelier"
date = "2012-07-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/12/pygmy-sommelier/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/12/pygmy-sommelier/).

Pygmy Sommelier

You’ve almost certainly heard about red-green color blindness. It’s
terribly common – in occurs in \~8% of European men. That is a
surprisingly high frequency for a genetic problem, but the fundamental
cause is a weirdly high mutation rate, due to the fact that the genes
for the red and green cone pigments are right next to each other on the
X chromosome and often get scrambled in recombination. Even in this
case, though, natural selection matters: deuteranopia is less common
outside of Europe, sometimes far less common. About 5% of men in China
have it, while about 1% of Pygmies do. The suspicion is that it matters
less among farming peoples than in hunter gatherers, and thus is more
common in people who have been farming longer, least common in people
who are still foragers.

There is an interesting riff on this: some of the scrambled versions of
the red and green genes still work, but have slightly nonstandard
absorption spectra. So there are a number of slightly different green
and red genes – and women, with two X chromosomes, can have four
different color sensors, instead of the standard three. There is
something similar in New World monkeys, where males have two working
cone pigments and females often have three.

Usually the brain wiring doesn’t seem to support four color vision in
women who are tetrachromats, but at least one case exists. Most people
can distinguish about 1 million different color, but she can probably
distinguish 100 million. She can see things no else can see, without
taking a potion.

In principle one could push this farther by putting contact lenses with
different filters in each eye, so that the left eye saw the bottom half
of red and the right eye the top half: ordinary people could in
principle distinguish six colors, while that tetrachromat lady could
distinguish eight. But it might screw up your depth perception, you’d
likely get a headache, and, as my real analysis prof said (Wolfgang
Haken), four colors suffice.

You probably know of color-blind men who have someone else help them
pick out clothes: they can’t tell, but most other people can. The lady
who is a working tetrachromat could give you better advice on how things
*really* look, but she’s one of the very few people who could appreciate
the effect. But doesn’t that make it even classier?

I mean, audiophiles have been known to shell out lots of money for
highly linear audio systems – when they can’t hear the difference.
Personally, I used to subscribe to Low Fidelity, because I loved those
analytical articles about taping a quarter on the tone arm,  recording
AM music during a thunderstorm, and saving audio system money by
repeatedly hitting a roll of caps with a hammer on the Fourth – but not
everyone is like me.

The story is similar, but more complicated, with olfactory receptors.
There are about 400 working olfactory receptors in humans, but many of
them have multiple versions, including pseudogenes – rather like
red-green color blindness, only there are 400 detectors involved instead
of 3, and 70 of them work in some people but not everyone. And, like
color blindness, the frequency of these non-working versions varies
between populations. In those olfactory genes that have working and
nonworking versions, Pygmies seem to have higher frequencies of the
working versions than Europeans do, just as they are less likely to be
color blind. Probably the sense of smell works better in the rain forest
(moist air) and it may be that the ability to recognize certain specific
scents, such as that of a lion hiding in the bushes nearby, has survival
value.

There are so many possible combinations of working and nonworking
olfactory genes that very few people, maybe no-one other than identical
twins, share the same set of smell receptors. This explains otherwise
inconceivable things, such as people who like broccoli. They taste a
different world.

If Pygmies do have a significantly higher fraction of working olfactory
genes, probably some Pygmies have a better sense of smell than any
European. It might be that the *average* Pygmy has a better sense of
smell than any European. And this suggests a new career path for the
Pygmy race.

Right now Pygmies are taking it in the shorts. They are often
enslaved, always discriminated against, sometimes eaten. They need to
find a new way. If I’m right, their natural new niche is as
super-sommeliers. They’ll know more about wine than you ever will:
you’ll never be able to taste what they taste. Reminds me of a
televised Beethoven concert at Wolf Trap where an interpreter was
signing for the hearing-impaired: I figure he was saying “This shit is
great, but you’ll never know, because you’re fucking deaf!”

Once they learn the patter and the necessary arrogance – once we teach
them to look down on customers while looking up at them – they’ll be a
shoo-in. It will be as big a success as Neanderthal gaming. Every
five-star restaurant will have one.

