+++
title = "Sanctuary"
full_title = "Sanctuary"
date = "2012-07-13"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/13/sanctuary/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/13/sanctuary/).

Sanctuary

In Robert Heinlein’s book *Starship Troopers*, he mentioned a planet
called Sanctuary. It was retarded: given favorable conditions and
similar amounts of time, life had not gotten very far. The most
advanced animal was a proto-insect, the most advanced plant something
like a primitive fern. The explanation given in the book was that the
planet had a very low level of natural radiation: with very few
mutations, evolution dawdled.

The planet had been settled by humans, who did well. For example,
Terran wheat easily displaced the local plants. But a local biologist
tells our hero that in the long run, Sanctuary is a trap. The settlers
will hardly evolve at all, and eventually – we’re talking the long run
– they’ll be obsolete, replaced by fast-changing outsiders.

Heinlein was right on some of this, wrong on more. In other words, he
knew a lot more biology than the average science fiction writer.
Mutations are indeed the seed corn of adaptive evolution: you have to
have some. But we’re pretty sure that radiation is not the only way of
producing them, not even the most common way. It takes a *lot* of
radiation to double the mutation rate – something like a lethal dose,
way more than you get from background radiation in a lifetime. I’m not
sure how well that was understood in 1959.

But assume it anyway. what would happen if people moved somewhere where
the mutation rate was far lower?

Their genetic load would decrease with time, assuming that they were
still subject to much selection. Today, everybody has hundreds of nicked
or broken genes: selection keeps eliminating them, while mutation keeps
creating them. The suspicion is that their effect is quite large. This
hypothetical population would have fewer and fewer. In a few thousand
years, they would lose most of the variants that decrease fitness by 1%
or more.

If the theory of mutational load is correct, it wouldn’t be the people
of Sanctuary who would have to worry about becoming obsolete.

