+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-07-30"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/30/kanya-pariksha-as-per-ashvalayana-grihya-sutra/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/30/kanya-pariksha-as-per-ashvalayana-grihya-sutra/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## kanyA parIkSha as per AshvalAyana gR^ihyasUtra

This is note on the kanyA parIkSha to be done before vivAha as per the
AshvalAyana gR^ihya sUtra:

Before vivAha one should examine the vaMsha-s of both the parents upto
ten generations where their vidya, puNya karma AcharaNa are to be
considered.

Or according to some AchArya-s examining the details of the father is
enough. The groom also should of course be a buddhimAn to perform the
vivAha with a kanya endowed with good qualities.

The kanya should be endowed with sadbuddhi, rUpa, of good shIla and free
some any long term diseases.

However determining these laxaNa-s is no easy task and are seen as
durviGYeyAni.

Hence, one should resort to the procedure outlined below:

Collect soil from eight different places and make them into the shape of
laDDU-s approximately. Perform abhimantrana of the eight clumps of soil
uttering the mantra “R^itamagre…”. Place them before the kanya and let
the kanya choose one from the eight.

If she selects the clump of soil from crops/farms, the kanya will be
endowed with food and santAna. If the soil from a cattle shed is picked
she will have great pashu saMpada. If the soil is from a yaGYa vedika
she will be endowed with brahmavarchas. Selection of soil from a tank
which is never known to go dry would mean she will be endowed with many
riches and likewise soil from a gambling place would mean she would be
prone to addictions. Soil from the cross roads indicates that the kanya
will go down an evil or a path devoid of virtue. If a clump of mud from
a barren land is selected, it indicates that would be a daurbhAgyavatI
while from a shmashAna would mean she would be widowed (perhaps early).

Additional comments: Everyone of course know that, one resorts to such
techniques after employing normal laukika filters. It would be futile to
deploy the procedure on somebody who is visibly “woke”. As an aside, one
should thoroughly invoke the iShTa or kula devata-s and employ some sort
of divination along with common sense and other laukika tools. As many
say, a strI’s mAya is not easy to see through and in the end, a lot
depends on karma. A proper siddha, someone well learned and experienced
in phala-jyotiSha, or someone well experienced with strI-s might be able
to see through. The last one could be useful in recognizing subtle cues
or in detecting manipulation/faking of body language with an intent to
mislead…

This entry was posted on July 30, 2021 at 2:09 pm and is filed under
[Divination](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/divination/),
[Grihya Sutra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/grihya-sutra/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/30/kanya-pariksha-as-per-ashvalayana-grihya-sutra/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/30/kanya-pariksha-as-per-ashvalayana-grihya-sutra/trackback/)
from your own site.

