+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-07-21"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/21/shri-bhuvaneshvari-kakshaputi-vidya/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/21/shri-bhuvaneshvari-kakshaputi-vidya/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## shrI bhuvaneshvarI kakShapuTividya

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/bhuvaneshvari1.jpg?w=480)

A text called kakShapuTi vidya or tantra focused on ShaT karma-s and
related karma-s was published in the North which students of tantra
might be well aware of. However, in Andhra there is a published text
called the bhuvaneshvarI kakShapuTi vidya, the manuscripts we may guess
must be in possession of some Andhra mAntrika lineages. At the moment,
lack of mention of this text outside Andhra gives an impression that
this might be unique to Andhra.

With variations the text is sometimes published as shrI bhuvaneshvarI
mantra kakSha puTi and shrI bhuvaneshvarI yantra kakSha puTi. Going by
the name bhuvaneshvarI must be of central importance in this tradition,
though the contents of the bhuvaneshvarI kakSha puTi vidya are standard
when compared to contents of most mantra shAstra digests/compendiums.
Known publications of the text are limited to the East Godavari and
Guntur districts of Andhra.

The contents are standard and starts with generic instructions on mantra
practice and a few chakra-s to check mantra compatibility, guru shiShya
laxana etc. Then it has chapters for devata-s starting with vinAyaka. It
gives a standard list of 32 gaNesha-s but says that in kali five forms
of gaNapati are most relevant and sadyassiddhi-prada. The five being,
haridra, uchChiShTha, laxmI, prasanna and shakti gaNapati. The five
vidya-s are given in detail and then the chapter closes by elaborating
prayoga-s for each. The next chapters focus on shaiva and vaiShNava
vidya-s. The text in possession I believe is incomplete and that only
extracts might have been published. The shaiva section starts with
pa\~nchAkShari and then each of the pa\~ncha brahma-s is given.
Associated with each of the pa\~ncha brahma-s the text gives twenty five
variations of pa\~nchAkShari to be deployed for various purposes. Other
texts which speak about these 125 pa\~nchAkShari-s are the shaivotsava
ratnAkara, the mahApa\~nchAkShari kalpaM and possibly the chidaMbara
saMhita (from which the contents are likely extracted by authors of
other texts). The published version has only three of the pa\~ncha
brahma-s and so gives only 75 pa\~nchAkShari-s. For the first two
brahman-s laxa japa is prescribed while for aghora rudra it is trilaxa.
The author mentions that his manuscript does not have the details of the
tatpuruSha and IshAna mantra-s and the 50 pa\~nchAkShari-s associated
with them. The other 50 are available in other places. The vaiShNava
section in the published version is likewise limited with focus on
nArAyaNa, nR^isiMha, pa\~nchamukha A\~njaneya and sItArAma.

The shAkta portion however is dealt in considerable detail but even here
the focus is specifically (other than bhuvaneshvarI of course) on
pa\~ncha shakti-s i.e. reNukA, kAlikA, chaNDikA, bagalAmukhI and vArAhI
which are said to be shIghra-siddhi-prada in kali. The next chapters
give mutiple vidya-s of each of these devata-s. reNukA trividhA proktA
shuddhA kairAta shAbarI. chaNDikA dvividhA – As chaNDI and chAmunDA.
kAlikA as pa\~nchakAlI – pratya\~NgirA, bhadrakAlI, sharabha kAlI,
dakShiNA kAlI and tArA. The variations of vArAhI are known standard ones
while bagalA is ekavidyA but along with the associated popular
ShaDastra-s. It gives a few prayoga-s involving the sharabha kAlI
mantra. One such prayoga supposedly removes different kinds of kShudra
prayoga-s and even removes or drives away any inimical devata shakti-s
(perhaps sent by a mighty opponent). Another sharabha kAlI prayoga to
destroy ugra prayoga-s and specifically bhetAla and brahma rAkShasa-s.
An interesting mAraNa prayoga involving the sharabha kAlI mantra
utilizes nara-taila (human oil?).

The last section is the yantra section which gives various yantra-s for
different phala-s. All yantras have 25 squares but the bIjAkShara-s and
the pattern of bIjAkShara-s differ based on phala. All these are
bhuvaneshvarI yantra-s and some yantra-s are associated with different
mantra-s of bhuvaneshvarI. As an example, the bhuvaneshvarI mantra
associated with the shishu rakSha yantra is oM hrIM shrIM klIM
bhuvaneshvarI AM hrIM kroM klIM hrIM shrIM huM phaT svAhA while the one
for vidveShaNa yantra would go as uM UM oM hrIM raM hrIM huM
bhuvaneshvaryai namaH UM uM.

The published version of these texts are silent on any siddhAnta or on
any grand theories of moxa (other than mentioning some mantra-s granting
bhukti & mukti) and also does not speak much on devata tattva. However
the shAkta section ends by saying that reNukA dharaNi proktA chAmuNDA
vAyu saMGYikA, kAlikA vahnirGYeyA vArAhI jalarUpiNI bagalA cha
viyatsaMGYI pa\~nchabhUtAtmikAH parAH. It correlates reNukA with Earth,
chAmuNDA with vAyu, kAlikA with agni, vArAhI with water and bagalA with
space/AkAsha and that one who masters these pa\~nchabhUtAtmika shAkta
vidya-s will be capable of nigrahAnugraha.

Above is from the published version of shI bhuvaneshvarI kakShapuTi
vidya by M satyanArAyaNa siddhAnti garu of Tenali. For those interested
in acquiring (it is in Telugu) a copy of this, they should be searching
for a book titled mantra siddhi by the siddhAnti. In East-WestGodavari,
there is a different publication on bhuvaneshvarI and is divided in
three parts. shrI bhuvaneshvarI yantra kakSha puTi, shrI bhuvaneshvarI
mantra kakSha puTI and shrI bhuvaneshvarI mantra kalpaM. The yantra
bhAga lists out various devata yantra-s for different kAmya-s. The
mantra bhAga lists out the mantra-s that are associated with the yantra
bhAga along with the japa saMkhya, homa dravya-s and other relevant
prayoga details. The mantra kalpa is exclusively concerned with
bhuvaneshvarI, the various prayoga-s involving the bhuvaneshvarI mantra
and yantra as also the antaryAga and bahiryAga. This was a limited
publication and hence I was able to acquire only the mantra kakSha puTi.
The mantra kakSha puTi gives a total of 96 mantra-s that are associated
with the same number of yantra-s starting with the saubhAgya
bhuvaneshvarI\*\* (or just a saubhAgya yantra involving the normal
bhuvaneshvarI mantra) yantra and ending with sudarshana nR^isiMha. Some
mantra-s are standard and the devata-s mostly are those that an AkAsha
bhairava kalpa related work would invoke. Two deities of interest that
are not usually found elsewhere are the AkAsha bhairavI, the vyAghra
chAmuNDI mantra and also a certain kalyANa vIrabhadra who is mounted
like his consort bhadrakAlI, on a vetAla (…bhetAlArUDhamugraM vikasita
jaTAbhaddha… in the dhyAna). Also a variation of the vaTuka mantra as
raNa-ra\~Nga bhairava is also of interest. Another unusual prayoga from
this text is a combination of the few standard astra vidya-s coupled
with one of the 64 kR^itya-s and cleverly combined with one of the astra
vidyA-s formed by inversing the standard vaidika gAyatri ending in the
shatrUn hana dvaya format. The devata for this terrifying combination is
termed as mahAkR^ityA. In the right hands perhaps, an opponent might be
pushed to wit’s end to stop the imminent disaster that is to follow such
a deployment. Some mantra-s of dhUmAvatI, vArAhI, bhadrakAlI and
mahAshAsta have Tamil and/or Malayalam pada-s in between, suggesting
that in the past, this text was known in Kerala/Tamil Nadu or at-least
the compilers of these texts were familiar with vidya-s from these
regions.

\*\* There are various bhuvaneshvarI-s that are mentioned in the devI
bhAgavata. a\~nkusha bhuvaneshvarI, pramAda bhuvaneshvarI, shrI krodha
bhuvaneshvarI and kapAla bhuvaneshvarI. While not present in the limited
number of texts that I have glanced, mention is also made of a certain
trishUla-hasta-bhuvaneshvarI who was invoked in the past by shrI
vidyAraNya svAmin to establish the great vijayanagara empire.

This entry was posted on July 21, 2021 at 3:42 pm and is filed under
[bhuvaneshvarI](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/shakta/bhuvaneshvari/),
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[shAkta](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/shakta/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/21/shri-bhuvaneshvari-kakshaputi-vidya/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/07/21/shri-bhuvaneshvari-kakshaputi-vidya/trackback/)
from your own site.

