+++
title = "Nanga Ped"
full_title = "Nanga Ped"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2015/12/16/nanga-ped/"
date = "2015-12-16"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2015/12/16/nanga-ped/).

Nanga Ped

In India, being barefoot has traditionally been the norm in many situations: in the home, in religious or spiritual places, and even in certain shops and classrooms. Unless you can’t afford shoes, or you are on a pilgrimage – and many do undertake annual pilgrimages of hundreds of kilometres barefoot, carrying only the simplest of belongings – you don’t though venture onto the great Indian street without some form of footwear. So when we tried our first barefoot jog in Bangalore a couple of weeks ago, we met with quite a lot of bemused stares. Despite having a poster boy in Milind Soman, barefoot running has not yet pierced the collective consciouness here.

In America by contrast it is fairly well established – so much so in fact that barefoot running shoes, bizarre as that may sound, are now big business. Christopher McDougall’s *[Born To Run](http://www.chrismcdougall.com/born-to-run/)* has attained cult status among barefoot runners, and has also helped introduce the idea to the general public. The book describes a legendary race between the naturally brilliant runners of the Tarahumara tribe in Mexico and some of the best ultra-marathoners in the States. It also leads the reader on a host of other interesting trails.

Two really caught my attention. The first is the story of how Nike’s first running shoes came into being, and how their inventer – Bill Bowerman – created demand for his innovative cushioned heels by popularising a new running style. Up until then, all runners landed on the ball of their toe and ran with short, soft-landing strides. Bowerman thought it would help if instead runners could land on their heel and thus lengthen their stride. The result was all kinds of injuries, as the knees became shock absorbers and runners landed far too hard . And yet even though Bowerman eventually realised his mistake, by that time it was too late (or he was making too much money). Ever since, running shoes have become even more high-tech and even more cushioned in a doomed attempt to improve performance and stem the tide of injuries. By shedding your shoes, or wearing incredibly thin shoes that let the muscles of your feet work as they would barefoot, you can immediately improve uour running style and posture and reduce stresses and injuries.

The second is a long chapter towards the end of the book in which McDougall describes the various eureka moments among a few genius biologists and anthropologists which led to the theory that man was designed to run, not to walk. For instance, unlike animals that are designed to walk – such as chimps – we have various equipment that is useful only for running, including the achilles tendon and a ligament that keeps the head steady at high speeds. What the scientists posited is that the reason Homo sapiens outlived his much stronger, more intelligent cousin the Neanderthal – long a mystery – was his ability to run long distances. This allowed Homo sapiens to secure himself a steady source of animal protein. He could not run faster than his prey, but he could outrun them over several hours. To test this theory though the scientists needed to find a living example – not just a story, of which there were plenty – of this type of persistence running, where humans ran their prey to death. And finally they did, on the desert plains of Africa, a fascinating account of which McDougall gives.

Even for those who are not convinced that running in any form is something they should or want to be doing, being barefoot goes far beyond your morning jog. There are numerous attested benefits to strengthening the muscles of your feet, for which you need to take off your shoes. I’ve been told several times in India that walking first thing nanga ped on dewy grass is a very good practice. I’m not sure why, but we are now spending dawn to dusk in Sakleshpur barefoot and loving it. There is a vulnerability about it which makes you walk more gingerly and more consciously, and because you are directly in touch with the earth there is a different type of connection. Going barefoot also gives you a sense of lightness and freedom, a kind of let’s do cartwheels in the grass just for the hell of it feeling.

In spite of Milind Soman and the odd event (including [one in Coorg](http://coorgwellnessfoundation.com/) last week), as happens with so many things in India – yoga, ayurveda, spiritual practices, squatting, co-sleeping, extended breastfeeding – barefoot is going out of fashion here just as the West wakes up to its importance. Ah well.
