+++
title = "GuptaHūṇa Relations A"
full_title = "GuptaHūṇa Relations A Study"
date = "2021-05-25"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/05/25/gupta-hu%e1%b9%87a-relations-a-study/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/05/25/gupta-hu%e1%b9%87a-relations-a-study/).

Gupta-Hūṇa Relations: A Study

**THE** north-western frontier of the Indian sub-continent has been
throughout it’s history, an entry point for the invading armies. The
first major historical invasion which resulted in the loss of territory
to India was the Achaemenid invasion during the great expansion by it’s
king Cyrus around 535 BCE. It made inroads into our territory and
annexed the area west of the Indus to the first Persian empire. In 518
BCE, Darius made a second successful attempt and the Indus valley,
divided into *satrapies* formed an integral and lucrative part of the
Achaemenid imperium. And this was just the start.

From here came Alexander the Macedonian and an imprint of that invasion
resulted in the establishment of a very strong Graeco-Bactrian influence
in the Indian north-west. Protection from this was provided by the first
Indian empire – the Mauryas. After the Mauryas, the responsibility came
on the *Śuṅga*-s. The vast steppes to the far north also started acting
up and gave us our next set of invaders – the Scythians *(Śaka)*, the
Parthians *(Pahlava)* and the Yueh Zhi *(Kuśāṇa).* The decline of
*Kuśāṇas* gave us our next indigenous empire – the formidable Gupta-s.
This time again in the Indian history, a *Māgadhan* empire had the
responsibility to defend the Indian frontiers. And this involved
defending the ever porous north-western frontiers. The next invasion was
by the people collectively called the Hūṇa in the traditional sources.
***This article is going to explore and analyse the relations between
Hūṇa-s and the Gupta Empire till the time of the end of the reign of
valorous Skanda Gupta.*** It’s a humble attempt to understand the
various entangled facts and to freshen up on our knowledge of these new
people that threatened our frontiers.

![***A scenic view from Swat, ancient
Gandhara.^(a)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/mahodand_lake-summer_2015.jpg?w=1024)

As this is going to be a rather long study, for the benefit of the
readers, I am going to give a cursory look as to how this article is
going to proceed. After explaining background to the rise of Hūṇa-s i.e.
the rise of a ruling family called *Kushanshahs*, the article will
proceed in two main parts. **Firstly**, non-Indian information and
evidence with regard to the various factions of the Hūṇa-s is going to
be considered in the following main sections: ***The Chionites, The
Kidarites, The Perso-Kidarite Conflicts, The Hephthalites and The
Alkhans.*** **Secondly**, Indian information and evidence with regard to
each Gupta monarch and their conflicts with the Hūṇa-s starting from the
period of Emperor Samudra Gupta till the end of the period of Emperor
Skanda Gupta (the purview of this article) will be considered in the
following heads: ***Samudra Gupta, Chandra Gupta II, Kumāra Gupta**,
**Skanda Gupta and, lastly Evidence of Pādatāḍitaka***.

**Background**: **The *Kushanshahs***

Around the middle of the third century CE, Kuśāṇa-s after ruling for
centuries in the upper part of the sub-continent were on the decline.
The obvious result of their declining power was the establishment of the
hegemony in the susceptible north-west by the new rising power in Persia
– the Sassanians. Ruler Ardashir I in c. 230 took over Bactria from
Kuśāṇa-s and a branch of these Sassanian Persians who helped in this
victory were made the governing nobles of this area. These governors
called themselves the Kushanshahs i.e. the King of the Kushanas
(Bactrian *Koshano Shao*).

They were sub-ordinate to the Sassanians, somewhat like *a cadet branch
of the Sassanian imperial family¹ *but mostly acted as semi-independent
rulers and even minted their own coins *(see image below)*. Their
territory included Sogdiana and even the province of Gandhāra where
their coins have been found. The first ruler of the Kushanshahs was a
certain Ardshir I Kushanshah who was appointed by Sassanian king
Ardashir I. The next main king of the line was Peroz I Kushanshah who
was able to seriously challenge the hegemony of the Kuśāṇa Empire and
confine them to the region around Mathura² as their western frontier
limit. Once, an attempt for independence was made by Kushanshah Hormizd
I (275-300 CE) and he rebelled during the Sassanian rule of Bahram II
but the attempt failed.

![***Hormizd I Kushanshah Coin – “The Mazda worshipper, the divine
Hormizd, the great Kushana, King of Kin******gs” in
Pahlavi.^(b)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/hormizd_i_kushanshah_merv_mint.jpg?w=500)

On the other hand, a new set of people called the Chionites had started
exerting influence in the northern territories of the Kushanshahs.
According to Ammianus Marcellinus (Roman soldier and historian), Shapur
II (*reigned* 309-379 CE) at the time starting around c. 354, was busy
fighting the Euseni, and the Chionite /Xionites who are now generally
identified by the scholars with *Cuseni* *i.e.* the northern Kushanas
and the earliest batch of the Hunnic people respectively.³ The Chionites
(probably the tribe of the Kidarites) under their king
Grumbates/Krumbates attacked the eastern frontier of the Persian Empire
but after struggling for years, finally concluded peace with Shapur II.
He and his son even took part in the Seige of Amida (today’s Diyarbakir,
Turkey) in 359 CE under Shapur in which Grumbates lost his son.⁴ The
Xionite history will be discussed shortly.

Due to his wars with these Kushans (shahs) and the Chionites, Shapur II
was able to extend his direct control towards the southern territories
formerly under the Kushanshahs and he reached the Indus. Therefore,
around this period the Sassanian coinage starts to appear in Taxila. The
Sassanian control on these territories was maintained even under Shapur
III (reigned 383-388 CE) but the control was far from absolute because
the Chionite-Kidarites were seriously challenging them.

> ***The control of Gandhara by Shapur II, known through the issue of
> his copper denomination there, appears to be a side effect of the
> increased Sasanian interest in the east. Al-Tabari reports that Shapur
> made many cities in Sajistan (Sakistan) and Sind (Sindh) and brought
> to his capital a doctor from India whose knowledge was later spread
> throughout the Sasanian realm (al-Tabari 845).***
>
> **K. Rezakhani, “From Kushan to the Western Turks”, King of the Seven
> Climes.**

These Chinoites or Xionites (one of the earliest Hunnic people) and
among them, the first appearance of the tribe of Kidarites is suggested
in the middle of the fourth century CE. They were to play a major role
in the Indian sub-continent. The first reason for trying to understand
the sequence of these events in the non-Indian world is that a lot of
new research has been done by scholars pertaining to the Hunnic world in
Asia of this period which involves physical evidence like artifacts and
numismatics that shed new light on the subject. The second reason is
that we can thus use this evidence with which we are less familiar with
to corroborate and compare the evidence and information which is
available pertaining to the Indian sequence of events of the time.

**NON INDIAN EVIDENCE**

**The Chionites**

The Chionites identified, albeit inconclusively with the Xiognu of the
Chinese were nomadic people in the Transoxiana-Bactria region. Sometimes
the geographical-physical and sometimes the political events in history
result in change of sociological conditions as well. The same has always
happened in Central Asia. One of the suggested theory is that the
Xiognu/Xiongnu were defeated by the Chinese in 89 CE at the Battle of
Ilkh Bayan and due to the subsequent actions of the Chinese under Ban
Chao against the Xiognu resulted in their migrations into Central Asia.

***What is interesting is that this Xiongnu tribal confederacy had
earlier in around 209-177 BCE under the leadership of Maodung, the
founder of Xiongnu Empire, defeated the Yueh Chi-s (the confederacy had
Kushanas as one of its tribe). Yueh Chi-s or Yueh Zhi-s in this war were
the allies of the Hans and their defeat by Xiongnu had resulted in their
migration.³***

Apparently the Xionites divided themselves into four kinds of hordes and
the division of these hordes was supposedly on the basis of colours that
are identified with cardinal directions in the Central Asian culture.
The Black-Northern horde beyond the Jaxartes (Syr Darya), the
Blue-Eastern horde around the Tian Shan (Tengri Tagh Mountains), the
White-Western identified with the Hephthalites around Khiva and lastly
the Red-Southern identified with the Kidarites-Alchons south of the
Oxus.

But this is only one of the several theories regarding the migration of
these tribes and consensus is lacking. Some scholars suggest climate
change could have been a reason for the migrations. Some place these
migration much later in first half of the fourth century CE. Scholars
agree that the Chionites had both the Iranian and Turkic elements. They
most probably were the Hunnic people who after their migration into the
Transoxiana-Bactria region adopted the Kushan-Bactrian language and
assimilated themselves in the Kushano-Bactrian culture in general while
retaining some of the habits of their (possibly) Altain origins.

**The Kidarites**

The first Kidarite ‘ruler’ that we know of is Kirada (c. 335-345). His
coins, found from the north west, western Punjab are inscribed with
vertical *Ga-ḍa-ha-ra* (Gandhāra). Some coins of these Kidarite
‘Kushanas’ have Samudra inscribed on them and this suggest that he
accepted the suzerainty of the Gupta monarch – the great Samudra Gupta.
This seems logical because Samudra Gupta had in his control the remnants
of the Kuśāṇa empire. The last known Kuśāṇa ruler – Kipunada (c.
335-350) barely controlled some areas around Taxila and Western Punjab
and accepted the overlordship of the Gupta monarch. It seems likely that
Kirada who was now reaching these areas, accepted the overlordship of
Samudra Gupta as supported by the numismatic evidence. Also, Kirada was
in virtual control over the last Kushanshah ruler Varaharan I Kushanshah
(340-345 CE) and restruck some of his coins. After him came the Kidarite
ruler Peroz (c. 350-360) who struck many of his coins with the title –
*King of the Kushans.* The Kidarite rulers evidently, despite their
Xiognu/Chionite/Hunnic ethnicity took the title *King of the Kushans*.
This practise was in continuation of their predecessors the
Kushano-Sassanians who despite being of Indo-Sassanian ethnicity took
the same title. And this is the reason why the earlier sources called
the Kidarite as Kidarite Kushans.

***The effect of the Kushana imperium was obvious. But the Kidarites
were also the last dynasty to do so. ***

Historian Khodadad Rezakhani suggests that Peroz was involved in the
seige of Amida in 359 CE from the Sassanian side. After Peroz, the most
known and influential Kidarite ruler was Kidar I (reigned upto 390 CE)
whose gold coin found near Tepe Maranjan near Kabul establishes the fact
that his territory now included considerable area south of the Hindu
Kush before 388 CE.⁵ It is after this ruler that these Chionite people
are specifically called the Kidarites. Around this time the coins of the
Kidarites are struck with their specific *tamga* and the end of
Kushano-Sassanians seems official. The capital of their territory was
Samarkand. The peace that has been achieved between the Persians and the
Kidarites was reportedly broken during the rule of Kidara, not long
after the Amida campaign in 359 CE and their relations had became
hostile which resulted in numerous battles between them. Due to this,
the Sassanians had lost much territory to the Kidarites. As per
Rezakhani , *“We can date the Kidarite period, based on different
evidence, to the period AD 370-457 for the rule of the Kidarites in
Bactria, Kabul, and Gandhara, and possibly AD 468 for their ultimate
defeat by the Sasanian King of Kings, Peroz (Errington and Curtis 2010:
82).”*

![***Kidarite King Kidar I (r. 350-385/90
CE)^(c)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/240px-kidara_i_portrait.jpg?w=240)

The Chinese chronicle *Beishi/Weishu* also refer to this King Kidara as
Da Yuezhi or the Great Yuezhi⁶ (we have to remember that various sources
confuse the Kidarite kings with the Kushans/Kushanshahs due to their
close, conflicted proximity and the continuing use of the title King of
the Kushans). King *Jiduoluo* mentioned in these sources has been
identified with Kidara. The chronicle describes the said king in the
following words:

***“Their King Jiduoluo, who was brave and martial, there upon raised an
army, crossed the great mountains \[i.e. the Hindu Kush\] and, moving
south, invaded northern India. Qiantuoluo (Gandhāra) and the four states
to its north fell under his control.”⁷***

**The Perso-Kidarite Conflicts**

It has been suggested from the authority of Armenian historian Faustus
of Byzantium (second half of 5th century CE) that Shapur II during c.
369-375 was defeated by a certain Kushan King of Balkh.⁸ As mentioned
earlier this period is ripe with the conflicts of Shapur II with the
Kidarites in which he sometimes could hold the positions. But the
Persian empire was seriously affected by these battles with actual loss
of territory especially around Bactria. In the period after Shapur II
Persia was more engaged in the internal affairs during the reigns of
King Shapur III, Bahram IV and Yazdigird I.⁹ Whether the concentration
on internal problems was a cause of the Kidarite-Persian problems or an
effect is uncertain but the Kidara tribe’s power was increasing in the
eastern Iranian region and they consolidated their rule in Bactria,
Kabul and Gandhāra.

It is in the reign of Bahram V (r. 420-438) that serious Perso-Kidarite
hostilities again commence. Bahram was able to gain the first victory.
He defeated them near Merv/Marv, personally killed their king¹⁰ and even
erected a boundary tower.¹¹ In earlier scholarly works, these conflicts
were considered to have taken place between the Hephthalites (the White
Huns) and the Persians but the modern scholarly consensus confirms that
these were conflicts between Persians and the Kidarites Huns who took
the title of Kushans.

But the Persian fortunes seems to have given away from now on. During
the reign of Yazdigird II (r. 438-457) there were numerous struggles
with the Huns. As Bakker mentions on the authority of the Armenian
historian Elishē, Yazdigird attacked the Kidarite ‘Kushans’ in 449/50 CE
and emerged victorious but in the next conflict when the Persian monarch
attacked the Kidarites c. 453-54 CE, the result was the opposite – the
Sassanians ended up being tributary to the Kidara king.¹² The response
of the Kidarite ruler to this Persian attack was this:

> ***…For although he was unable to face him in a pitched battle,
> nonetheless, falling on his rear he inflicted many losses falling on
> the king’s army. And he pressed, assailed them so hard that,
> overcoming them with a small number of troops, he turned them back. In
> hot pursuit, he plundered many royal provinces, and he he himself
> \[the king of the Kushans\] returned safely to his own country.***
>
> **Hans T. Bakker, The Alkhan: A Hunnic People in South Asia.**

We also learn that in the aforementioned struggle, the Hunnic Kidarites,
rather than fighting the Persians in opposing battle lines,
*unexpectedly fell upon each wing and put many Persians to sword and
dissappeared unharmed. They continued these tactics for many days and
“exhausted the Persian army.”* The next Persian king Hormazd III was
defeated by his own brother Peroz who with the help of Hephthalites was
able to secure the Sassanian throne. Motivated by the Hephthalite help,
Peroz (r. 459-484) now decided to secure the eastern frontier of his
empire and hostilities commenced with the Kidarites in 464-65 CE. As per
Priscus (eastern Roman diplomat and Greek historian), the Kidarite king
at this point was Kunkhas (κουνχας).¹³ Peroz saw some serious setbacks
in these early conflicts but conclusively defeated the Kidarite King
(possibly Kunkhas) in 467 CE and Kunkhas fled from his capital Balaam
(possibly Balkh) and apparently took refuge in Gandhāra.¹⁴ Peroz also
issued some gold coins from Balkh. The hegemony of Kidarites in this
region was substantially reduced with the loss of Bactria and they had
only Gandhāra (Swat) under their control.¹⁵ The later development in
Persian fortunes in the eastern regions will be dealt in the section
below concerning Hephthalites.

**The Hephthalites**

Another Hunnic power that affects the political situation in this region
are the Hephthalites who called themselves ηβοδαλο in Bactrian
*(Ebodalo)* and they seem to become important from about middle of the
fifth century CE. As mentioned earlier, they came to prominence when we
learn that the Persian Peroz took their help in securing his throne to
the empire. Peroz’s victory over Kidara and his conquest of Balkh has
been described as a Pyrrhic victory¹⁶ for Persians couldn’t hold on to
their gains in Balkh and soon lost these domains to Hephthalites who now
ruled Sogdiana and also Bactriana. The rest of their dealings with the
Persians after the period of Skand Gupta i.e. 467 CE are not in the
scope of this article. Though in short, they defeated the Sassanian
Peroz conclusively in which Peroz lost his life in 484 CE. This period
after Peroz’s death results in a period of their ascendance in the
region.

**The Alkhans**

This nomenclature, which can also be written as Alkhon or Alchon is a
rather new entry into the Hunnic world. The reason is that the name is
only found on the coins in the Bactrian αλχονο or αλχανο. The fact that
the Alchan evidence is numismatic and lacking in textual has until now
resulted in their conflation with the Hephthalites.¹⁶ The coins are
usually anonymous or if they do carry another writing, it is usually an
ethnic name Khiṅgila.¹⁷ It is now generally accepted that the Hūṇa kings
Toramāṇa and his son Mihirkula belonged to this faction, though neither
of these kings used this specific name Alkhan to describe themselves on
their coins.

The Hunnic rulers in general do not identify themselves by the word
Hūṇa. It is usualy done by their adversaries. Only three identical seals
from a certain Kidarite *Ruler (afshiyan) of Samarkand* named
Uglarg/Ularg use these words on the sealings to describe himself –
*“…lord Uglarg/Ularg, King of /over the Huns,* the great
*Kushāna-\[shāh\], afshiyan of \[Samar\] kand”*.¹⁸ Other than this a
Weishu documentation that describes a Sogdian king as Xiongnu and a clay
sealing from Kauśāmbi that apparently says *hūṇarāja*.¹⁹ There is not
much evidence according to Bakker that lends support to the theory that
these rulers ever used the word Hūṇa to identify themselves. The clay
sealing from Kauśāmbi is very unclear to read and cannot be taken
seriously at this point. Some scholars have hinted at the possibility
that Huna or Hūṇa was a pejorative name derived from the Chinese phrase
***xiōngnu̍*** ²⁰ which meant ‘savage slaves’.

The coins bearing Alchon start to emerge from the reign of Shapur II in
c. 370 in the Transoxiana region. By the c. 380-388 when the Kidarites
as mentioned above have formed a solid base south of the Hindu Kush in
Gandhāra, the Alchon Huns seem to be trying to form a base in the
Kabulistan region. It seems that they took over the Sassanian mints in
the Kabulistan and restruck the Persian coins by adding the name
*Alchono*. They were to slowly replace the Kidarites and to form the
main adversaries to the Indian kings in the future. They differentiated
their coins with the Kidarites by a special *tamga*. There is another
distinguishing physical feature in some of these tribes. It is
considered that Kidarites used to follow the practise of artificial
cranial deformation but the Alkhans seemed to taken special pride in
their elongated skulls.

But the major horde of coins bearing the title *Alkhan* are found south
of the Hindu Kush. The first proper ruler whose name emerges is Khiṅgila
(ruled 430-490 CE) when they take control of the routes of the Hindu
Kush and another Alchon King named Mehama (r. 461-493) is also known who
was even made governor by Sassanian king Peroz I. The rule of Khiṅgila
and Mehama seems to overlap. Mehama also allied with Peroz when the
Persian monarch defeated the Kidarites. The Alchon-Kidarite suffered
defeat in the hands of Emperor Skanda Gupta in around 455 CE. Despite
their defeat which stopped them from trying their luck any farther in
Indic mainland, they later seem to have expanded there by the year 470
CE, for we know due to their coins that the Alchons were in possession
of Gandhāra and western Punjab. There is more evidence in the form of
the Schøyen or the Talagan Copper Scrollbut that is out of the scope of
this article that concerns itself to the end of the reign of Skand
Gupta. However, there is another artifact which is of our interest – the
Swat Bowl.

![***Khiṅgila and the word Alchono in Bactrian script (αλχονο) , a tamga
and the special elongated
skull.***^(***d***)](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/khingila_alchono.jpg?w=800)

***The Swat Bowl***

The bowl that is now in housed in the the British Museum was found from
Swat region (now in Pakistan) in Gandhāra. The art of the bowl
represents four hunters. Earlier the dating of the bowl was considered
in the first half of fifth century but now the generally accepted date
is around the middle of the fifth century. It has also been suggested
after reading the inscribed words that it could also be alternatively
dated to 428-29 CE ²¹ that brings the bowl in our purview. The
inscription possibly, though inconclusively suggests the name of ruler
of the Alchons – Khiṅgila. The iconography suggests four huntsmen in
total, two of different ethnicity each. It is now considered that two of
them are Kidarite and the other two are Alchons based on their classic
elongated skulls. This suggest a period of peace between these Hunnic
tribes before Alchons finally displaced the Kidarites.

![***The Swat
Bowl.^(e)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/swat-bowl-2.jpg?w=540)

This whole study of the behaviour and the situation of these Hunnic
tribes tells us that there was quite a bit of overlapping in the domains
of these tribes. When Kidarites were ruling the Bactria, Kabul and
Gandhara, the presence and even increasing power of the Alkhans can be
seen in the Kabulistan region. The period of peaceful co-existence as
suggested by the Swat Bowl also tells us that these tribes went back and
forth in co-operating and nibbling at each other’s territories.

**THE INDIAN EVIDENCE**

**Samudra Gupta *(r. 335-375 CE)***

The first evidence regarding the Guptas and their dealings with the
north western frontier comes from the *Prayāga Praśasti* or the
Allahabad Pillar Inscription of Emperor Samudra Gupta which is dated c.
370 CE, though Hūṇa-s have not been mentioned by name in the
inscription. The inscription mentions the people from the north-western
frontiers in these words:

***The unimpeded flow (prasāra) of the prowess of (whose) arm (was
arrested) by an earth embankment (dhāraṇi-bandha) put up by means of
service through such measures as self-surrender, offering (their own)
daughters in marriage and a request for the administration of their own
districts and provinces through theGaruḍabadge, by theDevaputraŚāhi –
Śāhānuśāhi and the Śaka*** ***lords and by (rulers) occupying all Island
countries, such asSiṁhala and others.***

The text here mentions the *devaputra* who are generally identified with
the remnants of the Kushan power in India. The candidate for this can be
the the Kushana king Vasudeva II or the last known Kushana king
Kipunada. The Śaka princes also seem to have accepted his suzerainty and
*Śāhānuśāhi* seem to suggest the Persian monarch Shapur II though this
reading could be disputed. An alternate reading of the passage suggest
to read *Devaputra Śāhi Śāhānuśāhi* as one and referring to the last
Kushanas and another reading that sounds very convincing makes the
*Devaputra Śāhi Śāhānuśāhi* to mean the Kidarite Kushans. We now know
that the Hunnic tribe of Kidarites accepted and adopted the title of
Kushan Shahs like their predecessors in the region – the
Kushano-Sassanian rulers. So, it seems likely that it was the early
ruling Kidarite Hunas that accepted Samudra Gupta as their sovereign.

As mentioned above, the earlier Kidarite rulers like Kirada, Peroz and
Kidar I have on their coins the word *Ga-ḍa-ha-ra*inscribed signifying
Gandhāra. And we know that this area accepted the overlordship of
Samudra Gupta as many coins with *Ga-ḍa-ha-ra* have been found which are
inscribed with the name *Samudra*. K. D. Bajpayee suggests the
similarity of *Gadahara* coins and that of Kidara Kushanas. Here also,
the coins which were earlier considered of Kidara Kushanas are know
known to be of Kidarite Hunas. Therefore, it becomes more likely that at
least early Kidarite Hunas accepted the suzerainty of Samuda Gupta.

**Chandra Gupta II** ***(r. 375-415 CE)***

The extent of the Gupta empire at the end of the reign of Samudra Gupta
in c. 375 was huge. It included within it’s direct rule the entire Ganga
Valley, parts of central India with Mathura as one of its outpost and,
seemingly eastern Punjab as well. But we know that the indirect rule of
Samudra Gupta in the north covered even more area with most of the
Indian north-west. The overlordship on the southern Indian kingdoms had
also been established. The responsibility of converting this indirect
rule in the western frontier into a direct control was taken up by
Chandra Gupta II Vikramāditya. He extended the western boundaries of
direct Gupta rule to include Rājputāna, Mālwā, Saurāśṭra and Gujarāta.
The Śaka or the Scythians were conclusively annihilated. The approximate
date of the western victories is somewhere between 387 or 397 – 409 CE
since the coins of the last known ruler of the Western Kshatraps –
Rudrasimha III²¹ are dated 310 or 319 of the Śaka era (the reading is
unclear) that makes 387 or 397 CE. The Kshatrapa coins that Chandra
Gupta’s re-struck after his victory are dated c. 409 CE.

If we consider the possibility (very strong and convincing one) that
very early Kidarite rulers accepted the suzerainty of Samudra Gupta,
then the lack of any inscriptions on the coins of later Kidarite rulers
that in any way suggest suzerainty of Chandra Gupta II, lends support to
the fact that the Kidarites were no longer considering the Gupta monarch
as their overlord. This was the time when the Kidarite rule south of the
Hindu Kush in Gandhāra in around 388 CE was consolidated. At the expense
of the Persians, as we learnt above, the Kidarite rulers had been
extending their dominions. It’ll be foolish to assume that the
neighbouring empire was struggling to deal with people entrenched in the
Indian north-west and the Gupta monarch had no knowledge about it.

After securing the western frontier and finishing the Śaka rule, it
seems very natural that further in the north, Chandra Gupta would have
wanted to keep this volatile frontier secure. Otherwise, there could be
danger that these rulers would try their luck in mainland India. The
fact that Persia during Chandra Gupta’s time was ruled by rather weak
rulers could not have been a welcome sign for the Gupta monarch. The
Gupta army had been on a victory march in Samudra Gupta’s time. His son
had taken additional task and the army had marched to defeat the Śaka-s.

![***Coin of the Gupta Emperor Chandra Gupta
II.***^(***f***)](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/800px-chandraguptaiionhorse.jpg?w=800)

There was a real possibility of an impending danger in the north west
but it also seems plausible that there was no immediate danger of the
Kidarites in this period who were busy troubling the Persians. But what
if the Kidarite had decided to try their luck against India and the
Gupta emperor had gotten a hint of it. Was the Gupta army ready to do a
preemptive strike. Thus, there are enough logical reasons as to why the
Gupta monarch would have gone much further north. But did he? And if he
did, how far did he actually go? Was the expedition a swift one? What
was the result of the campaign? What was the route taken? We’ll attempt
to understand these questions.

***The Mehrauli Pillar Inscription***

The evidence for Chandra Gupta’s possible campaign in the north comes
from two kinds of sources – the inscriptions and the literary works. The
first main inscription that we’ll talk about is the Mehrauli Pillar
Inscription. Scholars are as of now divided regarding it’s
interpretation. As it has been generally accepted that the king *Candra*
which the inscription mentions was Chandra Gupta Vikramāditya, we can
proceed to know about the relevant lines. These are:

***tirtvā sapta mukhāni yena samare sindhorjitā bālhīkāḥ***^(***23***)

There is a difference of opinion with regard to two words – *sapta
mukhāni* and *bālhīkāḥ*. Some scholars consider *sapta mukhāni* to mean
the seven mouths of the Indus and some take it to mean the seven
tributaries including the Indus. These interpretations result in
suggestion of two alternative routes and therefore, a change in
understanding the identity of the *bālhīkāḥ* with regard to the route
taken.

The opinion of scholars supporting the *Seven Mouths of Indus* theory
suggest that Punjab couldn’t have been the region through which Chandra
Gupta went because the Gupta presence in any tangible way in the Western
Punjab is insufficient. Only one Shorkut inscription uses the Gupta era
and some coins bearing the name *Candra*. And the continuous finding of
independent Kidarite coinage from the region suggest that Chandra Gupta
never annexed the Western Punjab region which continued to be dominated
by the Kidarites. It’s pointed out in support of this theory that
*“…both Ptolemy and the Periplus actually refer to the seven mouths of
Indus in their time, and Ptolemy even names them separately. Therefore,
the Vahlikas, whoever they were-were encountered across the mouths of
the Indus and not in Bactria. It seems more legitimate to suppose that
Chandragupta extended his empire upto Sindh.”²⁴*

The argument is made that if the *Vāhalika* meant people north of the
Hindu Kush then the term would have been applied to the Bactrian Greeks
and the Great Kushans as well. Also the term has not been used even in
the Allahabad Pillar Inscription to signify the rulers/vassals in the
farther north. Dwivedi suggests that the *Vāhalika* mean not the
Kidarite Kushans but the Huns who might have tried to enter India via
Bolan Pass and Seistan, *much the same way as the Śaka did earlier.²⁵*
Therefore, Chandra Gupta would have naturally wanted to extend the Gupta
boundaries by including Sindh after the *Śaka* conquest. As of now,
argument can be made in both for and against the Sindh route theory.

We have already learnt that Alkhan Huns had not yet registered their
presence in India and these Huns that Dwivedi suggest could only be
Kidarites but we know they were confined to region around Taxila and
Western Punjab at best and no substantial Kidarite coinage from Sindh
have been found. Also there is evidence that Sindh was in Sassanian
control, testified by ample Sassanian coinage from Sindh and Seistan.
But scholars agree that the Sassanian extent in Sindh is unclear and
their rule might have been more nominal than real. Lack of any
inscription or Gupta coinage in Sindh proper suggests that if Chandra
Gupta had actually went there, it most probably was only a quick
expedition or more like a raid and if there was some capture, it
couldn’t have reached beyond eastern Sindh. Dwivedi rules out any
conquest of Bactria by citing the fact that at this time Bactria was
under strong hold of the Chionites (Kidarites).²⁶ He supports the theory
that the Gupta monarch might have fought the first onslaught of the
Hephthalites – *Vāhalika* (probably Alchon Huns) across the lower Indus.
But we already learnt that Alchon presence in this area so early seems
unlikely. Hence, if Chandra Gupta went through this route, he most
probably fought the Kidarites. As we can see, due to the inconclusive
evidence, it remains a theory.

Scholars who support the trans-Indus theory and thus the northern
identification of the Vāhalika say that the author of the Mehrauli
inscription gives an impression of wanting to describe the geographical
limits of the empire.²⁷ The *Vaṅga* or Bengal as the eastern limit, the
*Dakśiṇa Jalanidhi* in the south, the region watered by seven mouths of
Indus in the west and the *Vāhalika*. This looks like a clockwise
description and Vāhalika was therefore situated in the north. The
literary evidence is brought forth in support of this theory and that
forms the basis of the suggestion that Chandra Gupta went far north.

Kālidāsa’s *Raghuvaṁśa* forms the most solid basis of this argument.
*Raghuvaṁśa* IV. 67 describes that Raghu’s *“chargers* *had obtained
colour, with saffron flowers clinging to their manes, when they had
rolled on the cultivated saffron fields on the banks of the
Vankshu.”**²⁸* Vankshu has been conclusively identified with the Oxus.
Raghu of this piece is generally considered to be Chandra Gupa II.
*Raghuvaṁśa* even gives us an idea to the possible route taken by the
king. “Kālidāsa informs us that before launching his *Uttardigvijaya*,
Raghu was already present in the Aparant (western India). *There he had
compelled the rulers of that region to accept his overlordship.
After….he had adopted the land route to invade the Parasika. In a well
contested battle he had defeated them. And, after some respite in the
vine country, he changed his course and adopted the northern route
(Kauberi diśā) and descended on the banks of the river Vankshu.”*

The authority of medieval commentators like Kśīrasvāmi (11th century)
and Vallabha (12 century) is also cited which is consistent with
identifying *Vāhalika* as a country situated on the banks of river
Vankshu.²⁹ Kālidāsa also informs us that the Hūṇa ladies followed the
custom of turning their cheeks red to mourn their dead husbands. We know
that there was a custom of Hunnic tribes which had people cutting the
cheeks to mourn the dead relatives. This supports argument in favour
that the *Vāhalika* that is being talked about are the people around
Oxus. It is further opined that the monarch followed *dharmavijaya* and
came back after making them accept the Gupta suzerainty suggesting that
it was more of a raid. The most likely candidate for the Hūṇa king that
Chandra Gupta II humbled is either Kidar I or his some unknown successor
depending on the fact that we consider the campaign to have happened
after 387-397 CE or 409 CE.

***Poona Copperplate Inscription ***

Another evidence that points to the northern expedition is the Poona
Copperplate Inscription of Prabhavatigupta in which she claims that her
father Chandragupta’s fame had *tasted the waters* *of the four seas.*
Kumāra Gupta and also Skanda Gupta maintained these claims in their
inscriptions suggesting that Chandra Gupta was responsible was extending
the frontiers to the north because Samudra Gupta had made no such
claims.

The possibility thus increases that Chandra Gupta had actually gone to
the north and defeated the Hunnic tribes at Oxus which as explained
could have been the Kidarites. However, there is also another
possibility that the people Chandra Gupta defeated could even have been
the Alkhan Huns who as mentioned earlier, had by this time started to
make their presence strong in Bactria. The fact that the tribes
sometimes overlapped in certain periods makes this confusion happen. The
raid was most probably a swift affair and the monarch came back with as
speed as he had went. This might explain why there is no physical
evidence like coins or inscriptions either of the Guptas or the Hunnic
Kidarite-Alchon tribes that suggest any lasting Gupta outpost in
Transoxiana-Bactria region.

**Kumāra Gupta *(r. 415-455 CE)***

As mentioned above, Kumāra Gupta in his inscriptions maintains that the
empire was touching *the four seas.* But how far was this claim true?
The Kidarites had by this time in their control the area south of the
Hindu Kush and they had made strong inroads into the western Punjab as
they were pushed from the Hindu Kush region in around 430-450 CE by the
Alkhans. It is certain that the empire particularly towards the end
Kumāra Gupta’s rule was in trouble. The Pushyamitras (their existence is
certain but identity is unclear as of now) that are mentioned in
inscriptions were troubling the stability of the empire and some
scholars suggest that they might have been emboldened to raise revolt on
account of the weakening of the empire under constant Hunnic
aggressions. As in this period, the Kidarites and their conflicts with
Persians are certain, they might have been slowly gaining grounds in the
Indian north-west with their main energies concentrated with the
Sassanians and their might have been various skirmishes with the Lord of
the Warden of the Marches of the Gupta-s. But a more immediate and grave
danger appeared when the Hunnic tribes decided to to finally put all
their might towards India proper. Skanda Gupta was to save the day.

**Skanda Gupta** ***(r. 455-467 CE)***

The most obvious evidence for the mighty Gupta response to the Hūṇa-s
comes from the Bhitari Pillar Inscription. Its lines that concerns us
are : ***By whose two arms the earth was shaken, when he, the creator
(of a disturbance like that) of a terrible whirlpool, joined in close
conflict with the Hunas;.. among enemies…arrows…proclaimed…just as if it
were the roaring of (the river) Ganga, making itself noticed in (their)
ears.***

![***Bhitari Pillar Inscription of Skanda
Gupta.^(g)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/288px-bhitari_pillar_inscription_of_skandagupta-1.jpg?w=288)

Other convincing information comes from the text *Chandragarbha
paripṛichchhā* that states how Skandagupta defeated the Hūṇa-s.³⁰ It
states how the kingdom of Mahendra \[Kumar Gupta\] was under attack from
Yavana, Palhika, Sakunas – *who first fought among themselves.* They
took possession of Gandhāra and countries to the north of the Ganges. It
tells us how the young son of Mahendra, of weighty hands faced the
adversaries. The enemy numbered three hundred thousand and they were
under various foreign kings, the chief of whom was a Yavana. The
strength of the Gupta army according to this text was less than that of
the enemy numbering around two lakhs but Skanda Gupta with his
leadership and prowess emerged victorious. He came back and was awarded
the crown of the empire. But the troubles seems to have been only
subsided and not finished for the text tells us that Skanda Gupta fought
these enemies for another twelve years when he finally captured and
killed the three enemy kings.

Now the place of the battle is a contested opinion in Indian
historiography. Altekar supported the theory that the battle was fought
on the banks of the Yamuna. Upendra Thakur suggested the place to be
somewhere on the banks of the Sutlej or plains in the western India.
Atreyi Biswas holds the opinion that the north-west of the Indian
frontier was the location. Some scholars suggest that the battle raged
in the Ganga plains as well.³¹ Jagannath Agrawal has tried to explain
that *Surāṣṭra could have been the first province of Skandagupta’s
Empire to be exposed to the Hūṇa aggression* and that is the reason why
Skandagupta was so anxious to the administrative arrangements in
*Surāṣṭra*. And that these Hūṇa could have posed a threat to this region
only if they had been pouring through the Bolan Pass.³²

The *Chandragarbha paripṛichchhā* mentions combined attack of three –
*Yavan* (Hyōn/*Hūṇa)*, *Palhika* (Palhavik or Sassanians) and *Sakun*
(Śaka i.e. Kuśāṇa). As we earlier understood, this is the period when
Yazdigird II (r. 438-457 CE) was in a state of constant fight with the
Kidarite Kushans/Huns particularly after 450 CE. We also learnt earlier
that Yazdigird was convincingly defeated in 453-54 CE by the Kidarites.
This confirms the statement from the text that these kings had fought
among themselves. The Persian scene particularly of this period was
closely monitored by myriad of commentators and historians. Had a
Sassanian monarch taken part in a battle against an Indian monarch, it
is highly unlikely that it would have gone unnoticed. It is a
possibility that the combined attack could have some Persians in the
army due to hold of the Kidarite-Alkhans on eastern Iranian territories.
We also know that there was a period of peaceful co-existence, a
confederacy of the Kidarites and the Alkhans. The Alchons had only
started to gain stronghold on the Hindu Kush around 430-50 CE when they
removed Kidarites from the Hindu Kush but Kidarite still maintained
strong presence in Gandhara and western Punjab at this time and even
after their defeat by Skanda Gupta. Skanda Gupta mainly fought Kidarites
with some Alchons present due to temporary truce between these Hunnic
tribes. Alchons become important for Indians only after the complete
Kidarite defeat in around 460-470 by Persian monarch and Alchons
combined.

Two thoughts emerge from this scenario. Was there a proper invasion of
the mainland India by this Hunnic confederacy or was it a proper attack
by Skanda Gupta on the Hunnic people for they have been troubling the
empire and slowly gaining territories for long. The death of the famous
Attila the Hun in 453 CE, the commencement of the hostilities between
Persia and Kidarites and the battle of Skanda Gupta in which he defeats
the Hunnic powers seems too much to be a coincidence to happen in such
close periods. A theory is suggested by Hans T. Bakker in his *The
Alkhan: A Hunnic People in South Asia* that the attacks by the Persian
monarch and the Indian prince could have been planned – *“Did Yazdigird
and Skandagupta got wind of Attila’s failure and death and did they
coordinated their attacks on the Kidara* *on both the sides of the Hindu
Kush in 453-455.”* Lack of any other evidence makes this theory only a
theory albeit certainly a tempting one.

There is another possibility however. Defeating Yazdigird in battle in
453-54 CE would have been not only financial boost to the Kidarites
(possibly from the war captives and also the booty) but also a major
morale boost. This might have led them free from their western borders
and made them concentrate on their eastern borderland which they now
decided to extend. This could also suggest why their army was told to be
of larger number than the Indian one in *Chandragarbha paripṛichchhā*,
as it included the combined power of the confederacy of Alchon-Kidarites
along with the Persian captives. The practise of using war captives and
making them take part in campaigns by the victors was a long established
tradition in these areas. A battle royale then raged where Skanda Gupta
humbled them and then the Bhitari Pillar was inscribed around c. 455 CE
to commemorate the victory. The king that Skanda possibly fought might
also have included the Alchon Khiṅgila or possibly Mehama though under
the leadership of a Kidarite king. The possibilities are many. Other
than the obvious defeat of the Kidarites by the Persian monarch Peroz in
467 CE, the weakening of the Kidarite power by Skanda Gupta could also
be one of the reasons why Alchons eventually emerged victorious over the
Kidarites in a few decades.

![***Skanda Gupta’s coin with his portrait on obverse and Goddess
Lakshmi on
reverse.^(h)***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/300px-skandagupta_circa_455-480_ce.jpg?w=299)

Skanda Gupta though definitely defeated the confederacy and an immediate
danger of them reaching mainland India subsided, the problems seem not
to have ended for we have evidence of not only literary works like
*Chandragarbha paripṛichchhā* but also numismatic evidence that these
Hunnic groups continued their presence in the Gandhara and Western
Punjab. But it is certain that the enemies were kept at bay by the Gupta
monarch and it is to his credit that no other invasion seem to have
troubled the empire in his time.

**Evidence of *Pādatāḍitaka***

There is another literary source called *Pādatāḍitaka* that gives us
information regarding Guptas and the Hūṇa-s. A collection of four bhāṇa
plays called *Caturbhāṇī* was published in 1922 from South Indian
manuscripts. And *Pādatāḍitaka* of Śyāmilaka was one of them. *“This
type of play has only one actor who appears as a rake (viṭa)..he is
usually the only character on the stage..”.**³³* This particular play
drew obvious attention as it’s portrayal hints at many contemporary
people, places and political movements.

An interesting character is mentioned in the play named *Mahāpratihāra*
Bhadrāyudha. He is introduced as the Lord of Bāhalīka, and Kārūśa-Malada
in the north. He seems to imitate the speech of Lāṭa for he pronounces
*j* for *y* and *ś* for *s*. This habit of his is told to be due to long
residence in foreign countries. The author of the play doesn’t approve
of such habits but he makes an exception for Bhadrāyudha for his
military exploits and fame. Scholarly work of earlier time (Burrow,
1946) suggested the date of the work to be somewhere in c. 410 CE but
now it is now considered (due to scholarly work of Dasharath Sharma)
that the work has many hints which make the *terminus ante quem* 455-510
CE and thus the Māgadhan monarch who is the overlord of the
Mahāpratihāra is not Chandra Gupta (as was earlier considered) but
Skanda Gupta. Amongst many indications, one is that some lines in the
play bear a strong resemblance to Skanda Gupta’s Bhitari Pillar
Inscription.³⁴ Another corroboration is from the *Kathāsaritasāgara*
CXX, 53 ff., *“where Bhadrāyudha occurs as a pratihāra of king
Vikramāditya of Ujjain, who is son of Mahendrāditya.”* We know for sure
that Mahendra was *biruda* of Emperor Kumāra Gupta. The reference to
Skanda Gupta here is evident.

It is certainly an interesting evidence that points to the fact that
Skanda Gupta seems to have given special responsibility of securing the
frontiers of the empire in the north west. The Junagarh Rock Inscription
of Skanda Gupta corroborates this. The Hūṇa-s had been defeated but the
boundaries required constant vigilance. Persian monarch Peroz (r.
459-84) was to finish off the Kidarite power from the north west in
around c. 466 and the constant wars during this period between Persia
and Hunnic people might have kept the frontier volatile. Therefore, a
character that might be a historic person with the responsibility of
Mahāpratihāra seems very logical. The play definitely has many
historical undertones. What we know of Transoxiana at this period is
that the Kidarite power was ebbing and Peroz was able to capture Balkh.
Until some new and more conclusive evidence emerges, the probability of
Balkh as being the post of Bhadrāyudha then slims but it is very likely
that he was handling the security of the frontier in the Indian
north-west, possibly bordering the areas of Punjab.

**Conclusion**

The Indian north west thus, had been a hotbed for further invasions into
mainland India for a long time and mostly the question regarding their
invasions was not of if rather when. The dance of power between two
giants like Persia and India at one hand, and nestled between them the
ever menacing tribes, descending from the Central Asia has resulted in
changing fortunes of these two ancient civilizations. The Gupta response
to the Hunnic troubles, the possible expedition of Chandra Gupta in
region around Oxus, the indomitable and valorous deeds of Skanda Gupta
are one of the most glorious chapters of Indian history. But as can be
seen, there still are a lot of unanswered questions and many loose ends
that a history enthusiast can only hope to see resolved.

***References***

1.  Khodadad Rezakhani, [“From the Kushanas to the Western
    Turks”](https://www.academia.edu/32671225/From_the_Kushans_to_the_Western_Turks).
    *King of the Seven Climes.* p. 203
2.  *ibid*. p. 204
3.  Richard N. Frye, *[The History of Ancient
    Iran.](https://archive.org/details/ost-history-frye1983thehistoryofancientiran/)* p.
    311
4.  *ibid*.
5.  Hans T. Bakker, *[The Alkhan: A Hunnic People in South
    Asia.](https://books.google.co.in/books?id=ZLnVDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA14&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false)*
    p. 10
6.  *ibid*. p. 11
7.  *ibid.*
8.  *ibid.*
9.  Huart Clement, [*Ancient Persia and Iranian
    Civilization.*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.73398/page/n155/mode/2up)
    pp. 128-129
10. *ibid.*
11. Rezakhani, *King of the Seven Climes.* p. 206
12. Bakker, *The Alkhan….* p. 12
13. Rezakhani, *King of the Seven Climes.* p. 206
14. *ibid*.
15. *ibid*.
16. *ibid*. p. 207
17. Bakker, *The Alkhan….* p. 4
18. *ibid*. p.13
19. *ibid*.
20. *ibid*.
21. H. C.
    Raychaudhuri[,](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)
    *[Political History of Ancient India from the Accession of Parikshit
    to the Extinction of Gupta
    Dynasty.](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/page/n3/mode/2up)*
    p. 269
22. Dwivedi, Gautam N. “THE WESTERN LIMITS OF THE GUPTA
    EMPIRE.”*Proceedings of the Indian History Congress*34 (1973):
    76-79. Accessed May 23, 2021.
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44138595.>
23. Buddha Prakash, [*Evolution of Heroic Tradition in Ancient
    Punjab*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.107821).
    p.129
24. Dwivedi, Gautam N. “THE WESTERN LIMITS OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE.” p.77
25. *ibid*.
26. *ibid*. p.78
27. Vajpeyi, Raghavendra. “THE VAHLIKAS OF THE MEHARAULI IRON PILLAR
    INSCRIPTION.”*Proceedings of the Indian History Congress*38
    (1977): 783-90. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44139148.>
28. *ibid.*
29. *ibid.* p. 784
30. K. P. Jayaswal, *[An Imperial History of
    India.](https://archive.org/details/imperialhistoryo035289mbp/page/n5/mode/2up)* p.
    64
31. Tripathi, R. P. “BHITARI PILLAR INSCRIPTION OF SKANDAGUPTA—A NOTE ON
    GANGA-DHVANIH.”*Proceedings of the Indian History Congress*39
    (1978): 1010-014. <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44139451.>
32. Agrawal, J., & Agrawala, J. (1958). THE ROUTE OF THE FIRST HŪNA
    INVASION.*Proceedings of the Indian History Congress,**21*,
    160-161. Retrieved May 24, 2021, from
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44145184>
33. Burrow, T. “The Date of Śyāmilaka’s “Pādatāḍitaka”.”*The Journal of
    the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland*, no. 1
    (1946): 46-53. Accessed May 25, 2021.
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/25222064>.
34. Godard Hendrik Schokker, [The Pādatāḍitaka of
    Śyāmilaka.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.274312) p.
    22

***Photo Credits**:***

-   a, b, c, d, f, g, h: WikiMedia Commons.
-   e: Hans T. Bakker, *The Alkhan: A Hunnic People in South Asia.* p.
    21

