+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2020-08-28"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/08/28/graha-varana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/08/28/graha-varana/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## graha vAraNa

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/dushta-graha-nashana.jpg?w=566)

-iti sundarI khaNDe.

The name of the first devata might be a transmission error. Error
repeats at-least thrice in the printed version. The devata is popular.

brahma, viShNu, rudraH – refers to their respective graha-s mentioned
earlier in the text.

nava – Seems inversed but is supposed to mean dAva

bandha-dvaya – This is to mean the bahirbandha & antarbandha mentioned
in the text earlier?

The text mentions shiva pa\~nchAkShari also as being potent in graha
vAraNa. What is missed by most is the basic mantra-s taught i.e. the
shiva pa\~nchAkShari and the nArAyaNa aShTAkShari are quite capable of
handling most graha-s.

The above graha-s are both kShudra graha-s and mahA-graha-s.

Having gained a perspective on how a shAkta or shaiva handles the
graha-s in theory, as a next step, we will compare the vaiShNava
mantravAda and see how a pA\~ncharAtrika handles the above mentioned
graha-s.

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/09/image.jpeg?w=1024)

vaiShNava/pA\~ncharAtrika mantravAda:

These three gems which are the mUla mantra-s of pA\~ncharAtra can be
deployed either for vashya of other deva-s or for terrifying them (to
extract favors).

Both processes of placating other deva-s or forcing them to grant a vara
by deploying the main vaiShNava mantra-s are outlined elsewhere. One
such procedure bears a resemblance to how a smArta or an eclectic
mantrin might employ forceful means to acquire a siddhi as outlined in
works like the mantrAnuShThAna chandrika or meru tantra (?Need
verification)\*

This can be compared/contrasted with the netra tantra where deities of
other streams of Agama are invoked with their respective dhyAna-s but no
specific mantra is specified for these other deities.

nR^isiMha mantra-s may be used against asura-s and the
chatushshatAkShari for the viniyoga specified within. sudarshana is
either deployed as mahAsudarshana or ShaDakShari. mahAsudarshana may be
used to enslave rAkShasa-s. The japa of mahAsudarshana maybe done either
near a shmashAna or near cross roads facing South to enslave the
rAkShasa-s and do the mantrin’s bidding.

With the ShaDakShari, one may enslave yakSha-s and ask them about the
past and present that might be hidden, as also the future of things,
apart from achieving other objectives.

The great aparAjitA manifests as either durgA or vaiShNavI

For vashIkaraNa of gandharva-s the vaiShNavI vidyA may be deployed and
for nigraha or vashya of a vidyAdhara, durgA might be invoked. For
kinnara vashikaraNa varAha might be invoked. For pakShi-s, sarpa-s,
garuDa might be invoked. sarpa-s are of two types: sarpAH and nAgAH.
nAgA-s are kAmarupi-s i.e. they might roam about in various forms that
they like. sarpa-s are sarIsR^ipa-s. Apart from garuDa a pA\~ncharAtrin
might choose to deploy the mantra of nIlakaNTha mahAdeva.

Moving further, we come across the topic of bhUta nigraha where one
finds three kinds of mantra-s deployed. mantra-s calling upon viShNu or
vaiShNava mUrti-s only, with their pada-s and bhakti-s, and vaiShNava
mantra-s either mixed with shaiva mantra-s (or elements of shaiva
mantra-s) or constructed in the format found in shaiva bhUta tantra-s.

At this point it is like arriving at the cross roads of mantra shAstra
where one sees a confluence of shaiva and vaiShNava mantras. This is an
area where pA\~ncharAtra seems to borrow mantra-s or mantra formats from
the shaiva bhUta tantra-s. The later day pratiShTha manuals refer to the
bhUta and gAruDa tantra-s as separate subjects requiring an expertise
and are listed along with the veda, vedA\~Nga, purANa etc.

The vaiShNava mantra-s invoked for bhUta nigraha call upon nR^isiMha,
viShNu, khaDgarAvaNa, chaNDAsidhara, vajra-narasiMha or at time
nR^isiMha and durgA. As for the the shaiva bhUta tantra-s , khaDga
rAvaNa, seems to be prominent along with hayagrIva & chaNDAsidhara. It
is to be noted that pA\~ncharAtra works invoking hayagrIva to handle the
subject are unknown(or at-least not popular). This is to be made note of
along with the reduced significance of hayagrIva in later day
pA\~ncharAtrika works. The later vaiShNava GYAnArNava not dedicating
even a single chapter for hayagrIva in the 100+ chapters is a case in
point.

Sept 13th 2020:

We have a certain nR^isiMha kalpa where there is the system of deploying
nR^isiMha flanked on either side by viShNu-durgA and nArasiMhI for the
purpose of graha vAraNa is mentioned. It is possible that this might be
an extension/development of the pA\~ncharAtrika mantra-s which invoke
durgA & nR^isiMha in the same mantra. This work describes some yantra-s
where the triShTup is deployed along with nR^isiMha towards various ends
including our topic. We also come across procedures where a bunch of
hanumAn and nR^isiMha mantra-s are deployed for handling various
graha-s. One such A\~njaneya mantra ends with “…bhUta samaye tiShTha…”
which is a characteristic of the mantra-s from the shaiva bhUta tantra-s
also adopted by the pA\~ncharAtra. This is interesting to note given
that we do not have any dedicated shaiva bhUta tantra-s (from the
standard list:
<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2005/03/26/the-primary-tantras-of-rudra/>
) where hanumAn is of primary or secondary importance. As we do not have
the shaiva bhUta tantra-s available in their entirety, we cannot say
much at the moment. This work also gives the mantra of a certain
baDabAnala who is clearly described as ashvamukha though not called
explicitly as hayagrIva. A bhasma snAna procedure is further described
by this work which suggests deployment of a bunch of garuDa mantra-s in
conjunction with those of nR^isiMha, by which the bhasma snAna (…to the
victim. Part of an elaborate procedure to exorcise bhUta-s from victims)
is to be performed. By now, we have nR^isIMha, hayagrIva, A\~njaneya,
garuDa and varAha (for kinnara graha-s mentioned above) being deployed
at independently or combination of any two or three of the five. There
are idols of five headed hayagrIva with nR^isiMha, garuDa, varAha and
A\~njaneya mukha-s said to be from the shaiva bhUta tantra-s which look
similar to pa\~nchamukha A\~njaneya.

While we stop here due to many missing links, it is interesting to note
that pa\~ncha mukha A\~njaneya is considered by some as most effective
in treating multiple kind of disorders caused to various graha-s/bhUta-s
including those generated/impelled by abhichAra.

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2020/08/hanuman.jpg?w=236)

\**Opinion/Speculation: The later part about terrifying might have to be
executed carefully with proper guidance only for contexts outlined in
the texts. Indulging in matonmAda and trying to perform this
indiscriminately, while croaking aNya devata-s are lower in an insulting
manner, might result in either a devata shApa (because of specific acts
involved in the process) or slipping into a pit of Apada-s.* See:
<https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2007/01/14/shri-ramanuja-deshika-one-of-the-last-great-kaumara-tantrics/>

To be contd…

This entry was posted on August 28, 2020 at 12:52 pm and is filed under
[bhUta
tantra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/bhuta-tantra/),
[gAruDa
tantra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/garuda-tantra/),
[hanumAn](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/hanuman/),
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[pA\~ncharAtra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/vaishnava/pancharatra/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/08/28/graha-varana/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2020/08/28/graha-varana/trackback/)
from your own site.

