+++
title = "An interview with"
full_title = "An interview with Shalini Sinha first in an occasional series"
date = "2016-07-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/30/an-interview-with-shalini-sinha-first-in-an-occasional-series/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/30/an-interview-with-shalini-sinha-first-in-an-occasional-series/).

An interview with Shalini Sinha: first in an occasional series

Inspired by the various interviews with philosophers here and on the
Internet at large, I’mstarting a series here at the Indian philosophy
blog. The goal is to introduce readers to a wide range of scholars
working on Indian philosophy. Due to time constraints, the series will
feature a set list of questions rather than being individually tailored.
I hope this will generate an interesting comparison between
interviewees.

If you have suggestions for philosopherswho should be featured here or
wish to participate, please send me an email at malcolm.keating \[at\]
yale-nus.edu.sg. Several of our own bloggers will be represented in
upcoming interviews already–but I would like to expand the
representation.

Kicking things off, we have [Shalini
Sinha](http://www.reading.ac.uk/philosophy/about/shalini-sinha.aspx),
who is Lecturer in Non-Western Philosophy at University of Reading. She
earned her Ph.D. at the University of Sussex, and you can read her most
recent work in Jonardon Ganeri’s edited volume,The Oxford Handbook of
Indian Philosophy, where her essay, “[The metaphysics of self in
Praśastapāda’s differential
naturalism](http://philpapers.org/rec/SINTMO-13)“, appears.

**1. What are you working on right now, and what do you hope to achieve
by it?**  
I’m working on a book on classical Vaiśeṣika metaphysics of the self. I
hope to draw out the conceptions of self and agency, reason and
causation, order and moral law in classical Vaiśeṣika and demonstrate
how this articulates some of the key concerns of ancient Indian
philosophy. I hope this work will open up alternative approaches to how
we look at the relationship between selves, values and the ‘natural
world’.

**2. How did you come to study Indian philosophy, and how is it related
to your current position?**  
I originally trained as an economist but came to Indian philosophy via a
life-long interest and passion for formulating alternative paradigms for
approaching social, economic issues as well as fundamental questions of
human freedom and existence. I am currently a Lecturer in non-Western
philosophy at the University of Reading where I have developed courses
in Indian Philosophy. Currently, I am developing two courses in ‘World
Philosophies’, including the application of cross-cultural approaches to
issues of global concern (see Question 6).

**3. What advice would you give to students wishing to pursue the study
of Indian philosophy?**  
If possible, combine studies in Indian Philosophy with studies in, or
approaches to, practical issues – feminism, racism, governance, etc.
Increasing demand for this sort of applied philosophy is evident, for
example, in the criteria set out in the [Oxford Berggruen fellowships in
Indian
Philosophy](https://www.wolfson.ox.ac.uk/content/berggruen-research-fellows-approaches-indian-philosophy).

**4. What have your major intellectual influences been, philosophical or
otherwise?**  
Early influences were Marx and Hegel, later influences include Buddhist
philosophers from the Buddha, Nāgārjuna, to the Yogācārins, Zen, etc.,
the Upaniṣads and some 20th c. Advaita Vedānta philosophers.

**5. What do you think you’ll do next?**  
After setting up the courses in cross-cultural/world philosophy, and
finishing the book on Vaiśeṣika, I may try to get a research grant or
write a book on applications of Indian philosophy, Buddhist and
non-Buddhist, but possibly also other cross-cultural philosophical
approaches to particular economic and social questions.

**6. Where do you think the field should go next, in terms of priorities
and projects?**  
My interests, and I feel the current trend, is towards ‘applied or
engaged philosophy’, that is, cross-cultural and cosmopolitan
philosophical investigation of contemporary global issues: race and
gender; money, debt, and markets; war and terrorism; governance; and
more personal considerations such as how to live a good life, and how to
die.

**7. Finally, a question (originally asked on the [3AM Interview
Series](http://www.3ammagazine.com/3am/index/interviews/)): What books
do you recommend to help our readers be taken further into your
philosophical world?**  
This is a more difficult question. Philosophically, I find [Jonardon
Ganeri](https://www.google.com/#tbm=bks&q=Jonardon+Ganeri) and [Amber
Carpenter](https://books.google.com.sg/books?id=KlxsBAAAQBAJ&lpg=PP1&dq=amber%20carpenter&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=false)’s
work illuminating. However, there is an abundance of interesting work in
‘World Philosophies’ in the African and Native American traditions,
Chinese and Japanese, etc. which I have found very insightful.
