+++
title = "Job Announcement Mattoo"
full_title = "Job Announcement Mattoo Chair in Classical Indic Humanities"
date = "2016-07-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/13/job-announcement-mattoo-chair-in-classical-indic-humanities/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/13/job-announcement-mattoo-chair-in-classical-indic-humanities/).

Job Announcement: Mattoo Chair in Classical Indic Humanities

Iâ€™d like to call your attention to a new job opening for an endowed
position at Stony Brook University, the Mattoo Chair in Classical Indic
Humanities. Click on the link below for details, and please feel free to
to notify others who might be interested. Inquiries about the position
can be sent via e-mail to me or to the search committee chair, S.N.
Sridhar.

<https://academicjobsonline.org/ajo/jobs/7396>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The College of Arts and Sciences at Stony Brook University invites
applications and nominations for the Nirmal K. and Augustina Mattoo
Endowed Chair in Classical Indic Humanities. The goal of the Mattoo
Chair is to advance research in and promote a better appreciation of the
contributions to human knowledge made by systems of knowledge having
their origin or major development in Classical India. For the inaugural
appointment to the Chair, we are looking for an outstanding scholar in
the fields of art, aesthetics, literature, philosophy, theories of mind,
religion, cultural anthropology, or cultural and intellectual history.
The successful candidate must be eligible for appointment with tenure as
a full professor at Stony Brook University.

Required Qualifications: PhD in Art, Asian/Asian-American Studies,
History, Philosophy, Sociology or related field. Outstanding scholarship
in art, aesthetics, literature, philosophy, theories of mind, religion,
cultural anthropology, or cultural and intellectual history. Must be
tenurable in one of the following departments: Art, Asian/Asian-American
Studies, History, Philosophy, or Sociology. Exemplary record of
leadership and high standing in the international research community.

Preferred Qualifications: Experience in teaching and in community
outreach.

The holder of the chair will provide intellectual leadership to the
field; collaborate with campus academic units to design and implement
initiatives that will mainstream India Studies; pursue a research
program resulting in prestigious publications; teach graduate and
undergraduate courses and guide research scholars; organize conferences
and lecture series; conduct outreach programs; and contribute to the
mission of the Mattoo Center and its robust engagement with the public
and the Indian American community.

The endowed professor will hold the academic rank of tenured professor
in an appropriate department. Salary will be commensurate with
qualifications and experience. Additionally, the successful candidate
will have access to research, publication and program funding from the
Mattoo Endowment.

Stony Brook University is home to the Bishembarnath and Sheela Mattoo
Center for India Studies, a respected academic resource and community
asset with an endowment of $5 million.

The Employment Application form can be found here:
<https://www.asa.stonybrook.edu/asa/ASAForms/Department/HRS/Document/HRSF0113>.

We will begin reviewing files on October 1, 2016. Inquiries or to
nominate an individual may be directed to the chair of the search
committee, Professor S.N. Sridhar, at s.sridhar@stonybrook.edu.
Telephone: (631) 632-9742.
