+++
title = "Call for proposals THE"
full_title = "Call for proposals THE 11TH EASTWEST PHILOSOPHERS’ CONFERENCE MAY 2016"
date = "2015-09-14"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/14/call-for-proposals-the-11th-east-west-philosophers-conference-wednesday-may-25-tuesday-may-31/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/14/call-for-proposals-the-11th-east-west-philosophers-conference-wednesday-may-25-tuesday-may-31/).

Call for proposals: THE 11TH EAST-WEST PHILOSOPHERS’ CONFERENCE MAY 2016

**Call for Proposals**

**“Place”**

**The 11^(th) East-West Philosophers’ Conference**

**Wednesday May 25-Tuesday May 31 2016**

Humanity takes up space. In this, humanity is no different from other
species. Humanity also purposefully transforms space, but is not unique
in doing so. Other species also reshape the spaces they occupy to serve
their purposes: birds create nests, bees create hives and beavers create
dams. What seems to be uniquely human is the disposition to
qualitatively transform spaces into places that are charged with
distinctive kinds of significance.

Contemporary philosophical uses of the word “place” cover considerable
conceptual ground, centered on a distinction between ‘space’ and ‘place’
that was formalized by geographer-philosopher Yi-fu Tuan, who suggested
that “place incorporates the experiences and aspirations of a people”
over the course of their moral and aesthetic engagement with sites and
locations. Building on this distinction, we might say that spaces are
openings for different kinds of presence—physical, emotional, cognitive,
dramatic, spiritual, and so on. Places emerge through fusions of
different ways of being present over time—a meaning-infusing layering of
relationships and experiences that imbue a locale with its distinctively
collaborative significance. Place implies sustainably appreciated and
enhanced relational quality.

For many indigenous peoples, the relation to “place” has traditionally
been so intimate that to be forced off the land is to be forced out of
themselves, cut off from part of what makes them who they are. But
contemporary urban residents develop similar senses of the dynamic and
recursive relationship between who they are and where they are, and
among even those who are most globally mobile, recognition persists of
the significance of a ‘house’ being transformed into a ‘home.’ Humanity
is a place-making species.

Yet the place-making propensities of humanity seem from the outset to
have been inseparable from questions about our place in the world—the
place of ‘humanity,’ of ‘my people,’ and of ‘me’ personally. One result
of these questions has been the crafting of complexly imagined
cosmologies and narratives of “promised lands” and “paradises” beyond
the horizon of present experience. Another result, however, have been
concerns growing out of the recognition that our places in the world are
not equal and that being present together in some common social,
economic, or political space does not necessarily endow us with
equivalent opportunities for participation and contribution. At times,
these concerns about equity and justice have led to the crafting of
“non-places”—utopias—as means to establishing trajectories of hope that
might lift us out of opportunity- and dignity-denying places.

For the 11^(th) East-West Philosophers’ Conference, we are inviting
panel and paper proposals related to the theme of “Place.”Of special
interest are panels and papers that explore how places emerge through
the sustained, shared practices of mutually-responsive and
mutually-vulnerable actors. Subthemes might include: the place of the
personal, including issues of identity-construction and privacy; place
and culture, including considerations of how cultures shape and are
shaped by relationships with natural and built environments; places of
pilgrimage, including places charged with political or cultural, as well
as, religious significance; places of memory; places of mediation,
including social and mass media; place and the political, including
places of justice and places of both conflict and peace; trading places,
including the places of entrepreneurship and concerns about the place of
equity in economics; and the place of philosophy, addressing issues
about the real and ideal roles of philosophy in contemporary society.

**About the East-West Philosopher’s Conference:**

For more than three-quarters of a century, the East-West Philosophers’
Conference series has hosted a dialogue among some of the world’s most
prominent philosophers of their time. The dialogue began in 1939 when
three University of Hawai‘i visionaries—Professors Charles A. Moore,
Wing-tsit Chan, and Gregg Sinclair—initiated the first East-West
Philosophers’ Conference in Honolulu. Its aim was to explore the
significance of Eastern ways of thinking as a complement to Western
thought, and to distill a possible synthesis of the ideas and ideals
that are aspired to in these unique traditions. Comparative philosophy
has evolved from this earliest idea to pursue a mutual respect and
accommodation among the world’s cultures, with conferences continuing to
be held in 1949, 1959, 1964, 1969, 1989, 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2011.
Each of these conferences focused on a theme chosen as a vital issue of
its time.

This conference series has been successful in fostering dialogue among
philosophical traditions, and was instrumental in the establishment of
the East-West Center on the campus of the University of Hawai‘i in 1960.
*Philosophy East & West*, now one of the leading journals on comparative
studies, was founded in 1951 as a forum that continues this same
dialogue. Conference volumes from papers presented at these conferences
have been published by the University of Hawai’i Press to share with and
promote further discussion on its theme within the world academic
community.

**Sponsoring Institutions:**

The **EAST-WEST CENTER**promotes better relations and understanding
among the people and nations of the United States, Asia, and the Pacific
through cooperative study, research, and dialogue. Established by the
U.S. Congress in 1960, the Center serves as a resource for information
and analysis on critical issues of common concern, bringing people
together to exchange views, build expertise, and develop policy options.

The **UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI’I** is a Research I institution founded in
1907 that has identified Asia and the Pacific as one of its selected
area of excellence, with many of the centers in its School of Pacific
and Asian Studies ranked as National Resource Centers. The University of
Hawai’i Press is one of the leading international publishers of
scholarly monographs and journals on Asian cultures.

A short abstract can be sent to the organizing committee by email
attachment to

<ewpc2016@gmail.com>. The deadline for abstracts is November 1, 2015. We
anticipate that this forthcoming conference like the previous ten will
be an historical event. We look forward to welcoming you to the Islands.

Roger T. Ames and Peter D. Hershock, Co-Directors






