+++
title = "Reading the"
full_title = "Reading the deconstruction of the body"
date = "2015-09-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/13/reading-the-deconstruction-of-the-body/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/13/reading-the-deconstruction-of-the-body/).

Reading the deconstruction of the body

\[Cross-posted at Love of All Wisdom.\]

I was honoured to see [Elisa Freschi’s
post](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/28/amod-lele-on-santideva-and-the-impact-of-metaphysics-on-ethics/)
reviewing my recent [article on Śāntideva’s metaphysics and
ethics](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/).
I have a lot to say about both the post itself and the [comment threads
that followed
it](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/07/28/amod-lele-on-santideva-and-the-impact-of-metaphysics-on-ethics/#comment-132813).
I’ve said some of it in those threads already, but I’d like to pull them
together and express a way they relate to more general ideas.

There were two hermeneutical moves that I think were made by others in
this discussion, which I tend to be suspicious of whenever I find them.
Both moves were both made with respect to one of the more challenging
sections of Śāntideva’s major work, the Bodhicaryāvatāra (BCA): not
necessarily challenging to understand, but challenging us to live and
see the world very differently than we do. That section is the
discussion of the foulness of the body in [BCA chapter
VIII](http://dhammadhatu.com/the-bodhicaryavatara-chapter-8/), verses
29-84.

Śāntideva’s argument in this section is one of the four
metaphysical-ethical arguments I discuss in the
[article](http://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2015/07/16/the-metaphysical-basis-of-santidevas-ethics/).
He argues that the human body is nothing more than its component parts,
each of which would disgust us individually, and that we should
therefore feel the same disgust for the body in general, rather than
lusting for it. Of the four arguments in the article it is the one I
discuss at the shortest length, partially because it appears in so many
texts other than Śāntideva’s, but also because it is the one we are
least likely to want to apply to our own lives. It repulses us in a
post-’60s environment that celebrates not only gender equality but
sexual pleasure; it turns many people off the text entirely. (When I
first encountered this section in a lecture of Robert Gimello’s, the
student beside me wrote in his notes “What a misanthropic text”; a
well-known scholar of Indian and Tibetan Buddhism recently expressed to
me his own distaste for the entire Bodhicaryāvatāra because of that
section.)

That doesn’t mean Śāntideva *himself* wouldn’t want us to apply it,
though. And that brings me to the two hermeneutical moves, which I see
being made in this case but which concern me more generally. I think
both of these are ways of saying this section *doesn’t* really apply to
us – and thereby getting Śāntideva off the hook, in some sense.

One of these moves is to say that a text was written with a specific
audience in mind and that that audience does not include us. With
respect to the Bodhicaryāvatāra, the move is to say that the text was
written for monks, and so at least parts of it don’t apply to those of
us who are not monks. Elisa says she drew this interpretation of the
text from her teacher [Corrado
Pensa](http://www.dharmaseed.org/teacher/46/), but [Janet
Gyatso](http://hds.harvard.edu/people/janet-gyatso) had also once said a
similar thing to me about the BCA more generally: you can’t take the
text as speaking directly to you because “he’s a monk and you’re not”.

My problem with such interpretations, at least with respect to the BCA,
is that they can draw a sharp divide between householders and monks, as
if it were not possible for one to become the other. I don’t see
Śāntideva as expressing such a discontinuity. This text, like many
others before it, is full of praise for the monastic life, expressing an
argument that the monk’s renunciant life is *better* than the
householder’s worldly life. Much if not all of the text’s advice *could*
be followed by a householder who remained a householder, but if there’s
anything that can’t, it could still be followed by a householder who
made the decision to *leave* the household life and *become* a monk.
Śāntideva nowhere gives any interpretations that there are two separate
paths for householders and monks. There is only one path, and monks are
*further along* it than householders are; householders would do well to
emulate it, to prepare themselves for renunciation in the next life if
not in this one. In this respect, I think, Śāntideva *would* want us
householders to apply his advice to ourselves, even though we may well
decide we have reason to refuse it.

Likewise with the second hermeneutical move. This move is to say “he
couldn’t really have meant that”, a move I have [previously
noted](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/10/a-disrespectful-performance/)
my skepticism of in general. I think both Elisa and Stephen Harris make
this move here in some respect –saying that Śāntideva doesn’t actually
think the body is as foul as he says it is, he just says this as a
rhetoreical exaggeration to aid meditation. I tend to associate such a
move with a
[shopping-cart](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/)
approach to cross-cultural philosophy, one that tries to enhance our
appreciation for another tradition but winds up limiting what we can
genuinely learn from it that we didn’t already know. I’ve previously
expressed skepticism of this move to Stephen with respect to [another
one of the text’s metaphysical
arguments](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/03/of-anatman-and-altruism/),
but a related point applies here.

That is: Śāntideva’s claims about the foulness of the body are not
limited to one meditative context. He deconstructs the body to indicate
its foulness in *two* parts of the text; as well as the more notorious
part in chapter VIII, he does it more briefly in chapter V, verses
58-70. In chapter VIII his practical conclusion is to avoid sexual lust,
and he is writing for a heterosexual male audience, so the verses focus
on the foulness of the bodies of women one might lust after. They are
not only about that, however; even there, in verses VIII.53 and VIII.61,
he refers to the filth that is one’s own body. A man’s own body is just
as filthy as the bodies of the women he might lust after. In chapter V
that is made more explicit, because there the same metaphysical argument
– that the pure-seeming body should be deconstructed into its filthy
parts – is applied to a different conclusion, that one should not
protect one’s own body but instead devote it to the liberation of
others.

Two things seem to follow from this point. One, the deconstruction and
foulness of the body is *not* merely a meditative aid to be discarded;
it is as true as any other true statement that can be expressed in
words. Śāntideva, as far as I understand him, would want us to take it
as a good argument and not merely a meditative aid. Two, the passage is
not as sexist as it might first appears. I certainly won’t deny that
Śāntideva held sexist attitudes, but the logic of this passage doesn’t
require them. We can accept full gender equality – [the key achievement
of the 20th
century](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/10/the-singular-achievement-of-the-20th-century/)
and one we are rightfully loath to discard – and still acknowledge this
description of both female and male bodies; we could easily write a
parallel passage disdaining the male body to celebrate female asceticism
and it would not be at all out of place in this text. (Or, \_mutatis
mutandis\_, a passage applying to homosexuals of either gender.)

So the final question, which philosophers should ask: is Śāntideva
*right* about all this? I don’t think so, and I’ve [written before about
some of my
reasons](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/).
I think it is reasonable to treat our bodies and others’ as wholes in
the way Śāntideva refuses. I do think, however, that Śāntideva disagrees
with me entirely on this point. And I think it’s worth emphasizing that
point because I think it’s these points of hard disagreement –where
texts speak directly to us and tell us to think and act in ways very
alien to our everyday modern ways of thinking and being – where we
[stand to learn the most from
them](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/06/the-appeal-of-the-unappealing/).
