+++
title = "A reader’s query"
full_title = "A reader’s query"
date = "2015-09-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/26/a-readers-query/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/26/a-readers-query/).

A reader’s query

A reader of the blog, Satyanarayana, sent in the following question.
Could any of our learned śāstrīs provide any insight?

\* \* \*

**The *asatī* : *Strīsvabhāva*, *Kāvya*, *Śāstra***

A dominant theme of Brahminical patriarchy as reflected in the Sanskrit
social imaginary is the characterization of women as uncontrollably
insatiable, incorrigibly serial adulterous wanton hypersexed strumpets
compulsively preying on anything remotely male, even if that male
happens to be father, brother or son. The *asatī* *topos* (a sub-*topos*
of the *parakīyā nāyikā*) is a pervasive presence in many genres across
the Brahminical archive: the major *Gāthā*/*Subhāṣita* anthologies (from
the *Gāthāsaptaśatī* to the *Āryāsaptaśatī*), *Veda*, *kathā/nīti* texts
(*Pañcatantra*, *Hitopadeśa*, *Śukasaptati*, *Vikramacarita*,
*Kathāsaritsāgara*), *Itihāsa* (*Mahābhārata*, *Anuśāsanaparva*),
*Purāṇa*s (*Bhāgvata*, *Brahmavaivarta*, *Śiva*, *Garuḍa*) and
*Dharmaśāstra* texts (Manu, the *Strīdharmapaddhati*, the
*Gṛhyasūtra*s). The Gauḍīya Vaiṣnava theorists (15^(th) Century CE)
theologize and analogize the *parakīya*, whereas Jayadeva (*Gīta
Goviṅda* 12^(th) Century CE), Vidyāpati Ṭhākura (*Padāvalī*, 14^(th)
Century CE?) and Keśavadāsa Miśra (*Rasikapriyā*, 16^(th) Century CE)
divinize the *asatī* and the *upapatī*/*jāra* in the form of the
archetypally adulterous Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa pair.

Scholarly response to the *asatī* has been mixed: “poetic antinomianism
and freedom” (Hardy 1994,225); a “counter-system” of “women-centred
tales” and a “creation of women’s fantasy that deny in imagination the
restrictions of reality” (Ramanujan 1999, 446; cf. Doniger 1994,187);
satire evocative of the comic *rasa* (Siegel 1989, 127, 129, 131-133);
theft and “claim jumping” (Doniger 1994, 179); a proto-feminist
celebration of female sexual agency and autonomy in subversive defiance
of patriarchy (Shah 2009, 169; 184-185).

Bhoja posits in the *Śṛṅgāraprakāśa* that the aim of *kāvya* is akin to
*śāstra*, i.e., *vidhiniṣedha* (providing injunctions and prohibitions
for proper behavior) and ethico-moral instruction
(*vidhiniṣedhavyutpattiphalatvāt prabandhānām*), whether or not the
utterance is in the optative case (Mahimabhaṭṭa in the *Vyaktiviveka*
posits a similar *vidhiniṣedha* function to *kāvya*). He twice cites the
exemplum of the *Rāmayaṇa* as demonstrating the pre-eminence of a
virtuous man and the destruction of a flawed man, inferring that the
addressee is being taught to act like Rāma and not like Rāvaṇa. He also
states that if Rāvaṇa, capable of conquering the three worlds was
destroyed because he lusted after another man’s wife, so will it be for
others who behave like him and maintains that this text and other
literary works, courtly epics and the like are composed in the same
spirit. Bhoja thus conceives *kāvya* as having a function similar to
*śāstra*. The Sanskrit theorists conceive of all *śāstra* as being
beneficial to society and in furtherance of one of the *puruṣārthas*
(goals of life). The *Dharmaśāstra* texts severely censure the allegedly
wanton “female nature” (*strīsvabhāva*) and recommend “guarding” women
(*Manu* 8.317, 9.3, 9.5-7, 9.9; *Mahābhārata*, *Anuśāsanaparva*
13.21.19, 13.46.13; *Hitopadeśa* 1.118, *Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra*
2.3.44-45; *Vasiṣṭha Dharmasūtra*, 5.1; 5.2-3;*Yājñāvalkyasmṛiti* 1.85,
*Nāradasmṛiti* 13.30-31, *Viṣṇusmṛiti* 25.12-14). Despite the *śāstric*
censure of (*strīsvabhāva*), many *śāstra/kathā/nīti/kāvya* texts
delineate subversive themes (*Pañcatantra*, books 1, 3 and 4,
*Kāmasūtra*, *pāradārādhikaraṇa* 5.6.46-48, *Kuṭṭanīmata* 1059,
Rājaśekhara, *Kāvyamīmāṁsā* 6). Bhoja too, despite positing *kāvya* as
having the same ethico-moral didactic function of *śāstra*, profusely
cites Prakrit/Sanskrit *kāvya* texts on the *asatī* genre in the
*Śṛṅgāraprakāśa* as well as in the *Sarasvatīkaṇṭhābharaṇa*, where
“wanton” women (*asatī*) merrily deceive, mislead and cheat their
husbands (and other relatives) to have illicit sex with their paramours.
The *śāstric* profiling of female sexuality is thus starkly discordant
compared to its delineation in *kāvya*. Doniger (1994, 187) frames this
dissonance succinctly:

> With one hand (presumably the right), our educated Brahmin wrote the
> dharma texts; with the other (presumably the left), he wrote stories
> in praise of adultery. It would be interesting to speculate as to why
> the man who took such a rigid stance when he wrote a dharma text sang
> such a different song in the other genres. Perhaps, like his wife, he
> sought the solace of fantasy, or expressed in the narratives the
> limits (or flip side) of his official point of view. Or is this just
> another way of saying that *adharma* is the flip side of dharma?

My query to the esteemed contributors of this blog is this: in what
manner can this dissonance be resolved?


