+++
title = "Book Review of Engaging"
full_title = "Book Review of Engaging Buddhism Why It Matters to Philosophy by Jay L Garfield (Reviewed by Mark Siderits)"
date = "2015-09-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/02/book-review-of-engaging-buddhism-why-it-matters-to-philosophy-by-jay-l-garfield-reviewed-by-mark-siderits/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/02/book-review-of-engaging-buddhism-why-it-matters-to-philosophy-by-jay-l-garfield-reviewed-by-mark-siderits/).

Book Review of Engaging Buddhism: Why It Matters to Philosophy by Jay L. Garfield (Reviewed by Mark Siderits)

**Jay L. Garfield. *Engaging Buddhism: Why It Matters to Philosophy.*
xxii + 376 pp., index. NY: Oxford University Press, 2015. $29.95
(paperback).**

My job in reviewing this book is made much easier by something Garfield
says early on: ‘Mark Siderits and I rarely agree’ (xvi). I agree. And
since I don’t want to disappoint, much of my review will be devoted to
what I would identify as difficulties. But I should say right away that
there is much here that I can happily endorse. I won’t dwell on that
though, lest I be accused of being a closet dialetheist.

I predict that fans of Garfield’s earlier work will enjoy this book, but
he seems to be aiming at a larger audience. The book’s title tells us he
is addressing Western philosophers who don’t take the Buddhist
philosophical tradition seriously; he wants to tell them that’s a
mistake, that progress can sometimes be made by looking at historically
distinct traditions. The early chapters of this book lay out his
understanding of some key Buddhist philosophical positions; these are
followed by chapters on specific areas where Garfield thinks Buddhist
voices might contribute to current debates. The chapter on dependent
origination and impermanence, for instance, ends with a discussion of
the bearing Buddhist views might have on recent disputes between
3-dimensionalist and 4-dimensionalist accounts of diachronic identity. A
chapter on the self closes with a comparison of minimalism about the
self – the currently popular view that rejects both a Cartesian
soul-pellet and the straightforward reduction of persons to causal
series of psychophysical elements – and what Garfield identifies as the
Madhyamaka position. A chapter on consciousness discusses ways in which
Buddhist accounts might provide correctives to qualia-philia,
zombie-philia, and other fashions in consciousness studies. The chapter
on logic and the philosophy of language suggests that Buddhists always
recognized the logical possibility of true contradictions, as well as
the claim that Buddhist philosophy decisively refutes the 3rd-realm
entities involved in Fregean semantics and modal discourse. And in the
chapter on Buddhist ethics he suggests that something he calls moral
phenomenology represents a distinctive Buddhist approach to solving a
problem faced by all moral theorizing, that of specifying what has
explanatory priority in that theoretical enterprise.

But will this work for the new audience he wants to attract? I sometimes
had the impression that Garfield thinks the chief takeaway from Buddhist
philosophy is the quietist’s advice that we renounce all metaphysical
enterprises. (This may not be too surprising given the evident
centrality of Candrakīrti’s and Tsongkhapa’s Madhyamaka to Garfield’s
reading of Buddhist philosophy.) Instead we should be doing something he
calls moral phenomenology. To my ears this sounds a little like
cognitive-behavioral therapy. Make no mistake, I think CBT can be a
great thing. But I’m not sure how many professional philosophers will be
drawn to take the Buddhist philosophical tradition more seriously in
their own work if they understand Buddhist philosophizing as chiefly a
matter of ridding oneself of the errors of conceptualization and
embracing the everyday world. This may not be the best book to give
one’s mono-cultural philosophy colleagues.

Given the high editorial standards of the publisher, there are
surprisingly many mistakes that might have been caught by more careful
proofreading. Among these are errors in transliteration of Sanskrit
terms that readers of this blog may find distracting, such as:
‘Abhidharmika’ instead of ‘Ābhidharmika’ (62, 116); *‘vyapti’* instead
of *‘vyāpti’* (217 n.3); *‘svasasaṃvedanā’* for *‘svasaṃvedana’* (127);
*‘samprajaña’* for *‘samprajñā’* (127); ‘Nyāyikas’ (223) or ‘Nayāyikas’
(252) for ‘Naiyāyikas.’ Somewhat more troubling are claims like this one
concerning the Personalists: ‘pudgalavāda’ is actually an epithet
attached to the proponents of this view, who called themselves
Vātsiputrīyas or inexpressibilists’ (109 n.13); Vātsiputrīya simply
means ‘related to Vatsiputra’, and has nothing to do with the school’s
doctrine that the relation between *pudgala* and *skandhas* is
inexpressible. Then there is the claim that according to Dignāga the
form (*ākāra*) and not the external object ‘is the intentional object
(*artha*)’ of perception (134). The term Dignāga actually uses for an
intentional object in v.1 of *Ālambanaparīkṣā* is *viṣaya*; in this
context *artha* would be the external object. (The meanings of *artha*
and *ālambana* are similarly reversed at 192.) Garfield also gives an
English translation of the Tibetan translation of the *svavṛtti* of
*Madhyamakāvatāra* that has Candrakīrti quoting the *Laṅkāvatāra* to the
effect that a finger cannot cut itself (143). This would be an odd thing
to say. But a quick check of the Sanskrit shows that it is a sword that
is said not to cut its own blade, while what it says a finger can’t do
is touch its own tip (de La Vallée Poussin’s French translation of the
Tibetan translation of *Madhyamkāvatāra* confirms this reading). In his
discussion of the term *svabhāva* Garfield tells the reader that *bhāva*
means ‘being’(61); a quick check of Monier-Williams would have shown
that ‘nature’ is also a primary meaning. (To his credit, Garfield does
mostly stick to ‘intrinsic nature’ as his rendering of *svabhāva* in
Madhyamaka and Abhidharma usages.) Likewise Monier-Williams’ first entry
for *satya* is ‘truth’, not ‘that which is existent or is the case’
(57).

Editing difficulties are not confined to Sanskrit, as evidenced by ‘if
he … is correct, than his language must be empty…’ (251). Somewhat more
alarming, a crucial ‘not’ seems to have been omitted from this sentence:
‘They each apprehend conventional existence, but the first does so as do
most of us ordinarily, but as sophisticated Mādhyamikas do,
inferentially’ (239). And then there is ‘interdependence’, Garfield’s
preferred translation for *pratītya-samutpāda*. This preference invites
attributing to all Buddhists the distinctively Huayan doctrine that
everything depends for its nature on everything else. Garfield is
generally good about making clear that most Buddhist philosophers are
committed only to the much weaker claim that every existent depends for
its existence on many other prior entities and events. But not always.
Nor is he always good about blocking the easy slide from ‘everything
depends for its existence on other things’ to ‘everyone depends on
everyone else’, something readily taken to furnish a sort of grounding
of morality. So he invokes ‘a vast causal nexus’ to explain why taking
pleasure in the sufferings of others is ‘detrimental … to ourselves’
(294-5). This move threatens to transform the argument for impersonal
benevolence based on non-self into just another appeal to enlightened
self-interest.

Other difficulties might not be due to mere lack of editorial vigilance.
In his account of Abhidharma views on causation, Garfield says that the
*hetu-pratyaya* of the rice sprout is ‘a good soaking rain’, that the
*ālambana-pratyaya* of a book on the table is the table that holds it
up, and that the *adhipati-pratyaya* of the barley sprout is the barley
one wishes to harvest, i.e., the goal of the action (29-30). But it is
the seed that is standardly identified as the *hetu-pratyaya* of the
sprout; physical objects like books do not have *ālambana-pratyayas*,
only cognitions do; and there is to my knowledge nothing like a notion
of final cause in Indian Buddhism. Garfield also repeats the claim one
has begun to hear more frequently (and perhaps traceable to a certain
strand of Theravādin revisionism) that Theravāda is unlike other
Abhidharma schools in not doing metaphysics but phenomenology (18; 46
n.14). This would come as a surprise to Buddhaghosa and to the compilers
of *Kathāvatthu*.

There is a related difficulty in Garfield’s account of Buddhist
semantics. He says its nominalist metaphysics precludes the existence of
such third-realm abstract objects as propositions (which he claims are
needed for a correspondence account of truth). Of course Buddhist
nominalism would entail the rejection of propositions, but he goes on to
identify the *pratijñā* of Nyāya epistemology as just such an entity
(250-51). Some years ago there was a symposium held in Pune in which
Nyāya pandits and analytically trained philosophers discussed the notion
of the proposition. Once the pandits understood what propositions are
thought to be, they were quite adamant that their tradition did not
recognize them, and that this was no failing. Garfield does later
concede that taking Nāgārjuna to be criticizing Fregean semantics may be
a bit of a stretch, but says that extrapolating in this way allows us to
see ‘nascent concerns’ in Indian philosophy ‘that might otherwise escape
notice’ (328). The trouble with this is that if we are certain in
advance that the extrapolation is justifiable, we may miss ways in which
Nāgārjuna’s interlocutors actually avoided the difficulties of Fregean
semantics.

This brings me to a bigger problem. I share Garfield’s desire to bring
the Buddhist tradition into dialogue with Western philosophy. I also
think both sides can profit from such exchanges. But to pull this off
one must work very hard to avoid reading elements of one’s ‘native’
tradition into what one finds in the tradition one is exploring for
novel resources. It is all too easy, for instance, to read Berkeley into
Yogācāra arguments for subjective idealism. But many of Berkeley’s
arguments presuppose epistemological and semantic internalism, while
those of Vasubandhu and Dignāga do not. Garfield reads semantic
internalism into Yogācāra when he says that once we recognize that
sensory experience is mediated by our sense faculties, the idea that an
external object resembles our experience ‘makes no sense’ (74). Dignāga
does deny that the external object could resemble our sensory
experience, but not on verificationist grounds. There’s a similar
problem with Garfield’s claim that Madhyamaka shows ‘we don’t even know
what we mean when we assert that something exists *simpliciter*’ (36).
If Putnam is right that meanings ‘ain’t in the head’, then our not
knowing is no bar to a claim’s being meaningful and possibly true.

There may be something similar going on in Garfield’s championing of a
dialetheist reading of the *catuṣkoṭi* in Madhyamaka. Garfield says that
Mādhyamikas are not committed to rejecting all contradictions because
they are not committed to the principle of explosion – that everything
follows from a contradiction (248). It may be true that no Mādhyamika
endorses the principle of explosion. But Candrakīrti does say that
anyone who utters a contradiction is crazy (*unmattaka*) and not worth
debating (*Prasannapadā* 15). And the Indian Buddhist commentarial
tradition has always been scrupulous about explaining away all seeming
violations of the laws of classical logic in utterances made using the
*catuṣkoṭi* framework (usually through parameterization). Paraconsistent
logics are cool things. Madhyamaka can be cool as well. But the urge to
find allies in support of the causes we champion can sometimes restrict
our vision. And that’s not so cool if what we are looking for are fresh
insights.

There’s a fine line one must walk in order to facilitate a conversation
between distinct philosophical traditions. Liberties must be taken – one
will sometimes need to extrapolate from what the old texts do say in
order to work out how they might respond to a position or an issue of
which they were innocent. But if the liberties one takes are driven by
what one wants the old texts to say given where one thinks the new view
has it wrong, there’s the danger of turning the discussion into
something quite different from the engagement Garfield and I both want
to see. The interests of Native Americans were not well served when they
were drawn into the proxy wars of the French and the English in North
America.

I said I wouldn’t dwell on areas where Garfield and I agree, but there
are a few points I feel I must mention. Of course we share a deep
commitment to bringing the Buddhist tradition (I would add the *āstika*
Indian tradition) into the modern philosophy canon. We both believe that
philosophical progress can be fostered by looking at what another
tradition has done with a particular issue. I agree that consciousness
studies is one such area that may prove fruitful. I agree that Buddhist
philosophical methods represent a valuable corrective to the
intuition-mongering and modal metaphysics that pervade current
philosophical practice. I agree that the semantics of *apoha* represents
an important resource for thinking about the consequences of radical
nominalism. And maybe there’s more. But I should stop here lest I be
accused of (truly) contradicting what I said earlier.

*Reviewed by Mark Siderits, Seoul National University*
