+++
title = "New contributor Alex"
full_title = "New contributor Alex Watson"
date = "2015-09-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/06/new-contributor-alex-watson/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/09/06/new-contributor-alex-watson/).

New contributor: Alex Watson

I am pleased to announce the addition of a new contributor to our blog:
Alex Watson. Our readers already read
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/08/14/ashoka-university-a-guest-post-by-alex-watson/)
his description of his current position at Ashoka University, so I can
focus on what happened before that.

After a BA in Philosophy and Psychology, Alex studied Indology at the
SOAS (London) and then at Oxford. His PhD (an edition, translation and
philosophical analysis of Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s *Nareśvaraparīkṣā* defence
of the existence of the self) was written under the tuition of Prof.
Alexis Sanderson and examined by Prof. Lambert Schmithausen and Prof.
Karin Preisendanz. The final result became a book (*The Self’s Awareness
of Itself*), which goes well beyond its initial Śaivasiddhānta milieu
and which has consequently been read, reviewed (my own review is
[here](https://www.academia.edu/212236/%C5%9Aaivasiddh%C4%81nta_theories_about_%C4%81tman_Review_article_of_Alex_Watsons_The_Selfs_Awareness_of_Itself._Bha%E1%B9%AD%E1%B9%ADa_R%C4%81maka%E1%B9%87%E1%B9%ADhas_Arguments_Against_the_Buddhist_Doctrine_of_No-Self))
and thought about many times more than most other Indological books.  
After that, Alex continued to work on the theory of the *ātman* in
Buddhist and “Hindū” philosophy, often pausing on Bhaṭṭa Jayanta’s
*Nyāyamañjarī*. He studied psychotherapy and has published (see his
[page](https://harvard.academia.edu/AlexWatson) on Academia) on this
topic. His second book, together with D. Goodall and Anjaneya Sarma, *An
Enquiry into the Nature of Liberation. Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s
Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvṛtti, a commentary on Sadyojyotiḥ’s refutation of
twenty conceptions of the liberated state (mokṣa)* contains a critical
edition, a translation and a philosophical commentary (with many useful
schemes) of a complicated, yet foundational text of Śaivasiddhānta. He
also has publications on *vijñānavāda*, on *apoha* amd (in progress) on
the *īśvara* debate.

After Oxford and before the Ashoka University, Alex taught or researched
in Pondichéry, Fukuoka (Japan) and Harvard.

Last, let me add that Alex has the uncommon benefit among Indologists of
being able to teach and talk in a sattvic mode, without the usual
rajasic attitude of most speakers (“I have to say a lot in just 25′, so
I will just speak faster”). Listening to him is thus a pleasure, and one
ends up having understood and being able to remember what he said
—unlike in many cases in which an incredible effort in concentrating on
each of the points raised ends up in the complete oblivion of the whole
talk a few hours after it has been delivered.
