+++
title = "Book Review of Roots of"
full_title = "Book Review of Roots of Yoga, Translated and Edited by James Mallinson and Mark Singleton (Reviewed by Neil Sims)"
date = "2017-12-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/30/book-review-of-roots-of-yoga-translated-and-edited-by-james-mallinson-and-mark-singleton-reviewed-by-neil-sims/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/30/book-review-of-roots-of-yoga-translated-and-edited-by-james-mallinson-and-mark-singleton-reviewed-by-neil-sims/).

Book Review of Roots of Yoga, Translated and Edited by James Mallinson and Mark Singleton (Reviewed by Neil Sims)

***Roots of Yoga*, translated and edited by James Mallinson and Mark
Singleton, UK: Penguin Random House, 2017. 540 pp. $12.23 (paperback).**

Walk into most places dedicated to the teaching of yoga today, and you
will likely see quotes from one or more texts associated with yoga.
Common examples include Patañjali’s *Yogasūtra*, specific early
*Upaniṣads*, the *Bhagavadgītā*, or the later *Haṭhayogapradīpikā*. The
typical student, and often even the instructors themselves, will not
know what, if any, relationship there might be between such texts, or
the relation of these texts to their practice of yoga.

One way of addressing these issues is to immerse oneself in one or more
of the varied, long-standing yoga traditions existing today, and explore
how the members of these communities see their history and understand
their aims. James Mallinson, one of the co-editors of this volume, has
done considerable work in this area. Another method is to trace the
sociological development of yoga, including both traditional and
extra-traditional influences. The previous work of Mark Singleton, the
other co-editor, has often taken this kind of approach. Now, in *Roots
of* *Yoga*, these two scholars focus on specific source material, more
than a hundred texts ranging over almost three millennia, in more than a
dozen languages.

Before delving into what the book is and does, it might be useful to say
a bit about what it is not. It is not, the authors tell us, a book of
philosophy. Its focus throughout is practical, with metaphysics rarely
discussed, and then only when the authors see it as relevant to the
understanding of a given practice. The authors’ choices here can leave
room for disagreement. When can one separate theory—metaphysical or
other—from practice, especially when it comes to understanding the
experiences gained through practice? Are the authors assuming that
experiences can be understood without consideration of the
sociological/metaphysical frame within which they are gained? The
authors do not tell us. But in any case their implicit choices place
*Roots of Yoga* within a larger, ongoing academic discussion. Such
considerations, however, will not distract most readers from the broadly
informative nature of the text.

Though their aim is practical in the sense of bringing together writing
about yogic practice, the authors also point out *Roots of Yoga* is “not
a manual of yoga practice” (p. xii). The texts covered do not always
agree even on the goal of yoga, much less how yoga should be practiced,
and some of the practices they mention are straightforwardly dangerous.
Take one of the authors’ examples of internal cleansing (*dhauti*), with
the yogin purposefully “prolapsing the lower intestinal tract, rinsing
it in water and reinserts it into the body” (p. 130). Even with proper
guidance, this kind of practice can clearly lead to injury.

Mallinson and Singleton are also careful to point out that their book
stops at or around the time that modern yoga began to develop, about a
century and a half ago. The relationship between particular schools of
modern yoga and the texts covered in the book is not their main
interest.

The book is a *scholarly* look at historical texts related to yogic
practice—the introduction alone has 58 footnotes. The “historical
overview” sections alone will be eye opening to anyone who is not a
scholar in the field, and be useful for clarifying misunderstandings
about the origins and development of yoga in ancient and medieval times.
Many readers might be surprised by the influences on yoga theory and
practice from outside of Indian orthodoxy, such as from Jainism and
Buddhism in several forms. For instance, they briefly touch on the
influence of Yogācāra on Patañjali, specifically mentioning the
*Yogācārabhūmi Śrāvakabhūmi* (p. 17), and on the Buddhist Tantric
tradition, with texts such as the Tibetan *The Practice of the Six Yogas
of Naropa* (*Chos drug gi man ngag zhes ba*) (p. 29-31).

One useful tool for seeing the overarching chronology of the book is a
“Timeline of Important Texts,” which follows the introduction. After
that, the book is arranged by topics, including an historical
introduction of each. Generally each topic is then covered with
translations offered in chronological order. Sometimes this is the
structure of an entire chapter, while at other times the topic is so
large that it is broken down into sub-categories that are then covered
chronologically. Topics range from competing characterizations of yoga
and what it is to be a *yogin* in different texts and traditions, to the
differing conceptions of practices involved, and to the final goal of
liberation, conceived of in different ways as well. The discussion in
chapter 4 will be of particular interest to both students and teachers
of yoga today. For this chapter makes it clear that medieval *yogins*
generally did not emphasize either highly refined, one pointed cognition
(*samādhi*) as much as Patañjali, or postures (*āsanas*) as much as
modern practitioners, but instead focused much more on breathing
exercises (*prāṇāyāma*).

Mallinson and Singleton do an admirable job of letting the texts speak
for themselves. No hint of partisanship, or even a preferred view, is
given. At some places more information would be useful, for example, to
help the reader understand the historical connections between schools of
thought. But this lack seems to reflect current scholarship on many of
the relevant texts, which is often only a few decades old, rather than
an omission on their part. Seen in this way, *Roots of Yoga* offers clay
on the table, so to speak, providing a basis for further work. Some of
this work is anticipated in *Roots of Yoga*, with Mallinson and
Singleton offering passages from texts they are currently translating,
such as the *Amṛtasiddhi*, the *Yogatārāvalī*, and several others.

All told, the book succeeds on at least two levels. It addresses a lack
of historical understanding among contemporary yoga students and
teachers, and at the same time offers a significant contribution to
scholarship on yoga in particular, and to an extent, scholarship on
South Asian history in general.

*Reviewed by Neil Sims,University of New Mexico*
