+++
title = "Indian Philosophy in the"
full_title = "Indian Philosophy in the Global Cosmopolis"
date = "2017-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/12/indian-philosophy-in-the-global-cosmopolis/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/12/indian-philosophy-in-the-global-cosmopolis/).

Indian Philosophy in the Global Cosmopolis

What is the current thought on the nature, scope, and reach of Indian
philosophy?

Handbooks and histories of a given area, subfield, or tradition in
philosophy are always good places to start when trying to gauge the
current state of the art in that specific area, subfield, or
tradition.Now that we have not one but two large edited collections on
Indian philosophy published within a month of each other––*[The Oxford
Handbook on Indian
Philosophy](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-oxford-handbook-of-indian-philosophy-9780199314621?cc=us&lang=en&#)*,
edited by Jonardon Ganeri, and the [*Routledge History of Indian
Philosophy*](http://208.254.74.112/books/details/9780415309769/), edited
by Purushottama Bilimoria––it it worth asking how far we have travelled
and where do we go from here.

Since Ihad the honor of[introducing the
second](http://coseruc.people.cofc.edu/docs/rhip_chapter1.pdf)of the
two volumes, I’d like to share some of my thoughts on the matter in the
hope that theymay spur some discussion. Much of what I have to say
about the current state of play and the future of thefield hinges on
the following issues:

**#1 The Problem ofCanon and Style.**Indian philosophy is host to
conceptual, argumentative, and experiential strategies that do not map
neatly onto Western categories and practices. Take, for example, the
case of logic. If we render classical Indian logic in Western terms, the
*anumāna* system of inference ends up looking a lot likethe
Aristotelian syllogism. If we retain the original format with its
distinctive steps and characteristics, theIndian tradition of debate
can seem alien and contrived.

**#2****The Problem ofReliable Evidence**. Championing pre-modern
modes of inquiry in an era when philosophy, at least in the anglophone
world and its satellites, has in large measure become a highly
specialized and technical discipline conceived on the model of the
sciences, is challenging at best. What are the implications for doing
philosophy with the Indian materials in an age when deferring to the
sciences for empirical evidence has become the norm?

**#3****The Constraint of Genealogy.** If philosophy proceeds as a
series of dialogues among philosophers pursuing unresolved problems by
building on the achievements of their acknowledged forbears, then
philosophy is constrained by its own genealogy.That means one cannot
engage Indian philosophy without sharing some of its own presuppositions
and concerns about the nature of evidence, the proper place of reason,
and the aims of inquiry. What does this genealogical picture mean for
the project of cross-cultural philosophy?

**#4****The Problemof Modernity**. Does the methodological and
conceptual sophistication of late Navya Nyāya mark a turn toward a
distinctively autochthonous kind ofmodernity, something analogous to
theCartesian legacy in Western philosophy? I make the case that while a
sprit of*critical deference*to tradition has deep roots in the Indian
tradition, and may suggest thepresence of a proto-modernity, this
*modernity*differs significantly from the spirit of rational and
scientific inquiry that we associate in the West with Descartes and the
British empiricists.

**#5****The Metaphilosophical Problem**. The metaphilosophical question
“Is the Indian philosophical genre *philosophy*?” cannot be overlooked,
however difficult (and, for some, downright maddening) the question
might be. Among other things, it opens up the possibility of treating
themoral and metaphysical lessons of the *Upaniṣads*, the
*Yoga-sūtras*, and the *Bhagavad-Gītā*as proposing specific forms of
life rather than solutions to insoluble metaphysical questions.

**#6****The Problem of Authenticity**. Ifindigenism, comparison, and
cosmopolitanism are rival approaches, can a better understanding of the
history of philosophy in a global context defuse the tension these
approaches generate? In principle, that ought to be the case. But the
question of what makes Indian philosophy *authentically* Indian is not
the same as what makes it creative or capable of addressing a broader
range of concerns.Shouldcertain argumentative and interpretive
strategies be off limits when it comes to doing Indian philosophy just
because they did not arise within that traditionor because they don’t
reflect traditional sorts of concerns?

These are by no means the only problems that confront philosophers who
engage the history of Indian thought. But they do capture, I think,
enough of the challenges that still lay ahead. My proposal is that we
recognize the project of thinking across cultural boundariesfor what it
has always been: a type of ***intervention*** of, and from, one
tradition into the other, with consequences forboth. Interventions of
this sort, which happen at the confluence of cultures, can be (and often
are) turbulent events.But they also afford great opportunities for
changing course. I give several examples in the final section of the
introduction (available
[here](http://coseruc.people.cofc.edu/docs/rhip_chapter1.pdf)).

For balance, here’s whatother recent introductions to the field have to
sayabout the past, present, and future directions of Indian philosophy.

*The Fusion Model*. Mark
Siderits’[fusion](https://www.routledge.com/Personal-Identity-and-Buddhist-Philosophy-Empty-Persons-2nd-Edition/Siderits/p/book/9781472466105)
approach to philosophy needs no introduction to readers of this blog.
The approach gets a new makeover in “Comparison or Confluence
Philosophy?”–– one of the thematic introductions to*[Oxford Handbook of
Indian
Philosophy](http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199314621.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199314621)*,
edited by J.Ganeri. Sideritsaddresses a series of questions (and
criticisms) about the program of comparative philosophy: Are the two
traditions (Indian and Western) incommensurable? Is such a project
politically problematic? He also notes a trend away from historical and
comparative models of doing philosophy and toward the confluence
project, and identifies a series of topics that have provided fertile
ground for this sort of work.

*The Genre ‘Philosophy’*. The question whether there is an equivalent
concept analogous to the Greek *philosophia* has been a topic of
considerable discussion since the early days of Indological
research.Revisiting the question in his own thematic introduction to
the same *[Oxford
Handbook](http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199314621.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199314621)*
(“[History and Doxography of the Philosophical
Schools](http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199314621.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199314621-e-2)“),
AshokAklujkar acknowledges that, while vast tracks ofthought in India
resemble what in the West is called philosophy, there is also a great
deal of material that falls outside its scope. At one time or another
terms such as *ānvīkṣikī* and*darśana,*and in certain contexts
even*mata*, *vāda*, *naya* and *sāṃkhya*have come close enough to
capturing something like the notion of “philosophy” in India. But how
much of what is subsumed under those categories counts as philosophy in
the modern sense of the term is another matter.

*The Hermeneutic Circle*. Just how far into atradition faithful
interpretations of its texts can take us (consideringthat doing Indian
philosophy often meanstranslating and interpreting classical texts
preserved mainly in Sanskrit)? In yet another [thematic
introduction](http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199314621.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199314621-e-2)to
the same *Oxford Handbook*(“Interpreting Indian Philosophy: Three
Parables”), MatthewKapstein raises the problem of interpretation. As
anyone who is familiar with the famous hermeneutic circle knowns, the
practice of philosophical interpretation promises something that it
cannot deliver: occupying the perspective of the author or the cultural
text/artifact within the context in which it was authored or created
while at the same time articulating this understanding in our own world
and present moment.

*Broadening the Genus ‘Philosophy’*. Hegelian conceptions of the history
of philosophy, conceptions thatdeprived the non-Western world, and not
just India, of philosophy simply because the term itself and the
practice were considered a Greek invention, are no longer the norm. But
their legacy persists. Just about anyone working in Indian philosophy
for the past half century has had to overcome this legacy and question
its assumptions. A generation ago, it informed the work of Matilal and
Mohanty. Onesolution, argues Jonardon Ganeri in his general
[introduction](http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199314621.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199314621-e-3)
to the *[Oxford Handbook of Indian
Philosophy](http://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199314621.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780199314621),*
is to offer morecapacious definitions of the broad set of intellectual
practices and skills that nowadays go under the rubric “philosophy”.
Ganeri’s own definition articulates aSellarsian version of *global*
philosophy as the “distinctively human capacities to find orientation in
the space of reasons”. For Ganeri, thegenus “philosophy,” broadly
understood, is the type of intellectual activity where one
movesfromperplexity (*saṃśaya*) to clarity (*nirṇaya*) by harnessing
the powers ofdeductive reasoning, projective extrapolation, and
conceptual mapping.

*Technical vs Non-technical Uses of Philosophy*. Broadening
ourconception of what should count as philosophy raises a different,
though not unrelated, question about technical versus nontechnical uses
of the term. As Roy Perrett clarifies intheIntroduction to his own
*[Introduction to Indian
Philosophy](http://www.cambridgeindia.org/Academic/subjects/Philosophy/An-Introduction-to-Indian-Philosophy?ISBN=9781316634820),*in
a“non-technical” sense, philosophy often stands for a complete
world-view, the sort that provides a “fully coherent explanation of
everything”. Many of the so-called “schools” of Indian philosophy aim at
offering precisely such a complete metaphysical picture. In the
“technical” sense of the term, however, philosophy is a type of critical
reflection that calls into question this “traditional explanatory
world-view”. There is clearly Indian philosophy in the non-technical
sense of the term, but given that a great deal of Indian philosophy is
permeated by tradition-specific doctrinal claims, which traditions of
thought in India fit the technical description of the practice remains
controversial.

*TheQuestion of Parochialism*. Lastly, assuming, with Matilal, that we
cannot do Indian philosophy in a modern language like English without
doing comparative philosophy, how are we to proceed?In their
introduction to *[Comparative Philosophy Without
Borders](https://www.bloomsbury.com/us/comparative-philosophy-without-borders-9781472576255/),*
Chakrabarti and Weber, raise a series of questions about*best* (or, as
the case may be,*worst*) practices when it comes to doing philosophy
comparatively. Philosophy done in India and by scholars of Indian
philosophy outside India is replete with questions of the sort: “What is
the objectively graspable meaning of the first person pronoun ‘I’?” or
“Is *prāmāņya* truth or knowledgehood?”But one never comes across
questions like “Does Russell’s theory of error and false belief count as
an ‘*anyathākhyāti*’ (misallocated predication) theory?” or “Is
Armstrong a Cārvāka-style ‘*dehātmavādin*’?” Why is that? Because
Western philosophy is parochial?

Whetherinterest in comparative philosophy among contemporary analytic
philosophers is a case of “best” or “worst” practices depends in large
measure on whatever conception of philosophy one operate with. In the
anglophone worldthat conception has undergonedramatic shifts during
the last century with the emergence of theanalytic-continental rift,
and the progressive recognition that science is better equipped to
answer many of the problems that were once the province of natural
philosophy.

So, back to the question I askedat the top of this lengthy blog post.
One thing is obvious: we are in a much better position today to fill in
the gaps in philosophy’s long and culturally diverse history, so as
better to understand the nature, scope, and reach of Indian philosophy
relative to philosophy’s history elsewhere. The problem is that this
history is being told by those few philosophical globetrotters who can
move between the places that traditions occupywith only the minor
inconvenience of a temporary jet-lag.It is the cosmopolitan rather than
the indigenist,the champion of the open space of possibility, rather
than the protector of the enclosedplace of certainty, that gets to tell
the story.
