+++
title = "Whose religion? Which"
full_title = "Whose religion? Which science?"
date = "2017-12-24"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/24/whose-religion-which-science/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/24/whose-religion-which-science/).

Whose religion? Which science?

A little while ago I had the pleasure of giving a guest lecture on
Buddhism to [David
Decosimo](https://www.bu.edu/sth/profile/david-decosimo/)‘s class at the
Boston University School of Theology. The students were a delight to
teach – smart, actively engaged, asking many questions. One student’s
question in particular stuck with me after the session. She had started
to ask a long set of multiple questions, and then distilled it down to
what she referred to as a simple question: “How would you describe the
relation between Buddhism and science?”

My first response was: “That is not a simple question!” There is so much
to say about it that there are now books written not merely on the
actual relationship between Buddhism and science, but [on the very idea
of a
relationship](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/05/on-the-genealogy-of-buddhism-and-science/)
between Buddhism and science. I gave a relatively rambling answer. But
after leaving the classroom it occurred to me that there *was* a
relatively simple answer that I could have given – one that would have
put a large part of the question’s complexity aside, but focused on
something of particular relevance to students of Christian theology.

That is: “the relationship of our tradition with science” typically
means something very different to Buddhists than it does to Christians.
Years ago I often found myself bored by discussions of “religion and
science”, and did not see it as an area of interest. Then, after I
started blogging, I [realized I had been posting on religion and science
many
times](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/05/can-philosophy-be-a-way-of-life-pierre-hadot-1922-2010/).
In retrospect I came to realize why that was; I had said some of this at
the time but there is more to say here.

“Science”, of course, names a very, very large body of knowledge, as
well as the [norms and practices involved in coming to that
knowledge](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/04/descriptive-and-normative-meanings-of-science-and-other-traditions/).
Discussions of “religion and science” are never discussions of *all*
science. They select the “science” that is most relevant to “religion”.
And in keeping with the general tendency in Western discussions of
“religion”, “religion and science” usually means *Christianity* and
science, in a way that is probably but not necessarily relevant to Jews
and Muslims. The scientific questions usually investigated under *that*
heading are evolution and cosmology, because the scientific consensus on
those questions has seemed to be at odds with central tenets of
traditional Christian faith. Of course they both contradict the biblical
account of creation taken literally; but at a deeper level, a Christian
[natural-law
ethics](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/07/on-natural-law-and-positive-law/)
took as its starting point a divine teleology inherent in animal bodies.
We should do what we are designed to do. And once upon a time, such
divine design was actually the [best available
theory](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/02/the-god-hypothesis/) to
explain the world’s biological variation. Darwin shattered such a view,
and Christian faith has never been quite the same since.

But from a Buddhist perspective, things look very different. Here
questions of cosmology and evolution really don’t matter! On some of
their questions the Buddhist suttas say exactly this. The eternality of
the cosmos is the first item on the Buddha’s [list of unimportant
questions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/08/in-praise-of-questions-which-tend-not-to-edification/).
They do not help us with the quest to end suffering.

But what *does* help us with that quest is *psychology!* The Second
Noble Truth tells us that suffering comes from craving; the causes of
suffering are in our minds. And Buddhist texts are full of detailed
explorations of those mental causes. The
[Abhidhamma](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/ati/tipitaka/abhi/index.html)
texts break down the nature of mind in excruciating detail, and in this
they are entirely true to the spirit of the early *sutta*s. It is often
stated that the Buddha told his followers not to care about
“metaphysics”. That claim is entirely false. Rather, he told them not to
care about *cosmology*, about the metaphysics of the universe’s origins.
Throughout the early Buddhist texts we have, a central component of the
quest for liberation is insight (*paññā* or *prajñā*), specifically
meaning insight into a metaphysical question: the absence of self. We
cling to existence in a way that makes us suffer, and we do that, in
part at least, because we believe that our own selves are real and
enduring entities. Psychological understanding is part of what helps us
with that.

Several modern psychologists have turned to Buddhist psychological ideas
with enthusiasm. The most widely known research project has to do with
the beneficial psychological effects of mindfulness meditation, which is
already now applied practically in [completely secular
contexts](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/of-mindfulness-meditation-buddhist-and-otherwise/).
[Others](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15631554) have argued that
psychological research finds no evidence for a unified self. And the
Thai-born behavioural economist Nick (Nattavudh) Powdthavee noted how he
told his 90-year-old Thai Buddhist grandmother about recent
psychological research on happiness and she replied “Tell me something I
don’t already know.” And so, he came to think:

> maybe it wasn’t [Philip Brickman and
> colleagues](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill) who first
> discovered that people adapt to changes in life events. It probably
> wasn’t [Richard
> Easterlin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Easterlin_paradox) who was
> the first to conclude that economic growth for all increases the
> happiness of no one…. It was actually the Buddha who first discovered
> them over 2,500 years ago. ([The Happiness
> Equation](https://www.amazon.com/Happiness-Equation-Surprising-Economics-Valuable/dp/1848312466),
> pp. 206, 210)

But there is one core Buddhist idea that psychology has *not* confirmed
– [and that is
rebirth](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/).
Consciousness, research to date seems to indicate, emerges as a property
of animal bodies, and dies when those bodies die. We have little good
reason to believe that it transfers to another body after death, and
less reason still to believe that the nature of that rebirth would
correspond to the ethical qualities of one’s behaviour in life. Such
research thus falsifies a key element of traditional Buddhist karma
theory, and motivates the practice of [naturalizing
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/04/good-karma-as-eudaimonia/),
and more generally naturalizing Buddhism. So it is the theory of
consciousness as tied to matter, above all, that complicates traditional
Buddhist ideas in the way that evolution complicates Christianity. One
of the hot topics in contemporary Buddhist thought is the attempt to
naturalize karma – but that attempt is [itself
psychological!](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/06/naturalizing-karma/)

This isn’t the first time I’ve noted how Buddhist tradition emphasizes
psychology while Christian tradition emphasizes cosmology. I [spoke of
it
recently](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/the-saksit-of-notre-dame/)
– and there my emphasis was not on science but on *aesthetics*.
Christian church architecture, as I understand it, is all about
representing the harmony of God’s created cosmos; the theory that I have
been able to find behind [Buddhist temple
architecture](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/03/the-power-of-a-beautiful-temple/)
is all about the effect that it has on us human beings. The traditions’
approach to art (or at least architecture), at some level, mirrors their
approach to science.

As with any simple answer, there are all manner of nuances and
complications to be found. But I think it is not an *oversimplification*
to say: where the science that concerns Christians is evolution and
cosmology, for Buddhists it is psychology.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/whose-religion-which-science/)
