+++
title = "Reflections on the"
full_title = "Reflections on the Hamburg “Buddhism and Scepticism” Workshop"
date = "2017-12-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/02/reflections-on-the-hamburg-buddhism-and-scepticism-workshop/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/12/02/reflections-on-the-hamburg-buddhism-and-scepticism-workshop/).

Reflections on the Hamburg “Buddhism and Scepticism” Workshop

On Nov. 14-16, 2017 I attended a workshop called [“Buddhism and
Scepticism: Historical, Philosophical, and Comparative
Approaches”](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/11/06/workshop-buddhism-and-scepticism-historical-philosophical-and-comparative-approaches/)
held at the University of Hamburg. It was sponsored by the Numata Center
for Buddhist Studies and the Maimonides Center for Advanced Studies with
Oren Hanner as the convener. You can find more information
[here](https://www.maimonides-centre.uni-hamburg.de/en/events/workshops/buddhism-and-scepticism.html),
including abstracts for the talks. You can even watch videos of the
talks
[here](https://lecture2go.uni-hamburg.de/l2go/-/get/l/4943).\[Edit: Eli
Franco’s and Dong Xiuyuan’s talks are unfortunately unavailable\].
Also, Felix Baritsch (Deutsche Buddhistische Union) informed me that he
will be writing a summary of the workshop for an upcoming issue of the
*Journal of World Philosophies*, so look for that soon.

Rather than discuss each talk individually, I thought I might discuss
some general impressions.

First of all, the workshop was a great experience. I learned a lot, and
I made some excellent contacts. This was also my first time visiting
Germany, although I didn’t have much time for tourism.

This is probably the first conference I’ve attended where much of the
audience shared my interests in skepticism, particularly how it might
apply in the Indian tradition. I’m not used to having such a generally
favorable audience! Typically I face a lot more skepticism about my
skeptical interests, particularly when I’ve presented the idea that
Nāgārjuna is a skeptic about philosophy in a therapeutic vein somewhat
like Sextus Empiricus (but with important differences as well). Having a
small group of scholars focused on similar topics is an interesting
feature of a workshop like this one where each participant is invited
due to her/his specific research interests.

This isn’t to say that all the participants were entirely on board with
skeptical readings of particular Indian and Buddhist philosophers. The
keynote talk by Mark Siderits as well as Eli Franco’s talk, for
instance, gave some reasons to be skeptical about the applicability of
the Western concept of skepticism in the context of Buddhist philosophy.
For example, Siderits thinks some Buddhists may use skeptical arguments
but do not ultimately accept skeptical conclusions, and Franco thinks
there is no tradition of skepticism denoted by a Sanskrit word within
the Indian tradition. They both had some skeptical remarks about many of
the other talks (including mine, although Siderits said he agreed with
my general interpretation of Nāgārjuna, but he wouldn’t call it
skeptical).

Another interesting aspect of the workshop was seeing different academic
cultures come together. Those of us from North America working in
philosophy departments tend to employ the model of
comparative/cross-cultural philosophy, which is more focused on issues
and problems, while many of the scholars from Europe tend to be more
textually oriented in the traditions of European (especially German)
Indology. There were also two historically focused talks: Georgios
Halkias on Pyrrho’s possible Indian Buddhist influences and Dong Xiuyuan
on interactions between Buddhist and Islamic philosophers in central
Asia.

None of these are hard-and-fast distinctions, of course: you need some
basis in the Indological approach to do comparative philosophy and you
need to be able to think carefully about philosophical issues to
understand the texts – and you need some historical context to do any of
this. And of course North American scholars working outside of
philosophy departments often have approaches closer to our European
colleagues. It’s also worth noting that what I’m calling the North
American approach is shared by many scholars in other parts of the world
(Britain, Australia, India, etc.), especially those in philosophy
departments, and what I’m calling the European approach predominates in
other places as well (for instance, in Japan).

I think there’s a lot to be learned from these different approaches.
There is an unfortunate tendency among some North American philosophers
to denounce textually focused studies as “mere philology” rather than
real philosophy, and I suspect from the other side a lot of North
American scholarship sometimes looks a bit sloppy and insufficiently
textual, somewhat like one of those sensationalized movies “loosely
based on a true story.”

While I am more on the North American side by geography and personal
inclination, in recent years I’ve been trying to develop something of a
synthesis of these approaches in what I’ve been calling “expanding the
history of philosophy.” Of course we must pay close attention to the
linguistic and historical context of the text, but we should also think
about the philosophical issues and what we can learn from them.

I’ve been inspired by historians of Greek and Hellenistic philosophy
like Pierre Hadot, Julia Annas, and Martha Nussbaum, for whom careful
attention to ancient texts also yields philosophical insights for us
today. (I’ve written more about this topic in [a recent issue of the APA
Newsletter on Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies
devoted to B. K.
Matilal](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/10/31/apa-newsletter-on-b-k-matilal-now-available/)).

Another inspiration for this idea has been Amber Carpenter, who was also
a participant at the workshop. Her talk on the atomistic views of
Democritus and Vasubandhu (in his Abhidharma mode) was a great example
of the history of philosophy approach.

I should be clear that I don’t mean in any way to impugn any of these
various scholarly approaches. My attitude is that we should let a
hundred flowers bloom. We have as much to learn from these differences
as we do from like-minded scholars. After all, if part of the purpose of
philosophy is to expand our conceptual categories and to put our basic
assumptions to the test, then perhaps we ought to do the same with our
cherished academic methodologies. Workshops like this one in Hamburg are
a valuable way to accomplish this.

In closing, I’d like to thank Oren Hanner for inviting me and the staff
at the Maimonides Center (especially Maria Wazinski and Christine
Wagener) for hosting the workshop.
