+++
title = "Can there be harmless"
full_title = "Can there be harmless periodisations? On Oetke 2013"
date = "2014-02-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/07/can-there-be-harmless-periodisations-on-oetke-2013/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/07/can-there-be-harmless-periodisations-on-oetke-2013/).

Can there be harmless periodisations? On Oetke 2013

(I beg again your pardon for the lack of diacritics)

The fore-last essay (called *Classification and Periodization of Indian
Philosophical Traditions: Some Conceptual and Theoretical Aspects*) in
Franco’s *Periodization and Historiography of Indian Philosophy*, by
Claus Oetke, raises very general issues, departing from the problematic
definition of “Indian philosophy”, in which both noun and adjective
should be better assessed (does not “Indian” philosophy include also
authors who were active in Burma or Tibet? —not to speak of Sri Lanka?
This problem had already been raised by Michel Hulin in his long
introduction to his translation of the *Nyayabhasya*, whose review you
can read on my Academia page,
[here](http://www.academia.edu/1136864/Review_of_M._Angots_edition_and_translation_of_the_Nyayabha_ya "review of Angot").)

But the main core of Oetke’s investigation is the problem of why we keep
on doing periodisations, although they are so slippery. Perhaps, Oetke
insinuates, because “by classifying objects\[,\] rational beings are
better equipped for making predictions” (p. 349). By accident, this
sentence is almost the last one on a right side page, so that a reader
has a few seconds to ponder about it before turning to the next page.
And he or she might even find it tempting, before being brought back, on
the next page, to the more rational position that **predictions about
human events are untenable**, since historical developments are not
subject to one and the same scheme and, thus, predictions are
unwarranted. (It is not, for instance, the case, that a “Golden Age” is
necessarily followed by a “decline”.)

An alternative might be a sheer chronological periodisation, which would
be far less risky, suggests Oetke. (However, one might argue that
already the choice of one or the other —presumably Christian— chronology
influences one’s way to look at the material. It cannot be a coincidence
that most periodizations dealt with in Franco 2013 agree about a turning
point in Indian philosophy “towards the end of the first half of the
First Millennium CE”. Is not it the case that their own chronology
inclines scholars to settle the turning point around 500 CE instead of,
say, 430 or 623?) Oetke’s main objection against such periodisation,
anyway, is that they are less risky only at the cost of being less
informative.

Moreover, being a philosopher himself, Oetke suggests to focus not only
on chronological periodisations, but also on discussions of the
philosophical contents dealt with (as done in the third part of von
Glasenapp 1958).

Alternatively, at the very end of his essay, Oetke suggests
“classifications relating to different ways of performing philosophy and
to diverse methods of philosophical reasoning” (p. 355) (one is reminded
of the *sutra- bhasya- and prakarana* periods).

In the same essay, Oetke offers also a further interesting contribution
to the Frauwallner-debate (which is one of the leitmotivs of the whole
Franco 2013), namely the remark that it is not the “ethnic \[i.e.,
racial, EF\] explanation” to be problematic in Frauwallner, but rather
the fact that he does not explain why it fits the material he was
dealing with. Given that Frauwallner seemingly did explain that
non-Aryan religious cults prevailed in the second period, Oetke’s point
amounts to saying that Frauwallner was a priori convinced of a given
explanation and did not look for the best one among many.

Further posts on Franco 2013 can be found following the tag “[Eli Franco
2013](http://elisafreschi.com/tag/eli-franco-2013/ "Posts about Franco 2013")”
on my personal blog. See, on this blog, also
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/01/03/indian-philosophy-in-one-paragraph/ "Indian Philosophy in One Paragraph")
post and its comments (Andrew’s suggestions seems close to Oetke’s own
one).

(cross posted also on my personal
[Blog](http://elisafreschi.com "Elisa Freschi's Blog"))
