+++
title = "How many texts are"
full_title = "How many texts are comprised in the Mimamsa Sastra? And why is this relevant?"
date = "2014-02-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/04/how-many-texts-are-comprised-in-the-mimamsa-sastra-and-why-is-this-relevant/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/04/how-many-texts-are-comprised-in-the-mimamsa-sastra-and-why-is-this-relevant/).

How many texts are comprised in the Mimamsa Sastra? And why is this relevant?

(apologies in advance for the lack of diacritics, I am home, ill, with
no access to a unicode keyboard)

Purva Mimamsa authors are generally not interested in the topic, whereas
several Uttara Mimamsa (i.e. Vedanta) ones deal at length with the
status of the Mimamsasastra (I am tempted to say that, similarly,
Christians alone are concerned with the unity of the two testaments
within the Bible).  
A particularly puzzling element, in this connection, is the status of an
“intermediate part” of the Mimamsasastra, variously called
*madhyamakanda* (as opposed to the *karma*– and *brahmakanda*s or to the
*purva*– and *uttara*– ones, i.e., the Purva Mimamsa Sutras, henceforth
PMS and the Vedanta Sutras, henceforth UMS), or *Sankarsa(na)kanda*, but
also *devatakanda* or *upasanakanda*. Neither of these names is found
together with any other one, so that it seems clear that the basic
assumption for the Mimamsa (both of Purva and Uttara Mimamsa) authors
interested in the topics was that there were (at most) three basic texts
of the Mimamsa Sastra.  
Now, the problem is that the extant *Sankarsa Kanda* (henceforth SK),
preserved in a few manuscripts and edited together with a commentary by
Devasvamin or with a later one by Bhaskararaya, is a rather boring text,
dealing with technicalities of the ritual. I would locate it in the
Srauta-Sutra–Purva Mimamsa milieu, in the sense that it deals with
technical details and does not seem to me to aim at more general
problems. Thus, it makes good sense that Sabara twice refers to it (see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/12/16/how-many-sa%e1%b9%85kar%e1%b9%a3a-ka%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8das-are-there/ "How many Saṅkarṣa Kāṇḍas are there?")
post) or that Somesvara does it once, but that no more Purva Mimamsa
energies are dedicated to it. I might be wrong, but I am reminded of the
complements to Panini’s *Astadhyayi*, such as the Dhatupatha, in the
sense that Sabara seems to refer to the SK as to an appendix of the PMS,
which does not need a specific exegetical attention (and, in fact, he
did not comment on it).

A further significant detail is that the content of this SK does not
correspond neither to the appellation *devatakanda*, nor to the function
ascribed to it by Venkatanatha/Vedanta Desika and by other Vedantins,
i.e., the discussions of deities, later to be subsumed within the
brahman in the UMS.

By contrast, the SK–Devatakanda referred to by such Vedantins as Vedanta
Desika in his *Sesvara Mimamsa* fits nicely in a progressive scheme: the
PMS deals in this interpretation with karman, the SK with deities and
the UMS with brahman.  
Which *sutra*s are attributed to the one or the other? Sabara (two
*sutra*s), Somesvara and Sankara (one *sutra*, see below) mention
*sutra*s also found in the extant SK, whereas later Vedantins either do
not quote anything at all or quote a) the *sutra* quoted by Sankara (so
Ramanuja, *SriBhasya* ad 3.3.43), b) the same three (or four) theistic
*sutra*s referring to Visnu and not found in the extant SK (so
Venkatanatha in his *Satadusani* and in the *Tattvatika*, and Madhva in
the *Anuvyakhyana*).  
I counted three to four *sutra*s because Madhva’s *Anuvyakhyana*
mentions three (*athato daivi* (scil. *jijnasa*?), *ya visnur aha iti*
and *tam brahmety acaksate*), which should occur, respectively, at the
very beginning and at the very end of the SK. Venkatanatha does not
mention the first one, but has the last two preceded by *ante harau
taddarsanat*. *tam brahmety acaksate* makes indeed a smooth transition
to the UMS. Jayatirtha’s commentary to Madhva attributes them to a
*Devasastra*, an appellation which could refer to the SK-devatakanda
previous to its confusion with the SK (see below).  
Further four *sloka*s from some *sankarsanasutresu* and not present in
the extant SK are found within Utpala Vaisnava’s commentary on the
*Spandapradipika*.

A further significant element is the connection with the Pancaratra.
Already Sankara mentions the SK in his UMS-*Bhasya* in the context of a
*sutra* (3.3.43) which is interpreted as discussing the validity of the
*vyuha* doctrine of the Pancaratra. Further, Kanazawa mentions a very
interesting passage by Mukunda Jha Bkashi, the editor of Raghavabhatta’s
*Padarthadarsa* (15th c.), who writes that the PMS refer to the
Brahmanas, the SK to the Pancaratras and the UMS to the Upanisads, thus
distinguishing them on the basis of their referring to a different part
of the Veda. In the passage the editor comments upon, Raghavabhatta
attributes the upasanakanda to Narada and the UMS to Vyasa (who is
regularly identified with Badarayana, see, e.g., Venkatanatha’s
*Satadusani* 3). Who is this Narada? In any case, the name is connected
with the Vaisnava milieu and it figures together with Sankarsana in the
*guruparampara* leading to Vyasa in the (Vaisava) *Hayagrivopanisad*
(Kanazawa, p. 41).  
And the connection with the Vaisnava (and perhaps Kasmirian) milieu and,
thus, with the Pancaratra is reinforced by Utpala Vaisnava’s quote.

To sum up, the extant SK does not seem to properly fulfill the role
assigned to it by Vedantin authors.  
A possible explanation could be that Vedantin authors used the name of a
text which was assumed as part of the unitary Mimamsa Sastra but was
either lost or little known (remind the lack of quotations of the extant
SK in Vedanta Desika) and confused it with a different text which
fulfilled a role which they needed to see fulfilled, i.e., that of
introducing God in the Mimamsa system. Perhaps Kanazawa is right in
pointing out that the very name SK might have helped, due to the
importance of Sankarsana in the Pancaratra *vyuha* doctrine (Kanazawa,
p. 40).

It is still difficult to tell how and when exactly did this
superimposition of the one text on the other take place, but, as already
hinted at, it seems to have taken place in Vedanta-Pancaratra milieus
and Sankara may have played a major role in it, since he quotes from the
extant SK, but in the context of a theological-Pancaratrika discussion.
It might, thus, have been Sankara (or his Pancaratra opponent) who made
the SK’s role shift from sheer technical discussions to theological
ones. In other words, previous to Sankara there might have been a
technical SK and a theistic text (perhaps only a few sentences). If we
accept Jayatirtha’s authority, the latter had already a Vedantic flavour
and we might speculate that it had been used by Vaisnavas (perhaps:
Pancaratrins) who wanted to vindicate the Vedanta status of their
system. Sankara’s quote of the former SK in a context where one could
have expected the latter may have created the confusion between the two,
a confusion which was very much welcomed for non-Advaita Vedantins and
which harmonises nicely with further tripartitions (e.g., the one
between karman, *jnana* and *bhakti*).

A further scenario would require one to assume that no SK-devatakanda
ever existed and that some Vedantins artfully manipulated the evidences
regarding the SK, but since attestations regarding it range well beyond
the borders of an interconnected group of people, this scenario is at
the moment less likely.

Last, it is possible that there existed a tradition of interpreting the
extant SK in a theistic way and that it was in this connection that some
further theistic sUtras have been attributed to it. Although this
hypothesis clashes with the fact that no *sutra*s of the extant SK have
been transmitted together with the SK-devatakanda ones, it is probably
right in pointing out that the confusion was quite ancient. Anandagiri’s
explanation of the name sankarsa, for instance, refers to the technical
contents of the extant SK, but then calls it devatakanda (*sankarsyate
karmakandastham evavasistam karma samksipyocyate iti sankarso
devatakandam*).

The Purva Mimamsa milieus seemingly remained unaffected by this move
(remind Somesvara’s quote from the extant SK as late as in the 12th c.
and the general lack of interest for the SK).

**Which scenario seems to you more plausible?**

On the SK, see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/12/16/how-many-sa%e1%b9%85kar%e1%b9%a3a-ka%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8das-are-there/ "How many Saṅkarṣa Kāṇḍas are there?")
post and
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2013/12/02/what-is-the-role-of-the-sa%e1%b9%85kar%e1%b9%a3aka%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8da/ "What is the role of the Saṅkarṣakāṇḍa?")
one.  
(cross posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
