+++
title = "Alternative Histories,"
full_title = "Alternative Histories, Alternative Publics"
date = "2014-02-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/16/alternative-histories-alternative-publics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/16/alternative-histories-alternative-publics/).

Alternative Histories, Alternative Publics

**NOTE: This post represents the opinions of the author alone, and not
necessarily those of the “Indian Philosophy Blog.”**

Many of you may already have [read
about](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/15/world/asia/indian-publisher-withdraws-book-stoking-fears-of-nationalist-pressure.html)
Penguin India’s decision to recall and pulp all copies of Wendy
Doniger’s 2009 book, [The Hindus: An Alternative
History](http://www.amazon.com/The-Hindus-An-Alternative-History/dp/1594202052).
in response to a series of legal challenges from a right-wing Hindu
group. This decision raises important questions about the foundations of
free speech, and especially the freedom to conduct serious and critical
scholarly research. There is the issue of whether Indian law provides
sufficient protection to scholars—article 295 (A) of the Indian Penal
Code makes it a criminal offense to “insult the religious beliefs” of
anyone—and there is the potentially larger issue of how we can hope to
have, in the world’s largest and most diverse democracy, a space for
critical discussion that is protected from censorship and intimidation.

Readers of this blog might know well that India has long traditions of
[argumentation](http://www.amazon.com/The-Argumentative-Indian-Writings-Identity/dp/031242602X),
and these have always involved “taking the other side seriously”: one of
the foundations of Indian philosophical discourse is taking the trouble
to read and deeply understand your opponent’s views, presenting those
views fairly and in good faith, and then and only then subjecting those
views to a reasoned critique. This is not just a courtesy, but an
essential precondition of philosophical discourse as such: people like
[Bhaṭṭa
Jayanta](http://www.amazon.com/Much-about-Religion-Sanskrit-Library/dp/0814719791)
would always prefer to engage with positions that were different from
their own, rather than to silence them, even when the differences
concerned those things that are arguably most important—the existence of
God, for example. And [some
traditions](http://philpapers.org/rec/MATTCP-2) even built the
many-sided nature of truth into the very foundations of their
philosophy. The politics of outrage and offence, and the struggle to ban
and silence competing viewpoints, are antithetical to this long
tradition of reasoned debate. They impoverish public discourse and they
endanger critique and the kind of truths that depend on critique.

I would like to alert readers to an [online
petition](https://www.change.org/en-IN/petitions/members-of-both-houses-of-the-indian-parliament-and-the-honorable-law-minister-government-of-india-reconsider-and-revise-sections-153-a-and-295-a-of-the-indian-penal-code-to-protect-freedom-of-expression-in-india)
asking Penguin India to reverse its decision and demanding the revision
of the sections of the Indian Penal Code involved in this controversy.
