+++
title = "Economic structures and"
full_title = "Economic structures and philosophic superstructures On Scott 2013 and Eltschinger 2013"
date = "2014-02-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/23/economic-structures-and-philosophic-superstructures-on-scott-2013-and-eltschinger-2013/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/02/23/economic-structures-and-philosophic-superstructures-on-scott-2013-and-eltschinger-2013/).

Economic structures and philosophic superstructures: On Scott 2013 and Eltschinger 2013

How was Capitalism born? And, more in general, 1. does the economic
structure determine its superstructure (including philosophy or
religion), as in Marx; 2. does a certain philosophy, religion, etc.
determine a certain economic result, as in Weber; or 3. do important
actors select a certain philosophy, religion, etc., because it is more
adequate for their needs? Or are there still other solutions (as in
Hirschman’s 1977 *The Passions and the Interests*)?  
  
One has many chances to consider these issues, but the last one I
stumbled upon was Alexis Sanderson’s (see Sanderson 2009) and Vincent
Eltschinger’s (Eltschinger 2013) explanation of the success of Śaivism
and of its influence on Vaiṣṇavism and Buddhism in post-6th c. Kashmir
(and perhaps South Asia in general). Both authors (the latter following
the former) maintain that Śaivism was more successful and that Buddhism
and Vai.s.navism had to change and adopt its rituals and its narrative
structure because Śaivism offered a better narrative to the ruling
class. In fact, Śaivism at that point of its history —so Sanderson—
celebrated violent warriors as heroes and this was much more appealing
to the ruling class than the Buddhist celebration of compassion.  
This is a sort of a mix of Weber and Marx. The non-Marx part is the one
which refers to the idea that “Saivism developed independently of a
society whose ideals so closely corresponded to its own ones. The
Marx-like part is the one which says that a certain economic development
(change from urban to rural economy, and from trade to agriculture)
determined the success of one Weltanschauung over others.

These thoughts led me to a (great) lecture by Alan Scott, which was
based on his 2013 article published on *The Journal of Classical
Sociology* (an abstract is available
[here](https://www.academia.edu/4295945/Capitalism_as_culture_and_statecraft._Weber-Simmel-Hirschman "Alan Scott")).
Scott examines the possible non economic reasons for the raise of
Capitalism, especially discussing Hirschman, Weber and Simmel. Since
Weber is more well-known, I will avoid any gross summary of his views
(as exemplified by his thesis that capitalism is the result of the
Calvinist ethics). Hirschman, by contrast, considers capitalism as the
paradoxical result of the ruling agents who were trying to secure the
existing social order. As an alternative to Hobbes’ Leviathan, in fact,
they tried to tame lust transforming it into a rational interest for
gain, which would have in turn tamed other “hot passions” such as lust.
Thus, against Weber, capitalism would not be an exogenous process, due
to the emergence of a new class, the bourgeoisie, but an endogenous one,
due to the ruling class.  
Particularly interesting is Scott’s implicit way of contrasting this
claim with Weber’s sentences about the “enemies of capitalism”, which
are exactly those groups who are interested in defending their social
assets, challenged by capitalism, i.e., peasantry, jurists and civil
servants, academics, the church and the aristocracy.  
Last, Scott discusses also Simmel. Weber and Simmel agree on the fact
that capitalism can have some appeal also on people who are not going to
take advantage of it (e.g., peasant moving from the countryside to wage
labour). Weber explains it because of individualism: people prefer to
receive a meager pay in order to escape from the control of the
pre-modern autocratic landlord. Simmel is less positive about the value
of individualism and rather maintains the conflict between individual
and society as implied in Capitalism (which on the one hand promotes
freedom and on the other enforces control).  
Long story short: Scott showed (strong) arguments in favour of the
non-Adam-Smith view that Capitalism is a cultural product (and not the
result of the human inclination to exchange goods).

Let me now turn back to Eltschinger and Sanderson. **How plausible is it
that Śaivism was the best available match for the ruling class and that
this was the reason of its success?** Does it sound plausible to you
that neither the ruling class nor the emerging ones had any agency in
regard to the ideologies of their time and that they could only choose
among existing options? Did religions and other *Weltanschauung* compete
among themselves for the rulers’ sponsorship, with monks and other
authors having the ability to orient their religious movements according
to the needs of the rulers? It seems to me that Sanderson and
Eltschinger are, though only implicitly, proposing a model which is
neither Marxist nor Weberian and which leaves some room to individual
agency in the case of Buddhist and Vai.s.nava authors, although within
the deterministic perspective of their having no choice other than to
adapt to the needs of the ruling class. The only methodological flaw I
can point out is the lack of a theorisation of the causal model
presupposed by this view.

Eltschinger’s article is part of Franco 2013. For other posts on
articles within Eli Franco’s 2013 book (Periodization and Historiography
of Indian Philosophy), check the tag “Eli Franco 2013” on my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com).

(cross-posted, with more introductory material for lay readers,
[here](http://philosopherscocoon.typepad.com/blog/2014/02/economic-structures-and-philosophic-superstructures-on-scott-2013-and-eltschinger-2013.html "Alan Scott 2013").)
