+++
title = "24 Ideas "
date = "2021-04-06"
upstream_url = "https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFVSbmQwOVVRWHBQUkd0NFRYcFJQUT09"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view.php?chamuks=VFVSbmQwOVVRWHBQUkd0NFRYcFJQUT09).



![spf](article_img/CHAMU-162282443424%20ideas.jpg)

Here are 24 ideas (6X4) for the popularisation of Samskrit language.
They could be put into action by everyone, from a common man to a highly
influential person, sooner or later depending upon one’s degree of love
and passion for Samskrit. All the ideas will appeal to you only if your
love for Samskrit is genuine and intense. Each idea is a small thing to
do. But when many of them followed by many people repeatedly done many
times for many months and years can do wonders for Samskrit in a decade
or two.  
  
1. Four ways to put your love for Samskrit into positive action in a
small way to begin with – (1) Spending 1% of your time to learn Samskrit
language and to study Samskrit literature (2) Spending 1% your time to
teach Samskrit offline or online (to teach whatever little Samskrit you
know) (3) Spending 1% of your time for Samskrit Prachar activities (4)
Spending or donating 1% of your earnings to help the cause of
Samskrit.  
  
2. Propagate the following four facts either through your Social Media
accounts or through any other way - (1) Samskrit language is a simple
language and learning it through speech medium is easier than learning
any other language. (2) Samskrit belongs to all irrespective of caste or
gender and learning it will enrich everyone’s life materially,
intellectually and spiritually. (3) Anybody at any age can learn
Samskrit. Share this link to the article How to learn Samskrit
[https://www.chamuks.in/How_to_learn_Samskrit/](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view?chamuks=VGtSWmVVNTZVVEpQUkZVeFRrUk5QUT09)
(4) Propagate that everyone should know the following 24 facts about
Samskrit which are seldom understood properly -
[https://www.chamuks.in/24_Facts_about_Samskrit/](https://www.chamuks.in/article_view?chamuks=VFdwTmVVNUVaM3BQUkdONVRWUlJQUT09)  
  
3. These four of your acquaintances – (1) Members of your family (2)
Relatives (3) Office colleagues and (4) Friends in the society - can
help the cause of Samskrit in many ways. You can - (1) speak in Samskrit
language with them (2) teach them Samskrit (3) collect donation from
them for Samskrit Prachar works (4) take help from them for Samskrit
related activities. Think now whether you have explored all these 4 X 4
avenues for the cause of Samskrit. If you have not done it, then now is
the time to make use of your fullest potential to the greatest cause -
Samskrit. Now is the time when you still possess the energy and not
after the body is jaded or worn out.  
  
4. Contact as many Samskrit teachers as possible near your place or
through your acquaintances and (1) impress upon them the need to teach
Samskrit as a vibrant living language and not as a not-in-use classical
literary language (2) request them to use interesting, contemporary,
student centred and graded Samskrit language learning material in
Samskrit medium (3) ask them to enable/empower the students to
communicate in Samskrit at every stage of learning (4) encourage and
help the teachers in every possible way to be successful Samskrit
teachers and change-agents of Samskrit education.  
  
5. Any work for the Prachar of Samskrit needs both - people who know
Samskrit and people who do not know Samskrit but are passionate about
Samskrit and are willing to work for it. If you know Samskrit, you can
directly do the following four works. If you do not know Samskrit, then
also you can volunteer to coordinate or do the needful for the same –
(1) Teach the language / Kavya / Course books of various levels /
Shastra Texts etc (2) Write in Samskrit or translate from other
languages into Samskrit (3) Do research on contemporary application of
various knowledge systems available in Samskrit literature and (4) Edit
unpublished Samskrit manuscripts and make them print ready.  
  
6. You may think of utilising four of your great assets for Samskrit
Prachar – (1) Your talent/skills – Associate yourself with some or the
other Samskrit Seva activity at your place or online. (2) Your influence
– You may command some influence due to your power, position, fame,
money, age, knowledge or service. Many a times all these influences
accumulated throughout the life go waste unutilised. Often, people
hesitate to make the good use of the influence they command due to their
fear about personal image, obligation or just hesitation. One should be
hesitant if it is for any personal gain. But when it is for a noble
cause, one need not even think twice and forget about hesitation. (3)
Your contacts – Everyone comes across so many good people who may have
immense potentials. Not everyone gets a chance to serve the society.
Many times, people also do not know what to do and where to begin.
Mostly people love Samskrit. If you give them an opportunity to serve
through some of the ideas mentioned in this article or as required in
the field time to time and initiate them into service activities, that
itself would be a great service. You may know the famous quote in
Samskrit ‘अयोग्यः पुरुषो नास्ति योजकस्तत्र दुर्लभः’. Why don’t you
become a good Yojaka? (4) Rest of your life – Past is over. But you can
certainly spend the rest of your life for a greater and nobler cause to
make it more meaningful and memorable and also to make your next morning
brighter and happier.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

** By :- Chamu Krishna Shastry \| Views:- 1765 \| 04-06-2021 10:03
PM**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

