+++
title = "Ashkenazi Ancestry"
full_title = "Ashkenazi Ancestry revisited"
date = "2014-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/09/09/ashkenazi-ancestry-revisited/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/09/09/ashkenazi-ancestry-revisited/).

Ashkenazi Ancestry revisited

Shai Carmi has his
[article](http://www.nature.com/ncomms/2014/140909/ncomms5835/full/ncomms5835.html)
out on Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry. A few comments:

First, looks like a good job, on the whole. Perhaps Carmi had special
training…

Second, about dates: they assume a mutation rate of 1.44 x 10-8 per
generation, and a generation length of 25 years. I think both of those
are a little off. All the directly-measured whole-genome rates are
between 0.96×10−8 and 1.20×10−8: I wouldn’t go higher than 1.20 x 10-8
per generation, with what I know now. In the course of looking at
paternal age effects, I also checked out the known data on average
generation lengths. In no known population is it as short as 25 years:
never less than 28 for females, and almost always longer than 28 for
males, usually in the 30s. 30 is a much more reasonable generation
length than 25.

The date estimates are inversely related to the assumed mutation rate
and directly proportional to the generation length.

In the article, they estimate an Ashkenazi bottleneck with an effective
size of 250-420, 25-32 generations ago. With a mutation rate of 1.2 x
10-8 per generation, that changes to an effective size of 300-500 (not
much different) 30-38.4 generations ago.

By their numbers, we’re talking 625-800 years ago. Adjusted, 900-1150.
Since we know for sure that at least some Ashkenazi Jews were in the
Rhineland before the year 1000, I think that the revised estimate
indicates that the original settlement was the bottleneck, which makes
sense.

Third, about comparison populations: they used Flemings as a sample
European population, and estimated the Ashkenazi Jews are 46-50%
European. Why Flemings? All the previous analyses have suggested that
their European component is from southern Europe. The mtDNA analysis is
pretty specific: Italy and France.  I think you’d get a better estimate
using Italians, and it would probably yield a slightly higher estimate
of European admixture.

