+++
title = "Rise of the Nanda Imperium"
date = "2021-07-28"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/07/28/rise-of-the-nanda-imperium/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/07/28/rise-of-the-nanda-imperium/).

There are some events in the history of a civilization which have the
ability to change it’s outlook forever. So much so, that the
civilization’s motives change, its aspirations change, and more
importantly, the means change. In the tide of time, Magadha was the
place in ancient India that was meant to bring this ultimate switch in
the ways of kingship. The result was a metamorphosis in the ways of the
ancient Indian polity and how it was approached and practiced. The man
to herald the new era was the founder of the first Magadhan empire – the
first Nanda. This post is an attempt to comprehend the momentous rise of
Mahāpadma Nanda.

**Introduction**

Whenever we talk about any ancient dynasty in any ancient civilization,
we try to piece together information from various sources – the
archaeological and the literary. Absence or lack of information from any
of these sources results in a rather incohesive account. The scholars
then try to fit together whatever pieces they are left with and the
golden rule which they follow to form a genuine estimate is
corroboration from other sources. For a dynasty whose archaeological
evidence can be called meager, the Nanda dynasty actually does not lack
mention in literary sources. Many of them – the religious ones like the
*Purāṇa-s*, the Buddhists and Jain sources and other non-religious ones
like the dramas, the classical accounts *etc* actually provide us with a
lot of information. And herein lies the precise problem for the account
of the Nanda-s – the problem of plenty. There is a lot of information
from these sources and many a times, they contradict each other. In such
a scenario, it becomes pertinent that in order to weave a cohesive
account of the rise of the Nanda hegemony, we need to see for our self
what exactly does these varied sources say.

***Note:*** The motive of this post is to chart the course of the rise
of Mahāpadma Nanda to the Magadhan throne and his subsequent reign. *The
reign of his successors and the eventual overthrow of the Nanda-s from
Magadha by the duo of Chandagupta Maurya and Chāṇakya do not come in
purview of this write up* and will be discussed separately in future on
this blog. But the successors and their reign will be mentioned when
considered necessary to give perspective and context to the reign of
Mahāpadma himself.

![**Conjectural Reconstruction of an Ancient Indian City based on the
Bas-Relief on Southern Gateway of Sanchi Stupa by Percy Brown in his
*Indian
Architecture.***](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/07/conjectural_reconstruction_of_the_main_gate_of_kusinagara_circa_500_bce_adapted_from_a_relief_at_sanchi-1.jpg?w=1000)

**Content**

These are the summarized heads under which this in depth analysis will
proceed: ***Section One*** ***– Sources –*** (I) Literary Sources
(Religious): The *Purāṇa-s*/ Jain Literature/ Buddhist Sources/
Classical Sources. (II) Literary Sources (Non Religious):
*Kathāsaritasāgara*/ *Harśacharita & Ashtādhyāyi*/ *Mudrārākṣasa*/ Tamil
Poem by Māmulnār/ *Cyropaedia*/ *Shāha Nāmā* of Firdausi/ Other
Non-Religious Sources. (III) Archaeological & Non Literary Sources:
Hāthigumpha Inscription/ In the Deccan/ Coins. ***Section Two – Estimate
of the first Nanda – Mahāpadma Nanda/Ugrasen:*** Origin and Ascent to
the Throne of Magadha/ The Duration of His Reign/ Conquests/ The Nanda
Innovation/ Administration/ Cultural Environment/ Wealth of the Nanda-s
and Discontent in the Empire.

**Sources** – **Literary Sources** **(Religious)**

***§ ThePurāṇa-s***

The Purāṇa-s give the name Mahāpadma or Mahāpadmapati *i.e.* sovereign
of an infinite host or of immense wealth (Raychaudhuri, 1967) for the
first Nanda king, thus hinting at not only at his political power but
also his wealth. He is called *Śūdragarbhodbhava i.e.* born of Śūdra
mother and that he was the son of the last Śaiśunāga.¹ Various
*Purāṇa-s* like *Matsya*, *Vayu* and *Brahmāṇda Purāṇa*, all of them
agree and maintain that Mahāpadma Nanda was *Sarva Kṣhatrāntaka i.e.* he
destroyed all the Kṣatriya-s and that he was *ekarāṭa* – the sole
monarch of the earth.²

***Viṣṇupurāṇa also says the same* – *he was the destroyer of all the
Kṣatriyas and the paramount sovereign whose writ ran unchallenged
throughout the earth.³* **

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* even mentions his similarity in these acts with none other
than Paraśurāma *(Mahāpadmo nandaḥ paraśurāma ivāparo
akhilakṣatrāṅtakārī bhavitā).⁴* How the first Nanda was significantly
different from the previous rulers can be understood from the fact that
*Purāṇa-s* describe him as the incarnation of the Kali age.⁵ The dynasty
is called irreligious (adhārmika) in these writings. The *Purāṇa-s* give
an estimated reign of 28 years to Mahāpadma and state that he was
succeeded by his eight sons who ruled for twelve years. Thus, in total
the Nanda-s ruled for about forty year period. But the chroniclers give
the name of only one and possibly the eldest son of Nanda *viz.*,
Sahalya/Sahalin⁶ or Sukalpa.⁷ They also agree that Kauṭitlya, minister
of Chandragupta Maurya finished off the Nanda dynasty.

***§ Jain Literature***

Many readers here might have heard the connection between the Nanda-s
and their origin story concerned with a barber. It would be interesting
to know that the Jain texts are the prime source for this barber origin
story. Though, the classical Greek writings also mention this connection
but they will be discussed later in the post. Jain writers like
Haribhadra Sūri in *Āvaśyaka sūtra,* Hemachandra in *Pariśiṣtaparvan*,
and Jinaprabha Sūri in *Vividha-Tirtha-Kalpa* mention Nanda as
*nāpitadāsa…rājā jātaḥ, nāpitakumāra* and *nāpitagaṇikāsuta*
respectively *i.e.* the son of a courtesan by a barber named Divākīrti.⁸
Clearly, no connection has been supposed here between the Nanda king who
was contemporary of Alexander and the previous ruling house of Magadh.

Hemachandra narrates a very different account of Nanda and his rise to
power. He says that when Nanda was a mere boy, he saw Pāṭaliputra in his
dreams encircled by his entrails. Nanda explained his dream to his
teacher who saw it as a sign of his future greatness. The teacher then
married his daughter to Nanda. On the other hand, King Udayin as per
Hemachandra had been assassinated by his enemy’s son who had disguised
himself as a Jain monk. *Āvaśyaka sūtra* suggests that the assassin was
sent by Pālaka, king of Avanti, rival of Udāyin. Udāyin had therefore,
died with no heirs. When the marriage procession of Nanda was passing
through the city, the royal procession after Udāyin’s death was passing
from there as well. The two crossed each other and *the state elephant
put Nanda on his back, the horse neighed* and after many supernatural
signs, the people and the officers of the state decided to put Nanda on
the throne.⁹

With regard to the conquests of Nanda after coming to the throne, the
Jain texts explain to us how the entirety of this country down to the
seas was brought under the Nanda domination by his minister. This is an
intriguing information regarding the possible role played by a minister
of Mahāpadma.¹⁰ The reluctant minister according to Jain texts was a man
named Kalpaka and it was he who sowed the seeds of expansion in the mind
of the first Nanda.

***Samudravasan śebhya āsamudramapi śriyaḥ  
upāyahastairākṛishya tatah so*‘ *krita Nandasāt ***^(***11***)

Dr. Buddha Prakash mentions a Jain text called the *Bhagavatī sūtra*
that has important information regarding the first Nanda. It says that
many years after the demise of Mankhali Gośāla (the Ājīvika teacher
Gośāla), a very strong king named Devasena Vimalavāhana Mahāpadma
(Mahāpauma) was reigning in the city of Śatadvāra in the foot of the
Vindhya mountain. The *sūtra* calls this king the incarnation of Gośāla.
Though he also mentions that the alternate reading of the text could
mean the city as Śatadvāra located in the land of the Puṇḍas in the foot
of Vaiṭādhya mountain. Therefore, this would mean that the place
mentioned could be in Puṇḍa or Puṇḍra *i.e.* North Bengal.

These sources also agree that Nanda had eight sons who were his
legitimate heirs. The immense wealth of the Nanda-s is also mentioned in
Jain literature. A Jain work called *titthogālī paiṇṇa* (verses 636-639)
talks about a Nanda king-wealthy, beautiful and renowned who hid/buried
a huge amount of gold under five topes and Kalki took it away from
there. (Prakash, 1956). It is interesting that the work does not specify
which Nanda king hid the treasure. Most likely, it was one of the sons
of the first Nanda.

***§ Buddhists Sources***

The Buddhist text *Mahābodhivaṁśa* gives the name of the first Nanda as
Ugrasena. As per this text – the sons of the first Nanda were – Paṇḍūka,
Paṇḍugati, Bhūtapāla, Rāśṭrapāla, Govishāṇaka, Daśasiddhaka, Kaivarta
and Dhana.¹² Buddhists give only a period of 22 years in total to the
Nanda dynasty – the nine Nada-s *(navanandāḥ).* Buddhists texts also say
that this Ugrasena Nanda ousted the nine sons of the previous monarch.
In various Pali texts like *Theragāthā-Aṭṭhakathā,
Samyutta-Nikāya-Aṭṭhakathā* and *Petavatthu Aṭṭhakathā,* Nanda has been
described as a king of Kāśī.¹³ These works maintain that Nanda belonged
to very humble origins but still he covered the Kassapa Buddha’s
*chaitya* with a golden sheet and thus he was awarded with kingship. He
also held a great function to give alms to the 500 Peccaka Buddhas led
by Mahāpaduma and at the time of their death he was out in the frontier
of his kingdom to quell a rebellion. When he came back, he gave his
throne to his eldest son and himself became an ascetic.¹⁴

According to *Vaṁsatthappakāsinī*, there were nine more Nandas after the
first one and they were his brothers and not his sons making them in
total ten Nandas. Though, this reading in light of the other evidence
does not hold its ground.¹⁵ *Vaṁsatthappakāsinī* continues to give us
some more interesting tradition preserved. It goes on to say that not
much is known about Nanda’s family and that he spent his time as a
leader of the band of robbers in Malaya (north west). When he collected
enough material wealth, he invaded Magadha and made himself the king. We
can see that as per this text, Nanda had quite a similar career as that
of Chandra Gupta Maurya. This theory however does not seem to be tenable
in light of contradictory evidence. Again Prakash in his paper also
furnishes interesting revelation and cites *Vaṁsatthappakāsinī* to show
that when Chāṇakya pronounced his curse on the Nanda king in the session
of the alms house (Dānagga), he addresses the Nanda king as Nandin and
not the usual Nanda. *Mahāvaṁśa* of Mogallāna (the Cambodian or Extended
*Mahāvaṁśa*) also has similar tradition when he states that one of the
ten sons of Kālāśoka was called Nandin (different from the upstart
robber Nanda as per the Buddhist text).

It is clear that a lot of convoluted rumours are being addressed here.
*Vaṁsatthappakāsinī* also states that Nanda-s levied taxes on
everything, even on skins, gums, trees and stones.¹⁶ Not surprisingly,
these steps made the Nanda-s extremely unpopular in the eyes of the
public. These texts also refer to the generosity of the last Nanda king-
Dhana Nanda and the reason told is that a Brāhmaṇa had entered into the
corpse of the greedy Nanda and then he started his charities.¹⁷ The fame
and wealth of the Nanda-s had long passed into the folk tales in
gigantic proportions. Some Buddhists/Pali texts even refer to a story
which relate that Nanda had a tree of desires – *Kapparukkha/Kalpavṛkṣa*
(Prakash, 1956).

Another extremely important source for the tale of the rise of the first
Nanda is the 8th century Buddhist text called the
*Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa* and just as important is its analysis by
scholar K. P. Jayaswal. It explains that after the reign of certain
Viśoka and Śūrasena for 76 years and 17 years respectively, Nanda will
rise at Puśpa-city.¹⁸ It is important to note that the king Śūrasena has
been told to reign the territories up to the sea. It is related that
Mahāpadma was a great power who possessed a large army. He is called
*Nīchamukhya* – the leading vile man by the writer. It is revealed in
the text for the first time that he had also been a prime minister to
the king before and only got kingship due to some magical process. The
writer of the text in a way complains that Nanda though a *pious and a
just soul* always patronized and was surrounded by Brāhmin intellectuals
and officials – *he gave them riches*, it says. Brāhmin Vararuchi was
his Prime Minister who is told to have been a Buddhist. Famous scholar
Pāṇini as per *Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa* was his favourite. It is then
told that Nanda had issues with his Council of Ministers due to
alienation of their feelings by him. The writer then relates that Nanda
became ill and died at the age of 67.¹⁹

***An important point raised is that the Prime Ministers seem to have
played very engaging role in the polity of Magadh right from the time of
the reign of king Bimbisāra and especially from the time of the first
Nanda as the Buddhist practise of recording the name of prominent Prime
Ministers of the empire start from the rise of the Nanda dynasty.²⁰***

***§ TheClassical Sources***

In 327 BCE, when Alexander the Macedonian invaded India and next year,
defeated the Indian King Porus in the battle of Hydaspes
(Vitastā/Jhelum), after some time, he camped near the banks of Hyphasis
(Vipāśā/Beas).²¹ And here, it is related to us by Quintus Curtius Rufus
that he obtained information about the mighty empire of the east and its
enormous army – the Nanda-s. Alexander is told that “Beyond the river
lay extensive deserts, which it would take eleven days to traverse. Next
came the Ganges, the largest river in all of India, the farther bank of
which was inhabited by two nations, the Gangaridae and the Prasii, whose
king Agrammes kept in the field for guarding the approaches to his
country 20,000 cavalry and 200,000 infantry, besides 2000 four-horsed
chariots, and, what was *the most formidable force of all*, a troop of
elephants which he said ran up to the number of 3000.”²² When Alexander
asks confirmation of these reports from Porus who was also present
there, he answers him in these words:

> ***“..as far as the strength of the nation and kingdom was concerned,
> there was no exaggeration in the reports, but that the present king
> was not merely a man originally of no distinction, but even of the
> very meanest condition. His father was in fact, a barber, scarcely
> staving off hunger by his daily earnings, but who from his being not
> uncomely in person, had gained the affections of the queen, and by her
> influence advanced to too near a place in the confidence of the
> reigning monarch. Afterwards, however, he treacherously, murdered his
> sovereign; and then under the*** ***pretense of acting as guardian to
> the royal children, usurped the supreme authority, and having put the
> young princes to death, begot the present king, who was detested and
> held cheap by his subjects, as he rather took after his father than
> conducted himself as the occupant of the throne.”***
>
> **J. W. M’Crindle,** ***The Invasion of India by Alexander The
> Great.***

Diodorus also gives the account in a very similar manner. The difference
from Curtius account being the name of the nation called Praisioi and
Gandaridae, the name of the king given is Xandrames and the elephant
number as 4000 instead of 3000. But the account differs on major points
when the narration is about what Porus told Alexander when he was asked
about the veracity of these claims. Here, Porus confirms the strength of
the army and details of their territory but Diodorus presents further
narrative as if these were rumours (Prakash, 1955) and thus not
confirmed reports. Porus told Alexander that *“the king of Gangaridai
was a man of quite worthless character, and held in no respect, as he
was thought to be the son of barber. This man – the king’s father – was
of a comely person, and of him the queen had become deeply enamoured.
The old king having been treacherously murdered by his wife, the
succession had devolved on him who now reigned.”²³*

Scholar Buddha Prakash highlights in his paper *Chandragupta Maurya in
the Shāha Nāmā of Firdausi* that the the current Nanda king was only
***thought*** to be the son of a barber. Not only this but, there are
other visible differences in the accounts of Curtius and Diodorus.
Prakash points out that the while Diodorus makes the queen herself as
the assassin of the Magadhan predecessor, Curtius makes the barber
paramour as the culprit. And while Diodorus makes the murdered Magadhan
king issueless, Curtius, not only mentions young princes but also that
they were murdered by the barber. As can be seen from these accounts,
the classical writers here not only differ from the Indian authorities
but also have varied narratives within.

Plutarch mentions the Gandaritai (Gangaridae) and Prasiai as territories
that had separate kings as well as raises the figure for the elephants
to 6000. Another classical writer that mentions some details of these
territories is Pliny. He narrates that Prasii surpasses every other
territory in India in power and glory. Pliny says that *“the capital is
Palibothra (Pātaliputra), after which some call the people itself the
Palibothri, nay, the whole tract of the Ganges.”²⁴*

**Literary Sources (Non-Religious)**

***§ Kathāsaritasāgara***

*Kathāsaritasāgara* interestingly mentions a *katak* i.e. a camp of the
king Nanda in Ayodhyā and therefore suggests an expedition that Nanda
might have taken in the territory of Kośala.²⁵ As per this text the
Nanda-s possessed 900 million (990 crores?) of gold pieces –
*navanavatiśatadravyakoṭīśvarāste nandāḥ.²⁶*

***§ Harśacharita & Ashtādhyāyi***

*Harśacharita* of Bāṇa also has some inputs that are connected to the
rise of the first Nanda. As per Bāṇa, the last Śaiśunāgi had a dagger
thrust into his throat in the vicinity of his city.²⁷ *Ashtādhyāyi* of
Pāṇini has a curious passage which is an illustration for a rule –
*nandopakramāni mānāni*. A commentary on Pāṇini’s work named *Kāśikā*
also mentions it. Raychaudhuri makes this passage indicative of the
possibility that one of the Nanda king was credited with invention of a
certain kind of measure.²⁸

***§ *Mudrārākṣasa****

It is interesting to know that the famous drama *Mudrārākṣasa* by
Viśākhadatta assigns very high birth to the Nanda king.²⁹ This text also
like *Kathāsaritasāgara* mentions the exact same figure of 900 crore
(990 million?) pieces of gold for the treasure of the Nanda-s. It goes
on to say that the people in the Nandas’ dominions were crushed by the
burden and heaved a sigh of relief when they were ousted. Their downfall
was like all the heart diseases of the earth have been removed.³⁰ Not
only the common people but *Mudrārākṣasa* makes the ministers of the
state just as perturbed by the Nanda rule and they can be seen in the
play as actively taking part and helping Chandragupta when he invaded
the kingdom. The infamous incident of the play where Dhana-Nand insulted
Chāṇakya is also well known.

***§ *Tamil Poem by Māmulnār****

Famous scholars S. K. Aiyangar and Nilakantha Sastri had pointed to the
Tamil poem by Māmulnār which refer to the immense treasure of the Nada-s
– *“What is it”* asks a love-lorn lady, *“that has attracted my lover
better than my charms?”* And among the alternatives considered to the
question, one is *“Is it the treasure accumulated in the prosperous
Pātaliputra and hidden in the waters of the Ganges by the Nandas of
great renown, victorious in war?”³¹*

***§ *****Cyropaedia********

Militaryman, philosopher and historian Xenophon (c. 430-354 BCE) also
refer to an Indian king in his fictional biography of the Persian King
Cyrus the Great – *Cyropaedia* which is said to have been written around
370 BCE. The king is told to be a very wealthy man.³² It is told that
when Cyrus demanded material help from this king, he promptly helped him
with funds and an embassy was sent to Cyrus with the requested funds.
The embassy through espionage, also gave them some much needed
information about Cyrus’ enemy Croesus. It is very well known among
scholars that the account by Xenophon, though describing the events of
the time of Cyrus the Great, many a times have details of Xenophon’s
contemporary Cyrus the younger. And as can be seen from the period he
wrote around i.e. 370 BCE, it is extremely likely that the Indian king
being mentioned here is the first Nanda.

***§ *****Shāha Nāmā of Firdausi********

Buddha Prakash in his paper has convincingly proved that the tale of an
Indian King *(Shah-i-Hind)* and his meeting with Alexander (Sikander)
mentioned in the *Shāha Nāmā* of Firdausi are stories of good authority
and has some elements of genuine history. The Shah-i-Hind Kaid (Kand of
Ma’sudi and Kafand of *Majmul-ut-Tawarīkh*) is none other than Chandra,
the Maurya. Kaid is told to be working under the guidance of one sage
named Mihrān that Prakash identifies with Chāṇakya and says the word is
an obvious Persian transcription of the Indian word Brāhmaṇa from its
Prākrit form Māhaṇa (this word is mentioned in *Sukhabodhā* of
Devendra-Gaṇin).³³ Mihrān interpreted the dreams of Kaid and saw signs
of future sovereignty in them. He charted the course for Kaid in order
to achieve their objectives. While narrating this story, it is mentioned
by Firdausi that the dreams of Kaid are interpreted by Mihrān and in
them he saw a king, his extortionist policy, his overthrow and the end
of his dynasty. The king had mighty troops which won him great fame.
Prakash mentions how in the poem, the King was utterly despised by the
people, he has grinding taxes in his state and poor are in miserable
position. He has a mean heart and insatiable greed. Sages and scholars
roam like a pauper and those who do receive patronage are involved in
sycophancy of their masters. The people grew wretched and their life
became gloomy and devoid of charm.³⁴ Important point to note here as per
Prakash is that Firdausi in this epic does not impute any bad origin to
the king and only mentions the demerits of his character.³⁵ Some lines
from the epic explain the situation during the said mean king’s reign:

***He will be gathering fresh hosts  
To win his crown new fame….***

***A time will come when men  
Will joy in wealth and never have enough….***

***When Saturn entereth Libra  
The world will be beneath the strong arm, poor  
And sick fare ill, and yet, the well-to-do  
Will still exact from them, will never open  
Their own hordes, nor abate the others’ travail…***^(***36***)

***§ *****Other Non-Religious Sources********

Raychaudhuri points out that no contemporary literary authority actually
mentions Nanda-s as a dynastic name and the closest we get is in
*Arthaśāstra* of Kauṭilya. The later works like Milind Pañho has the
words like *“the royal family of Nanda”*, then there is of course the
Khāravela inscription that mentions Nandarāja. *Milind Pañho* also gives
us hints for some administrative structure of the Nanda dynasty, though
the *Arthaśāstra* is also a good sources for that. The works of the
Tibetan Tārānātha also have information regarding the Nanda-s and he
assigns a 29 year reign to the first Nanda. The epitomizers of the
*Bṛhatkathā* by Guṇāḍhya also record important details about the
cultural environment of the time of the Nanda-s.³⁷ Another confirmation
from a non-religious source comes from the famous Chinese traveler Hiuen
Tsang who also mentioned about the wealth of the Nandas – *the five
treasures of King Nanda’s seven precious substances.*

**Archaeological/Non Literary Sources**

***§ *****Hāthigumpha Inscription********

The Hāthigumpha inscription of king Khāravela is one of the most
important inscription that mentions the Nanda king. It refers to a water
way (aqueduct) constructed by Nanda in the territory of Kaliṅga and also
that Nanda carried away a seat (statue or footprints) of the Jina from
Kaliṅga as a trophy of his triumph and also some heirlooms of the
Kaliṅga kings.³⁸ Tripathi in his paper on the Kharavela inscription has
related about an old Sanskrit manuscript that was in possession of a
Brāhmin in Bhubaneśvara and which contains a concise account of various
dynasties over the period that ruled Tri-Kaliṅga and had the titile of
*Trikaliṅgādhipati*.³⁹ The manuscript definitely mentions Nanda Vaṁśa as
one of them. He also mentions about a Jayapura Copper-Plate Grant but
that comes not in the purview of this write up as it hints towards the
possibility of events after the reign of the first Nanda.

***§ *****In the Deccan********

The old name of the city of Nander situated on the banks of Godavari –
“Nava Nanda Dehra” also suggests that the Nanda empire might have
reached even there.⁴⁰ Raychaudhuri states on the authority of Rice and
his *Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions* that some inscriptions
dated to 12^(th) century CE state that the ancient Kuntala was ruled by
the Nanda-s. Though, the late date of the inscriptions make this only a
possibility and the suggestion cannot be made with surety.

***§ *****Coins********

When it comes to coinage, the hoard of many punch marked coins found in
a deep stratum of Golakhpur/Golakpur, the site of ancient Pāṭaliputra
are considered pre-Mauryan in origin and hence belonging to the period
of the Nanda-s. Mookerji informs us that they contain symbol of “a dog
or a hare on a hill” which might have been the symbol of the Nanda
Vaṁśa.⁴¹ P. L. Gupta however suggests that of the coins of the Imperial
Series from Golakpur, only the coins belonging to the Period IV may be
attributed to the Nanda dynasty. But S. R. Goyal is of the view that the
Imperial series coins found from different parts of the country should
be attributed to either the Nanda-s or the Mauryas.⁴² It has been
suggested by some scholars that the few specimens of coins (like from
the Kuru janpada) seems to have some overstrike of Magadha symbols. That
might suggests that these punch marked coins were issues by Mahāpadma
Nanda after he conquered the land of the Kuru-s.

Rice in his *Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions* has given some
added information according to which, many leaden coins found in 1888 at
the site of Chandravali, west of Chitaldurg, bore some Brāḥmi legends
like *Raño Muḍā Naṃdasa* which might suggest some sort of Nanda coinage.
Later finds in 1909 at the same place also had similar legends like –
*Raño Chuṭtukaḍḍā Naṃdasa*. The date suggested for these coins is from
2nd century BCE-1st century CE. Same series coins have also been found
in Karwar. A 2nd century CE stone inscription of Sātakarṇi from
Malavaḷḷi and Banavāsi has *Vinhukadda Chutukulā Nanda* as one of the
title and all of this evidence together might suggest some sort of Nanda
domination in north-central Kanara but other scholars like Rapson
disagree with this reading and are of opinion that the phrase
*kulānanda* only means ̍joy of the family’ and nothing more.⁴³

**Estimate of the first Nanda – Mahāpadma Nanda/Ugrasen**

As we have seen, there are multiple stories emerging from different
kinds of sources and these sources do not only have differences in
narrative with others but also huge gaps between them as well. Now that
we have learnt about these myriad of views, we can now proceed to form a
general estimate of the rise and the historical reign of the first Nanda
– Mahāpadma Nanda.

***§ *****Origin******** ***and Ascent to the Throne of Magadha***

Hindu sources across are unanimous about the name of the first Nanda
which as per them was Mahāpadma. Another name suggested by Buddhist
sources is Ugrasena. The classical records mention the name of the Nanda
king contemporary of Alexander as Agrammes which Raychaudhuri suggests
is the Greek corruption of the Sanskrit patronymic *Augrasainya* i.e.
son of Ugrasena. Probably, Mahāpadma was a *viruda* of the first Nanda
which eventually became more famous with time. The origin of Mahāpadma
is surrounded by many rumours and many scholars have tried to form a
cohesive theory about it.

***But first and foremost, the theory about him being a barber,
suggested by classical sources has to be categorically rejected. ***

The reason is two fold – first, all the Indian sources be it Hindu,
Buddhist or Jain confirm that Mahāpadma was not a barber himself. The
emphatic evidence against this theory and the nature of the classical
evidence itself supports this view which seem to present their stories
in a ‘non-commital’ way. Second, the classical evidence of relations
between a barber and the queen, the usurpation by a barber, all seem a
bit too fantastical in nature. Regarding the Curtius’ claims about the
first Nanda’s origin, it has to be kept in mind that these reports of
the classical authors were written down based on the rumours that were
prevalent in those parts of Punjab where these foreigners interacted.
Prakash even suggests that theymight even have been calculated to
exaggerate the excesses which made them unpopular in the estimation of
the people.

***Scenario One:*** When it comes to the Indian stories about the origin
of Mahāpadma, again, different interpretations are suggested by various
scholars based on the given evidence. Prakash suggests that he was the
son of Mahānandi, which he identifies with Kālāśoka and he was probably
the product of an illicit affair from a śūdra women (possibly a
coutesan). Prakash maintains that because he was the son of Mahānandi,
his name might have been Nandi, as mentioned in Buddhist sources. And
due to him being an illegitimate son to this king, he might have
deliberately changed his name from Nandi to Nanda. And this could be the
reason that some Buddhist sources continue to give the name Nandi to the
dynasty. As per Hindu law, the offspring of a kṣatriya male and a śūdra
female is called Ugra. This story of his origin seem to be corroborated
from the classical sources which name the current king Agrammes i.e.
Augrasainya – the son of Ugrasena. As per Prakash, this also then
suggests as to why he might have been given the post of the
minister/prime minister by the last Śaiśunāga, for not being a son of
the queen consort, he could not aspire to equality with other legal
heirs to the throne.⁴⁴

As mentioned above, the *Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa* relates that Nanda
firstly was the prime minister of the last king. As per Prakash, it was
probably due to the reigning king’s affections for him and also that
Mahāpadma was always a very talented, innovative statesman that he was
given the role of prime minister for he could not have been given his
due on count of his low-birth. Being this close the royal family, it was
then possible for the first Nanda to ingratiate himself with the
officers and plan the assassination of the heirs. The people then
accepted him on the throne as there were no legitimate heirs left.

Prakash also suggests as to why the title of Mahāpadma being the son of
a barber might have taken roots in the folklore. He points out that in
Indian tradition of ancient times, the greedy kings were usually styled
as sons of a barber. He relates that in one Jātaka tale, king Bharu of
Bharukaccha is told be son of a barber due to his miserly disposition.
*In Divyāadāna, the inmates of the harem of Bindusāra, called the
daughter of the brāhmaṇa of Champā a barber’s daughter in order to
divert the attention of the king from her.*^(*45*) Therefore, the people
who were burdened by ever increasing taxes and the greed of the king,
might have dubbed his origin as the son of a barber. It then becomes a
recurring pattern in one section of our sources.

Prakash also suggest a very interesting reason for the grossly
exaggerated vices of the Nanda-s. Probably it was done in order to
highlight the virtues of the Mauryas. Kauṭilya as astute a statesman as
he was, probably found it useful to give air to such views in the
popular narrative. This might thus have been a deliberate method of
propaganda under the Maurya-s. There is another possibility however,
that the tales became more exaggerated with time due to the way the
stories are spread in the folk lore which tend to have a more stylized
narrative and there was not a major propaganda angle in the Nanda tales.

***Scenario Two:*** Another scenario is by scholar R. Morton Smith who
suggests that Mahāpadma was the son (offspring of an illicit affair with
a courtesan) of Mahānandin who he identifies with Nāgadarśaka, the last
Haryaṅka.⁴⁶ Mahāpadma was made minister of the kingdom owing either to
kings affections for him or due to his talents, probably both. He
suggests that when Nāgadarśaka was killed and his throne usurped by
Śiśunāga, Mahāpadma was left alive as he was not considered to be a
danger, being a non legitimate son of the last king. But Śiśunāga died
within six/seven years and Kālāśoka/Kākavarṇin ascended throne,
evidently a young man. It might have been considered prudent to continue
Mahāpadma as the minister as he was probably one of the most experienced
man in the family, almost ten years older than Kālāśoka. At the time of
assassination of Kālāśoka which probably happened when he went to war
with Ujjain/Avanti, he was survived by only young princes. Mahāpadma
Nanda then saw the opportunity in killing the sons and ascending the
throne.

Though this might sound odd but Smith makes it a point to note that as
despising this practice of regicides, parricides and the eventual
killing of the surviving princes in the eastern royal houses might
sound, in those times, this was probably only way left to the aspirants
of the throne to make their seat secure in times when despotism and
polygamy created many enemies within the royal household.⁴⁷

***§ *****The Duration of His Reign********

Purāṇa-s make the reign of Mahāpadma of *Aśtāśîti* – 88 years (Matsya
Purāṇa ) which scholars consider to have been a mistake and take it to
mean *Aśtāviṁśati* – 28 years (Vāyu Purāṇa) which Tārānatha confirms but
there are different approaches taken by different scholars. Most
scholars consider the latter meaning to be accurate and take the
following years important in his life – Birth around 402 BCE, ascent to
the throne in around 362 BCE (in the light of the overwhelming evidence
that Mahāpadma was a man of quite a experience when he usurped the
throne) and his death in around 334 BCE. Smith here takes the former
meaning and considers the period told in the Purāṇa-s to have been his
entire life and not just his reign. He considers the birth year of
Mahāpadma to around 431 BCE and his ascent to the throne in around 385
BCE. Thus making his age about 46 when his reign started. He died in 344
BCE at the age of 88 and the Nanda successors reigned for about 22
years. The Buddhist tradition ascribes to the entire Nanda dynasty a
period of 22 years but Smith takes it to mean the period of the
successors of Mahāpadma only.

***§ *****Conquests********

It is agreed by all our sources that the Nanda king was the paramount
sovereign of a large part of India. The extent of his rule seem to
suggests that the dominions which the Nanda king reigned on was hitherto
not achieved by anyone else. The classical sources testify to the
immense dominion of the Nanda-s and it is very likely that the conquests
were mainly done under the reign of Mahāpadma Nanda as he is called
*Sarva Kṣhatrāntaka* – destroyer of all Kṣatriya-s, *Mahāpadmo nandaḥ
paraśurāma ivāparo akhilakṣatrāṅtakārī bhavitā* – the second Paraśurāma
and *ekarāta* – the sole monarch.

The military machine of the first Nanda that went to the farthest
corners of India winning those territories could not have been possible
without its gigantic strength. The classical sources mentioned above in
this regard confirm this. This was the same army that when brought under
the control of Chandragupta Maurya went ahead to add even more to what
had been conquered by the first Nanda.

The ruling Kṣatrīya clans of India when Mahāpadma ascended the throne
were – Ikṣavāku, Pāñchāla, Kāśeya, Haihaya-s, Vitihotra-s, Kaliṅga,
Aśmaka, Kuru, Maithila-s, and Śurasena-s. Not much is known about the
Ikṣavāku of Kośala after the reign of Prasenjit and his son Virudhaka.
The kingdom was evidently on the decline and Mahāpadma Nanda used this
opportunity to end the rule of the Ikṣavāku and annex the territory to
Magadha. The *Kathāsaritasāgara* evidence of a camp of the Nanda king in
Ayodhyā confirms this.

***Raychaudhuri notes that may be due to this event, the remaining
Ikṣavāku-s had to migrate and they thus went southwards, for the
Ikṣavāku-s are found in 3rd-4th century CE occupying the lower valley of
Kriṣṇā.⁴⁸ ***

There are strong hints as per Smith that the overthrow of the Vatsa
kingdom was also done under the rule of Mahāpadma. Kāśī had been a seat
of the viceroy of Magadha since a long time back. When Nanda came on the
throne, it must have been under a viceroy of the Śaiśunāga family which
Nanda finished off. The Vrijis had already been annexed by Ajātaśatru
and keeping a base from here, Raychaudhuri suggests, Nanda might have
conquered the remaining parts of the Nepalese Tarai ending the remnant
Maithilas.

From the evidence of the Hathigumpha inscription and the old Sanskrit
manuscripts of Orissa, the conquest of Kaliṅga by Nanda is confirmed.
Ancient Kaliṅga was considered by the ancient Indian authorities to have
been the source of the best of elephants in the country and it is very
likely that Nanda had this fact in mind when he went to conquer the
territory which hitherto had remain untouched by the rulers of the
north. The strength and the importance of elephants in the Nanda army
was probably one of the reason for their extensive conquests. How
impactful the elephants might have been can be gleamed from the fact
that the the classical sources are unanimous in making Macedonians be
most worried about the elephant corps – *“the most formidable force of
all.”* That is also the reason why the figures for the elephants are the
most fluctuating in the classical sources – from 3000-6000 while other
figures remain more or less the same.

*Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa* says that the emperor’s (Nanda predecessor)
authority extended up to the sea. There is thus a slight possibility
that Kaliṅga was actually brought under the Magadha rule during the last
Śaiśunāga and Magadha during this times was under the prime minstership
of Mahāpadma Nanda. And that’s why Nanda understood the importance of
this place for long and after his rise to the kingship, constructed the
aqueduct for better facilities and administration of the territory.
Conquest of Kaliṅga therefore, was a personal project of Mahāpadma. But
it only remains a theory because the evidence for annexation of Kaliṅga
during the time of Nanda (not Śaiśunāga) is overwhelming.

Pāñchāla-Kuru-s and Śurasena-s are confirmed to have been under the
Nanda-s by the classical sources. When Chandragupta Maurya ascended to
the kingship of Magadha, the territory of much of Malwa, Gujarat were
under his rule and it is extremely likely that the base was prepared by
Mahāpadma Nanda by bringing Haihaya-s, Vitihotra-s under his domination.
The Nandera/Nava Nada Dehra evidence also gives credence to the Nanda
conquests up to the banks of Godāvari *i.e.* the territory of the
ancient Aśmaka-s. As has been mentioned above on account of some early
period coinage, inscriptions and also some late period inscriptions from
erstwhile Mysore state, there is a possibility of north Karnataka to
have been under the influence of the Nanda-s but the evidence is very
much debatable in this regard and therefore, can not be taken seriously
at this point.

***§ *****The Nanda Innovation********

Purāṇa-s had been consistent in relating to us that the rule of the
Nanda-s was a break from the past. It herald the age of kali, terrible
in the eyes of the chroniclers. It seems like more than the origin of
Mahāpadma, it was his innovation in kingship that possibly was the
harbinger of change in the Hindu polity. Eastern India had to be the
perfect place for this transformation. Ever since the period of
Ajātaśatru, the no holds barred approach of the kings of Prāchī was very
different from what seem to have the norm in the Madhya Deśa.

***In these parts, every single king, almost every dynasty had been a
usurper with numerous cases of regicides and parricides and the throne
had been won many a times by bloodshed. ***

Therefore, it would be very natural that a statesman of immense talents
would emerge from this part of our ancient civilization where rules, at
least in warfare and politics were some what relaxed. And it would have
been even more natural that this man went ahead of his predecessors in
his ruthlessness. Here Raychaudhuri quotes another scholar which
perfectly sums up the innovation of Mahāpadma Nanda – they (Nanda-s)
*“compelled the mutually repellent molecules of the body politic to
check their gyrations and submit to the grasp of a superior controlling
force.”*

Smith says that Mahāpadma’s innovation consisted in dethroning the old
rulers, and apparently extirpating their families: *he destroyed the
kṣatriyas*. He continues to cite its similarity to what communism had as
its feature – the old ruling class must be destroyed so that the revolt
is without leadership, he says. The stake of revolt is then greater,
all, or nothing, he continues.⁴⁹ And that is why Chandragupta was
successful in his revolt, he in the guidance of Chāṇakya, went for all,
or nothing – and he got it all.

***§ *****Administration********

Arrian has mentioned that beyond Beas, there existed *“an excellent
system of internal government, under which the multitude was governed by
aristocracy, who exercise their authority with justice and
moderation.”⁵⁰* This Raychaudhuri suggests reminds us of the *gaṇa
sangha-s* and the *rājaśabdopajīvin* of the Arthśāstra and thus means
that Mahāpadma Nanda though conquered these territories but still
allowed them much independence in their internal administration. It is
corroborated by the classical authors who mention the Gangaridae and
Prasii separately but put them under one king. The system of relaxed
rule was clearly not followed in the core territory and its immediate
neighbourhood where the rules were much more strict and harsh.

On the authority of the classical sources, Raychaudhuri implies a a
system of provincial government under nomarchs and hyparchs in the Nanda
period- somewhat like the governors and the satraps. Though many a times
they are mentioned in context of the rule of Chandragupta but it will
safe to assume that the system might actually have come into force
during the reign of Mahāpadma Nanda, otherwise, it would not have been
possible to reign in such a large empire. The experience of Mahāpadma as
a minister might have played a huge role in these innovations. Important
in this regard are that the stories of exceeding taxes on everything
under the sun during the Nanda rule. Such efficient though burdensome
levies could not have been possible without an equally efficient
administration to exact them. Raychaudhuri has also suggested the
possibility that the territorial units like *āhāra, viśaya, janapada*
and the functionaries like *rājūka, prādeśika* and *raśṭrīya* might have
their roots in the Nanda rule as well.

Ministers seem to have continued to play important role in the Nanda
rule as hinted in *Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa,* though in it, they are
more related regarding their disapproval of the ways of the Nanda. But
still it seems like the Council of Ministers was pertinent in the
administration. The role of Vararuchi in the text is also an example of
the influence of the prime minister. And if some of our sources are
correct then a minster called Kalpaka was very influential in the reign
of Mahāpadma, so much so, that some Jain sources, as mentioned above
ascribe the huge conquests of the first Nanda to the influence of this
minister and his advice. The tradition of strong prime ministership
therefore, seems to have been an established practice of the Magadha
Empire.

***§ *****Cultural Environment********

If the tradition mentioned in the Bṛhatkathā is to be believed,
*“Pāṭaliputra under the Nanda rule became the abode (kṣetra) of
Saraswatī and Lakṣmī, the home of learning as well as material
prosperity.”* The immense wealth of the Nanda rule seem to support this
statement and if coupled with the evidence of *Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa*
which makes Nanda surrounded by Brāḥmin intellectuals along with the
very important revelation that Nanda had a friend in the epitome of
scholarship – the famous Pāṇini, then it becomes even more clear that
the rule of Mahāpadma had the traditional hallmarks of cultural and
intellectual superiority as well. Scholars like Varśa, Upavarśa,
Kātyāyana, Vararuchi, Vyāḍi are said to have flourished in this period.

***We have to keep in mind that the tales of Nanda-s disrespecting the
intellectuals of the period seems to have taken roots during the rule of
Dhana Nanda and not the first Nanda – the infamous incident of the
tradition where he insulted Chāṇakya is just an example. ***

Another interesting conjecture can be made here regarding the religious
affiliations of Mahāpadma. As mentioned above, the Jain text *Bhagavatī
sūtra* suggests that the first Nanda might have had close connections
and affiliations with the Ājīvika sect. This could possibly be one of
the reasons for the bitterness of the sources like Hindu, Buddhist and
Jain towards Mahāpadma Nanda. It appears that he none the less respected
and supported other religions and sects but strong ties to the Ājīvika-s
might have made others displeased. But this is just a guess at best at
the moment for any additional proof in this regard is lacking.

***§ *****Wealth of the Nanda-s and Discontent in the Empire********

As mentioned earlier, the wealth of the Nanda-s was proverbial and also
seems to have been the reason of discontent in the empire among the
common folk for the wealth was collected due to the ever exceeding
burden of taxes. It is no doubt that this wealth must have been from the
territorial extension of the Nanda dominions under the leadership of
Mahāpadma Nanda and the tributes, taxes levied from these conquered
areas. But it is natural to assume that such a huge and fine army
required regular maintenance on its upkeep and thus Mahāpadma must have
financed such an expenditure by resorting to increasing the taxes.

***Thus we can assume that more the conquests furthered by the Nanda
army, more were the taxes to maintain the pace of these conquests and
instill a fear of such a huge army in these areas to keep them from
revolting. ***

Their proverbial wealth like the figure of 900 million gold pieces
possibly became a folk lore due to their new coinage and currency
system. Scholar John Allan had stipulated that the stories of the Nanda
dynasty’s wealth arose because they were the first dynasty to issue
coins onsuch a large scale. Other scholars however do no support this
theory as coins of previous period have been found. Never the less,
whether the Nanda-s were the first to issue such coins or not but they
certainly seem to have issued them on a large scale for the evidence in
the phrase *nandopakramāni mānāni* mentioned above of a possible royal
measure issued by a Nanda king suggests its possibility.

The authorities are however unclear as to who actually was responsible
for the exceeding burden of taxes on the populace. It is possible that
the later Nanda-s particularly the last emperor Dhana Nanda went too far
in this regard and the folklore eventually muddled up the two periods.
After all, about the Nanda-s, tradition also says, as mentioned above,
*that Pāṭaliputra became the abode (kṣetra) of Saraswatī and Lakṣmī.*
The only way these contradictory views are possible is if the period of
Mahāpadma saw the flowering of cultural and economical development and
the later Nanda-s squandered the positives away by their mean and cruel
disposition. The statement from *Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa* which
describes the first Nanda as *“pious and just soul”* supports this view.

The enmity of the council of ministers has been alluded in the
*Ārya-mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa*. This might then be due to the fact that
Mahāpadma had not long ago been their peer and it was not possible for
many of them to take orders from him. The way he had ascended the throne
by intrigues was known to some ministers and they were thus hostile to
the first Nanda. The more authoritative Mahāpadma tried to be to make
his throne secure, the more resentment grew. Prakash suggests that this
might have been one of the reasons that Chandragupta Maurya found many
supporters and helpers among the ministers of the last Nanda for his
usurpation which has been depicted in *Mudrārākṣasa*.

**Conclusion**

If we try to understand as to why the Nanda-s, particularly Mahāpadma
Nanda are not given their due in the history, possibly it is, as has
been suggested by historians because they were overshadowed by the
dynasty which came later- the Maurya-s – *“the glamour of the Nandas has
been dimmed by the great splendour of the succeeding dynasty.”* It will
be however, correct to remember at this moment that as astute as
Mahāpadma Nanda was, the edifice that he erected was based on the
foundations of the rule of Bimbisāra and Ajātaśatru which in turn was
taken to new heights by the Maurya-s. The talent of Mahāpadma therefore
was, in taking what the Haryaṅka rulers had done and add his innovations
to the techniques of the ancient Indian polity and warfare.

It is perhaps not an exaggeration when Raychaudhuri in his
work,compares the role of Haryaṅka and the Nanda dynasties to what
Wessex played in the history of Pre-Norman England, and Prussia in the
history of modern Germany. The first Nanda made large scale annexations
of territories acceptable in the ancient Indian body politic. We can
thus say for sure that the Nanda dynasty under the reign of Mahāpadma
Nanda certainly changed the rules of the game forever.

**References**

1.  Hema Chandra Raychaudhuri, *[Political History of Ancient India from
    the Accession of Parikshit to the Extinction of the Gupta
    Dynasty](https://archive.org/details/politicalhistory00raycuoft/)*.
    pp. 117-118.
2.  *ibid*.
3.  Prakash, Buddha. “CHANDRA GUPTA MAURYA IN THE SHĀH-NĀMĀ OF
    FIRDAUSI.”*Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
    Institute*36, no. 3/4 (1955): 270-91. Accessed July 24, 2021.
    [http://www.jstor.org/stable/44082961.](http://www.jstor.org/stable/44082961)
4.  *ibid.* p. 288.
5.  H. C. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *[Age of the
    Nandas and the
    Mauryas](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.430300/)
    (1967). ed. by* K. A. Nilakantha Sastri. p. 11.
6.  *ibid*. p. 23.
7.  Raychaudhuri, *Political History of *Ancient India**. p. 119.
8.  Prakash, Buddha. *“Chandra Gupta Maurya in the Shāh Nāmā of
    Firdausi”*. Part 1. p. 291.
9.  Prakash, Buddha. *“Chandra Gupta Maurya in the Shāh Nāmā of
    Firdausi”.* (Continued).*Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
    Institute*37, no. 1/4 (1956): 120-43. Accessed July 25, 2021.
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44082912>.
10. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *Age of the Nandas
    and the Mauryas (1967)*. p. 17.
11. *ibid*.
12. Raychaudhuri, *Political History of *Ancient India**. p. 119.
13. Prakash, Buddha.*“Chandra Gupta Maurya in the Shāh Nāmā of
    Firdausi”*. Part 1. p. 290.
14. Prakash, Buddha. *“Chandra Gupta Maurya in the Shāh Nāmā of
    Firdausi*.” (*Continued part 2)*.” pp. 121-122.
15. *ibid.*
16. *ibid.* p. 126.
17. *ibid*.
18. K. P. Jayaswal, *“§ 7 Magadha King and their Ministers, Subsequent
    to Udāyin.”* *[An Imperial History of
    India.](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.12147/)* pp.
    14-15.
19. *ibid*.
20. *ibid*. § 8 Maurya Dynasty. p. 17.
21. J. W. M’Crindle, *[The Invasion of India by Alexander The
    Great.](https://archive.org/details/dli.granth.107735)* pp. 221-222.
22. *ibid.*
23. ibid. pp. 281-282.
24. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *Age of the Nandas
    and the Mauryas (1967)*. p. 16.
25. Raychaudhuri, *Political History of *Ancient India**. p. 119.
26. Prakash, Buddha. Chandragupta Maurya… *(part 2)* p. 126
27. Raychaudhuri, *Political History of *Ancient India**. p. 118.
28. *ibid*. p. 120.
29. Prakash, Buddha. Chandragupta Maurya… *(part 2)* p. 124.
30. *ibid*. p. 127.
31. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *Age of the Nandas
    and the Mauryas (1967)*. p. 254.
32. Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya..(part 2)*. p. 125.
33. Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya… (part 1)* p. 279.
34. *ibid*. pp. 283-287.
35. Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya..(part 2)*. p. 124.
36. Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya… (part 1)* p. 283-287.
37. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *Age of the Nandas
    and the Mauryas (1967)*. p. 25.
38. Raychaudhuri, *Political History of *Ancient India**. p.
119. *{cf*.
    Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya… (part 1)* p. 289*}*.
39. Narayan Tripathi, “A Note on the Hati Gumpha Inscription of Emperor
    Kharavela.” [*Journal of Bihar and Orissa. (1930) Volume
    XVI*](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.280418/) *(J. B.
    O. R. S.)*. p. 191.
40. Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya… (part 1)* p. 290.
41. R. K. Mookerji, *[Chandragupta Maurya and His
    Times](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.281321).* p.
    345.
42. Goyal, Shankar. “HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE PUNCH-MARKED COINS.”*Annals
    of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute*81, no. 1/4 (2000):
    153-68. Accessed July 27, 2021.
    <http://www.jstor.org/stable/41694610>. p. 167.
43. B. L. Rice, *[Coorg
    Inscriptions.](https://archive.org/details/coorginscription01riceuoft/)
    Epigraphia Carnatica. Volume I.* p. 103.
44. Prakash, Buddha. *Chandragupta Maurya..(part 2)*. p. 125.
45. *ibid*. p. 127.
46. Smith, R. Morton. “On the Ancient Chronology of India
    (II).”*Journal of the American Oriental Society*, vol. 77, no. 4,
    1957, pp. 266–280.*JSTOR*. Accessed 27 July 2021.
    [www.jstor.org/stable/596129](http://www.jstor.org/stable/596129)
47. *ibid.*
48. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *Age of the Nandas
    and the Mauryas (1967)*. p. 17.
49. Smith, R. Morton. *“On the Ancient Chronology of India (II)*. p.
    275.
50. Raychaudhuri, “India in the Age of the Nandas.” *Age of the Nandas
    and the Mauryas (1967)*. p. 21.

