+++
title = "The Masters of the"
full_title = "The Masters of the Future"
date = "2013-08-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/08/26/the-masters-of-the-future/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/08/26/the-masters-of-the-future/).

The Masters of the Future

In *Guns, Germs, and Steel,* Jared Diamond argues that all human groups
have equal mental capabilities – except for the inhabitants of New
Guinea, who are clearly smarter than the human norm.

If this is the case, there’s money to be made. Good performance in a
lot of high-paying jobs requires intelligence above some fairly high
threshold. Such people are scarce \[outside of New Guinea\], and that
means that their labor is expensive. The fraction of individuals above
a high threshold increases dramatically with a higher mean, and since
people in PNG don’t have high incomes, there is a fantastic arbitrage
opportunity here. You could locate some of the many geniuses that must
exist in PNG, rapidly and inexpensively teach them high-tech skills
(which they would learn easily, since they’re geniuses, natch), apply
for H1B visas, and them resell them to the highest Silicon Valley
bidder. This wouldn’t last, of course – these guys would not stay peons
forever. They’d be generating their own start-ups in a few years,
founding hedge funds, dominating the Vegas poker tournaments, etc.
Some, less materialistic, would become grandmasters, win Fields medals,
or write seminal books about the attractions of cannibalism. Still, you
could make a lot of money in the short run, and if you were careful to
build good relationships with your employees, they might let you in on
the ground floor of an IPO later.

Poul Anderson, always a visionary, foresaw this. A character in one his
books put it thusly:” I am a racist – a dedicated, fanatical racist –
who maintains, and can scientifically prove, that his own race is
inferior. The only true humans on earth, my friends, the main line of
evolution, the masters of the future, are the lordly Melanesians. ”

Of course that character was feigning insanity, but still.

