+++
title = "The Long Count"
full_title = "The Long Count"
date = "2016-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/04/08/the-long-count/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/04/08/the-long-count/).

The Long Count

They’ve managed to sequence a bit of autosomal DNA from the Atapuerca
skeletons, about 430,000 years old, confirming that they are on the
Neanderthal branch.

Among other things, this supports the slow mutation rate, one compatible
with what we see in modern family trios, but also with the fossil
record.

This means that the Pygmies, and probably the Bushmen also, split off
from the rest of the human race about 300,000 years ago. Call them
Paleoafricans.

They are anatomically modern: they have chins, etc. Behaviorally modern?
There have been only a few attempts to measure their intelligence: what
has been done indicates that they have very low IQs. They definitely
talk, tell stories, sing songs: does that imply that they could, given
the right environment, have developed the Antikythera mechanism or a
clipper ship?

This means that language is older than some had thought, a good deal
older. It also means that people with language are quite capable of
going a quarter of a million years without generating much technological
advance – without developing the ability to push aside archaic humans,
for example. Of course, people with Williams syndrome have language, and
you can’t send them into the kitchen and rely on them to bring back a
fork. Is the sophistication of Bushman language – this means the
concepts they can and do convey, not the complexity of the grammar –
comparable with that of other populations? I don’t know. As far as I can
see, one of the major goals of modern anthropology is to make sure that
nobody knows. Or that they know things that aren’t so.

The minimal definition of behavioral modernity – that set of traits that
exists in all of humanity, including those that are most divergent, and
that are probably ancestral in anatomically modern humans – may not
include much technological creativity.

Next: since we now know that generic Neanderthal and Denisovan alleles
don’t fit too well with anatomically modern humans, and AMH alleles
didn’t fit too well with Altai Neanderthals, it seem likely that you see
the beginning of such functional divergence between Paleoafricans and
everyone else. I know of one example of a European haplotype that’s a
heart disease risk on a mostly-African genetic background, but not on a
European background, but most such incompatibilities are probably very
mild, hard to detect. It would probably take thousands of generations
for a Pygmy population to lose a significant fraction of its Bantu
introgression. You might be able to detect this on a few alleles, but
for the most part it just hasn’t been long enough.

Culture gets forgotten, inventions get lost: any populations with a
sufficiently low innovation rate probably does not advance at all,
culturally. They could respond to natural selection, change in a way
that increased their innovation rate… So people could continue to make
Acheulean handaxes for a million years: they had to change before there
could be further technological progress. Neanderthals had more
sophisticated technology, but that technology changed very, very slowly
compared to, say , that of humans in the upper Paleolithic. Biology
keeps culture on a leash, and you can get to the end of the leash.

Some have suggested that the key to technological development is higher
population: that produces more intellects past a high threshold, sure. I
don’t think that’s the main factor. Eskimos have a pretty advanced
technology, but there were never very many of them. On the other hand,
they have the highest IQ of any existing hunter-gatherer population:
that’s got to help. Populations must have gone up the Eemian, the
previous interglacial period, but nothing much got invented back then.
It would seem that agriculture would have been possible in the Eemian,
but as far as we know it didn’t happen. Except for Valusia of course.
With AMH going back at least 300,000 years, we have to start thinking
about even earlier interglacial peiods, like Mindel-Riss (424-374 k
years ago)

