+++
title = "Phenotypes vs genetic"
full_title = "Phenotypes vs genetic statistics"
date = "2014-05-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/05/19/phenotypes-vs-genetic-statistics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/05/19/phenotypes-vs-genetic-statistics/).

Phenotypes vs genetic statistics

Lewontin started
[it](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/01/26/lewontins-argument/),
but responsibility is infinitely divisible, so that’s no excuse. Later
practitioners are just as guilty.

He tried to argue away the possibility of phenotypic differences between
different human populations using the magic of genetic statistics. 
Looking at overall genetic variation in humans (why?) most is
within-group, rather than between groups. That’s true of dog breeds, as
well, which is why they’re all really the same, even though they may
*seem* to vary wildly in size, appearance, lifespan, and behavior.

Which is why Pygmies aren’t really short: they’re faking it.

This whole approach is just nonsense.First, you can sometimes see big
between-population phenotypic differences driven by a single SNP: the
east-Asian [EDAR](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/03/12/edar/)
variant causes many of the morphological characteristics you see in East
Asians, and it’s almost fixed. Naturally, that one SNP accounts for an
infinitesimal fraction of overall genetic variation.

Selection can also create big phenotypic differences between populations
through moderate frequency changes in many alleles of small effect, and
that doesn’t result in much between-group genetic variation either.
Those tamed foxes aren’t going to be wildly genetically different from
their source population, in terms of overall variation. They differ in
the genes that influence their tameness, that plus drift from the
domestication bottleneck. Mostly this means that the frequencies of
alleles that favor tameness has increased: I wouldn’t bet on many hard
sweeps, although there would eventually be some, given time. But fox
domestication didn’t take much time: true human-symp foxes, ones that
jump into your lap, showed up by generation 10. This is a behavior that
you never, ever see in wild foxes. Except, sometimes, when they have
rabies.

Height is highly polygenic, almost as much so as IQ. Pygmies are about
six standard deviations shorter than Europeans or Bantus: what magic
principle says that you couldn’t see comparably large differences in IQ?
There is none. Although the evidence we suggests that average
population IQ doesn’t vary quite that much – probably ranges over
something like 3 std, from low to high.

If we knew the alleles that influence height – a fair number, not
necessarily all of them – we could probably determine the extent to
which genetic differences causes the difference in height between two
populations, say between southern and northern Europeans.
Height-favoring alleles are definitely more common in northern
Europeans, so at least some of the difference in average height is
genetic. At any rate, this approach works if the populations are not too
divergent.

Now this is perhaps not quite so simple if the local population has a
significant number of alleles affecting height that are private, not
shared with the populations we have previously studied.

For example, a quite recent
[study](http://epigen3.mcgill-cihr-ig.ca/abstract/genetic-determination-and-evolution-of-adult-height-among-central-african-pygmies-and-their)indicates
that SNPs associated with height in Europeans contribute to adult height
in Pygmies, but a number of other local alleles (not found in Europeans)
do as well. I would guess the Pygmy variants affecting growth hormone
metabolism are not found in Europeans.

Pygmies are diminutive, obviously, but not in exactly the same way that
Europeans are. If you tried to estimate Pygmy height using only the
alleles that influence height in Europeans, you’d predict that Pygmies
were short, all right, but in real life they’d be a good deal shorter
than your estimate – because you’re not counting the private height
alleles. You would need to supplement your list of height variants with
a huge GWAS study of Pygmies, in order to find those local variants. If
you want to find small-effect variants, you’ll probably need to include
all living Pygmies.

Assuming that you do your original GWAS study in Europeans, in what
other populations would your predictions work decently without local
supplementation? Hard to be sure, since there might be local variants
of strong effect – but I’d guess that it would probably work on
everybody outside of Africa (OK, maybe not Melanesians), might work with
the more common kinds of sub-Saharan Africans (Bantus and Nilotics, say)
and would be least likely to work with Pygmies and Bushmen, who are the
most divergent.

I started out this piece with the aim of kicking Lewontin’s idiotic
heirs, but then got interested in the details, how to actually figure
something out. When will I learn?



























