+++
title = "Unknown Phenotypes"
full_title = "Unknown Phenotypes"
date = "2014-05-22"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/05/22/unknown-phenotypes/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/05/22/unknown-phenotypes/).

Unknown Phenotypes

One of the fun parts about these gormless discussions about race
consists of people who talk as if we don’t really know anything about
the phenotypes under discussion. Like, who really knows what
intelligence is, and who really knows if groups vary in average
intelligence, blah blah blah.

The funny thing is that a lot of those discussing these issues really
*don’t* know. At this point, the average graduate student in physical
anthropology doesn’t know that different populations have significant
differences in average brain volume – so why would you expect Jerry
Coyne to? Does he know that there’s a fair-sized correlation between
brain volume and measured intelligence? Even if he doesn’t, he would
immediately understand why that was highly likely. Is he moderately
familiar with modern psychometrics? Probably not. Does he know that
there is a one-std difference in IQ between blacks and whites, and that
it shows up before kindergarten? I doubt it. James Heckman knows.
There is of course lots of other evidence that clearly shows that
schools are not the cause of that difference, not least the observation
that blacks do poorly in the same prosperous, integrated, liberal
schools (Shaker Heights!) where whites and northeast Asians do just
fine.

How many know that the observed rank-orderings of groups are apparently
the same everywhere? Bring in Japanese as farm workers, and they’re in
the upper middle class in four or five generations. Bring the Chinese
into Malaysia as illiterate tin miners, and they end up owning and
running all the industry in the country (and the Communist party too,
back in the day).

How many of those talking about clines and races know that black 12th
graders in the US score lower than white 8th graders on reading and
math? How many known that blacks are hugely underrepresented in the
upper tails of the achievement distribution?

How many remember the tens of times that we’ve been told that some new
intervention is going to erase these gaps, and then seen the story
dribble away to nothing? While we’re at it, why do these interventions
always consist of a bunch of liberal arts graduates talking with great
sincerity – isn’t there anything else to try? Something new, something
with at least a Chinaman’s chance of success? Modafinil? Trancranial
magnetic stimulation? Caning? Tarts for nerds?

Parenthetically, none of these practical questions have anything to do
with typological questions: a population that originated from the other
end of a cline can be very different, and it’s the differences that
matter, not whether there’s a natural seam between populations (like
the Sahara, or the Himalayas). This is obvious to anyone who’s ever
thought seriously about the matter. Both of us!

Since it is obvious that ‘clines vs races’ argument has no relevance to
the real question – the enduring achievement gaps between different
populations in the US and other countries – why do people keep bringing
it up? I used to think that such people were blowing smoke, deliberately
lying to make a point, but I am increasingly willing to consider the
possibility that they’re just stupid. Mixed explanations are also
possible: such nonsense has worked in the past, and the current
practitioners are following a beaten path, rather than rationally
planning a deception campaign.

Of course, when someone says that “Genes matter, but they are only a
small part of the whole evolutionary picture”, you figure that he’s just
an idiot.

















