+++
title = "Tibetan mastiff"
full_title = "Tibetan mastiff"
date = "2016-12-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/12/11/tibetan-mastiff/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/12/11/tibetan-mastiff/).

Tibetan mastiff

[![tibetan-mastiff](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2016/12/tibetan-mastiff.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2016/12/tibetan-mastiff.jpg)

The Tibetan Mastiff can take high altitude better than generic dogs, or
so breedists would like you to think. Some of the genetics changes are
similar to those seen in *human* Tibetans – regulatory changes in EPAS1,
for example. Domesticated dogs haven’t lived in Tibet all that long –
but wolves have. The Tibetan Mastiff [picked
up](http://mbe.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2016/12/04/molbev.msw274)
some of those useful variants from local wolves, even though the amount
of admixture wasn’t large. Adaptive introgression, just as Tibetans seem
to have acquired their high-altitude version of EPAS1 from Denisovans.

Andean Indians didn’t have any archaic humans around to steal
adaptations from. They have had to develop their own altitude
adaptations (in a relatively short time), and they aren’t as effective
as the Tibetan adaptations.

Naturally you are now worrying about sad Inca puppies – did they suffer
from hypoxia? There are canids in South America, like the maned wolf and
the bush dog, but they are probably too divergent to be able to
hybridize with dogs. The chromosomes are different, so pre-Columbian
dogs probably couldn’t acquire their alleles. Moreover, the dogs of the
Amerindians seem to have done poorly in competition with Eurasian dogs:
I know of only a few breeds \[the Carolina Dog, for example\] that are
known to have significant pre-Columbian ancestry. Perhaps Amerindian
dogs were also scythed down by Eurasian diseases.

