+++
title = "Goolie Chits"
full_title = "Goolie Chits"
date = "2016-12-21"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/12/21/goolie-chits/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/12/21/goolie-chits/).

Goolie Chits

A goolie chit, also known as a [blood
chit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/blood_chit), is a notice addressed
to whoever, promising a reward for giving assistance to the bearer,
payable when he shows up somewhere safe. For example, in World War I,
RAF pilots in India and Mesopotamia carried a goolie chit, printed in
four local languages, that promised a reward for anyone that would bring
an unharmed British aviator back to British lines. Some US service
members serving in various dirty sandpiles have been issued chits that
guarantee $500,000 for aid and safe return.

It strikes me that there might be a larger market for goolie chits â€“
people working for aid organizations in various pestholes, oil and gas
workers, extreme tourists \[ the sort of people that insist on seeing
Palmyra *right now* \], people visiting Europe on any national holiday,
those running liquor stores in inner Baltimore, etc. With the proper QR
code blazoned on your shirt, the more sophisticated terrorists would
swerve to miss you while mowing down chitless bystanders. In order to
make this startup into a unicorn, you need to hire top-notch modern
actuaries, and, of course, do all the usual things to get an efficient
website, get away with violating numerous local and state laws simply by
being really cool, etc. You can get favorable coverage from reporters
just by giving them stock \[ and, for the more adventurous, discount
goolie chits.\] Bitcoin rewards will be an option for those threatened
by future AI.

