+++
title = "Make Room! Make Room!"
full_title = "Make Room! Make Room!"
date = "2015-06-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/06/24/make-room-make-room/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/06/24/make-room-make-room/).

Make Room! Make Room!

There is a recent
[article](http://www.necsi.edu/research/evoeco/programmed.pdf) in Phys
Rev Letters (“Programed Death is Favored by Natural Selection in Spatial
Systems”) arguing that aging is an adaptation – natural selection has
favored mechanisms that get rid of useless old farts. I can think of
other people that have argued for this – some pretty smart cookies
([August Weismann](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_Weismann), for
example, although he later abandoned the idea) and at the other end of
the spectrum utter loons like Martin Blaser.

If this were the case, it would be a good thing, because we could then
hope to significantly extend the human lifespan just by interfering with
key steps in the programmed aging mechanism.

We would be able to easily identify those key steps because of natural
experiments – people born with mutations that screwed up their kill
switch and therefore lived lots longer than normal – you know, like
those inventions that get released by mistake (the gasoline pill, the
100 mpg carburetor, etc.) . The problem is, I have never heard of any
such slow-aging genetic syndrome. I don’t think any exist in humans. Too
bad. And humans are the species to look at – not just because we hope
to apply this to humans, but also because we know an enormous amount
about human genetics. Milo of Crotona couldn’t lift a current paper
edition of [OMIM .  
](http://www.omim.org/)

On the other hand, there may well be cases in which something like this
happens in other species, particularly in semelparous organisms – those
that reproduce only once, like Pacific salmon. Normally those salmon go
back to their original spawning grounds, breed and die. In dying, they
create a nutrient-rich environment for their off spring, and for other
offspring that are on average closely related. You can see how
programmed death might pay off in this case. A simple change does slow
down senescence in those salmon: castration before they flame out
triples their life span.

There might could be mutations that significantly extended lifespan but
had consequences that were bad for fitness, at least in past
environments – but that isn’t too likely if mutational accumulation and
antagonistic pleiotropy are the key drivers of senescence in humans. As
I said, we’ve never seen any.

It is possible that old people were once useful (materially contributed
to the fitness of near relatives), especially in preliterate days. Back
in the ice age climate could change rapidly (Dansgaard-Oeschger cycles)
– old farts may have remembered previous climates, and that might have
been useful. When Peter Panum studied the 1846 measles epidemic in the
Faeroes, he found that quarantine could prevent contagion – but the old
farts that had lived through the 1781 epidemic already knew that. People
who listened to them, about a quarter of the population, were shielded
from the epidemic.

