+++
title = "101 Eurasians"
full_title = "101 Eurasians"
date = "2015-06-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/06/11/101-eurasians/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/06/11/101-eurasians/).

101 Eurasians

There is a new
[paper](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v522/n7555/full/nature14507.html)
out in Nature, mostly about the spread of the Indo-Europeans. They
confirm that the Yamnaya ( from the Ukraine) were the main ancestors of
the Corded Ware culture (northern Europe, from Germany far on east).
The Sintashta culture, (base of the Urals down to the Caspian, first
with chariots, and ancestors of the Indo-Iranians), looks like a
migration of Corded Ware to the east.

The Yamnaya were also the source of the Afansievo culture in the Altai,
possible ancestors of the Tocharians.

The European lactose tolerance mutation is not common in the early
Bronze Age, but it does exist, particularly in the Yamnaya, where the
gene frequency is about 30% (in this study – zero in the Haak study)
This suggests that the European mutation originated on the steppe (not
Bavaria !) – which would explain why the same mutation is fairly common
in northern India and Pakistan. It’s not clear if it was common enough
to have social and demographic significance back then – since it’s
dominant, a gene frequency of 30% would mean that 51% of the Yamnaya
were lactose tolerant. In other words, I said that I must be wrong about
lactose tolerance mattering in the Indo-European expansion, but I am no
longer sure about that. But these samples are small – time to excavate
more kurgans. Conceivably the frequency varied significantly by social
class. Anyhow, it had to have been spread by a massive invasion – it
couldn’t have spread that fast as a [Fisher
wave](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/11/22/faster-than-fisher/).

