+++
title = "Conspiracy Theory"
full_title = "Conspiracy Theory"
date = "2018-11-24"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/11/24/conspiracy-theory/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/11/24/conspiracy-theory/).

Conspiracy Theory

Let me tell you my favorite Kennedy assassination theory, which I
developed up myself using my patented automatic conspiracy generator. In
my scenario,. there’s a tough old West Texas rancher – ex-marine, WWII
vet, very old school. Married to a very pretty, extremely wild, much
younger wife. He finds out that JFK has been screwing that young wife of
his, protests to no avail, and while doing business in Dallas takes the
opportunity to pot the POTUS as a purely personal question of honor. His
wife is impressed, and calms down for a year or two.

But she falls off the wagon. Looking for adventure , or whatever comes
her way, a few years later she’s fooling around with Martin Luther King,
with predictable consequences.

All this is slowly discovered, over a long search, by a true-blue New
Frontiersman who has dedicated his life to finding the real killer. At
the end of the story, at the end of his interview with the old rancher
and his still-handsome middle-aged wife, he’s utterly gobsmacked. Both
of his heroes dead by one hand: not because of race, or politics, or
international intrigue -just because they couldn’t keep their pants on.
So after hearing about MLK’s death, he asks ” What then?”. The Rancher
says nothing involving more trouble: they made a living, raised a
family. She’d calmed down a lot and was a good mother and a fine helper
on the ranch. She said “You see, after he shot Martin, I knew he really
loved me”.

