+++
title = "Risch’s Conjecture"
full_title = "Risch’s Conjecture"
date = "2011-12-28"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/12/28/rischs-conjecture/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/12/28/rischs-conjecture/).

Risch’s Conjecture

As some of you already know, Henry and I have put forth the hypothesis
that the observed high intellectual achievement of Ashkenazi Jews is a
result of natural selection for intelligence over the Middle Ages. We
think there’s a pretty good case. One important supporting fact is that
high Ashkenazi intelligence shows up everywhere they live. You see it in
Russia, the US, Latin America, Israel, etc. It doesn’t spring from a
single cultural milieu: you saw it in Jewish kids raised in
turn-of-the-century Vienna, in Israeli kibbutzes, in Bronx tenements,
and in Stalinist Russia. It’s not a consequence of Talmudic study – you
see the same results in religious and irreligious people of Ashkenazi
descent.

Interestingly, other ethnic groups show a similar pattern. Those that
exhibit high levels of intellectual achievement in one country do so in
others. Chinese do well in every society, even if they arrived as
illiterate tin miners, as they did in Malaysia. Swedes in the h0meland
score like their cousins in Minneapolis. Sub-saharan Africans do poorly
in every country they inhabit. This suggests that genetic factors may be
the main general cause of observed intergroup differences in
intelligence and academic achievement. The selective pressures that
caused these differences may not be as easy to figure out as in the
Ashkenazi case, particularly if they acted over tens of thousands of
years.

As Neil Risch forcefully put it, in an interview with Karen Kaplan on
our paper about Ashkenazi Jews, “What are their theories about those on
the opposite end of the spectrum? Do they have genetic theories about
why Latinos and African Americans perform worse academically?” A truly
perspicacious question – to ask it is to answer it..

