+++
title = "Maṇḍana’s intellectual"
full_title = "Maṇḍana’s intellectual theory of motivation"
date = "2020-08-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/20/ma%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8danas-intellectual-theory-of-motivation/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/20/ma%e1%b9%87%e1%b8%8danas-intellectual-theory-of-motivation/).

Maṇḍana’s intellectual theory of motivation

Maṇḍana’s thesis is an answer to the problem of how to identify the core
of a prescription. What makes people undertake actions? Kumārila’s
śabdabhāvanā theory and Prabhākara’s kāryavāda had already offered their
answers. Maṇḍana expands on Kumārila’s intuition about human behaviour
being always goal-oriented by offering a radical reductionist
hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, being a motivator is nothing
but communicating that the action to be undertaken is an instrument to
some coveted result. In this sense, prescribing X to people desiring Y
is nothing but explaining that X is the means to achieve Y.

This cognitive interpretation of what motivates one to act could be
accused of intellectualism. What about agents who, though understanding
that X would be the appropriate course of action, do not undertake it,
perhaps out of sloth?

A possible answer is that Maṇḍana’s theory describes the behaviour of
ideal agents, who are able to evaluate rationally what is the best means
to a coveted goal. Alternatively, one might suggest (as hinted at at the
end of section 11.2) that even such irrational people would be impelled
to act, even if they then do not physically undertake any act. The
iṣṭasādhanatā is a motivator even for them, although they do not act
correspondingly. One might think of the comparable case of someone who
intensely desires an ice-cream and comes to know that great ice-creams
are available in a given part of the city. They are ready to go there,
but undergo an accident and are prevented from going. Although they do
not practically act, the knowledge about the ice-cream shop did act as
motivator for them.

Correspondingly, pravṛtti is used as a synonym of prayatna \`effort’ and
indicates the undertaking of an activity, not yet its realisation.
Similarly, a person said to be pravṛtta is one who has already conceived
the decision to undertake an action, although no movement can be seen
yet.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com).)
