+++
title = "Perennial nondualism"
full_title = "Perennial nondualism"
date = "2020-08-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/30/perennial-nondualism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/30/perennial-nondualism/).

Perennial nondualism

I have spent a good deal of time
[criticizing](https://www.academia.edu/3846106/Beyond_enacted_experiences)
the idea of a “perennial philosophy”, the idea (expressed by Ken Wilber
and others before him) that the great sages of the world have always
basically agreed on the really important things. In the past I had said
there were [perennial
questions](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/perennial-questions/)
but with different answers; now I’m not even sure whether *that* is the
case.

And yet I *am* struck by a particular phenomenon from which the
perennialists draw a great deal of inspiration – and that is the
pervasive influence of *nondualism*. “Nondual” is a literal English
translation of the Sanskrit [*a-dvaita*](https://iep.utm.edu/adv-veda/),
the name of [Śaṅkara’s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adi_Shankara)
school of [Vedānta](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Vedanta)
philosophy. But the core idea of nondualism has been asserted by a very
wide range of philosophers around the world –from people who could
never have heard of Śaṅkara, to Śaṅkara’s *enemies.*

That core idea is that the truest, most ultimate reality should not be
identified with the many plural distinct things we typically observe and
the distinctions between them. Rather the true reality is ultimately
one, or at least (a literal translation again) *not two*, and not *more*
than two either. That ultimate is often (not always) spoken of as
ineffable, beyond words, so that to the extent that one can speak of it
at all one must speak of what it is *not* (the famous *neti neti* of the
[Bṛhadāranyaka
Upaniṣad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brihadaranyaka_Upanishad). But
the most important thing that the ultimate is not, is dual or plural. It
might not be one exactly, but it is *closer* to being one (or perhaps
zero!) than it is to being two or more.

And the two that it *really* isn’t, is the distinction of subject and
object. Nondualists tell us that we are misled by that core grammatical
distinction of the Indo-European languages (languages which many, but
not all, of those nondualists speak). Ultimately [“you are
that”](https://www.britannica.com/topic/tat-tvam-asi):the distinction
between our supposed individual consciousness on one hand, and reality
on the other, must collapse.

That is nondualism in a nutshell. And while Śaṅkara was perhaps
nondualism’s purest and most famous exponent, it was taken up by many
others in various ways – including by very different enemies of Śaṅkara.
The later theistic thinker Rāmānuja wanted to assert against Śaṅkara
that the plurality of things in the world is real, and yet he accepted
Śaṅkara’s basic nondualism: his philosophical system was called
Viśiṣṭādvaita, differentiated or qualified nondualism. He aimed to
produce a harmonious synthesis: the plurality of the world is not an
illusion, as Śaṅkara would have it, but the *parts* of the divine One.

Now while Rāmānuja could be harshly critical of Śaṅkara himself, he
remained in Śaṅkara’s basic camp of loyalty to the Vedas and especially
the Upaniṣads. Śaṅkara had much greater hostility to the Buddhists, who
rejected the entirety of the Vedas and Upaniṣads. And yet – here is the
striking thing –a very large number of Buddhists *themselves* accepted
nondualism. The [Yogācāra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yogachara)
school had been taking up some form of nondualism since *before*
Śaṅkara’s time, enough that to other Vedāntic thinkers Śaṅkara’s school
just looked like the Buddhism they were familiar with; for that reason
they even called him a “crypto-Buddhist” (*pracchanna bauddha*). By
Śaṅkara’s time a great deal of Indian Buddhism had itself become nondual
– and that Buddhism in turn reached its full flower in East Asia, where
it became the dominant form of Buddhism. Thus [John Dunne uses the term
*nondual*]((http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/classical-and-nondual-mindfulness/)
to refer to the present-centred, nonjudgemental meditation traditions
created by these newer sorts of Buddhisms, Yogācāra and beyond. (Ron
Purser rightly pointed out, though, that it is harder to see anything
“nondual” about the modern mindfulness practices that take up those
meditation traditions.)

I often find reading East Asian Buddhism weird because it looks to me so
much like the Advaita Vedānta that arose in *opposition* to Buddhism.
But opposed or no, these nominally opposed sides – Buddhists and
Vedāntins –could agree on a basic nondual worldview. By the 20th
century, the Japanese Buddhist philosopher Nishida Kitarō could proclaim
constructively, in his own voice, that “Ātman and Brahman are
identical.” ([*An Inquiry into the
Good*](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300052336/inquiry-good) p.
80) For Nishida it made sense to have a Buddhism that actually took up
the Upaniṣads’ worldview.

Centuries before Śaṅkara, in Rome and in Alexandria – the West – a
Greek-speaking follower of Plato, named Plotinus, had proclaimed that
everything is an emanation from what he called “the One”. Now that’s
[not quite nondualism *per
se*](http://www.integralworld.net/hines1.html), because everything comes
*from* the One; it is not identical to it. Centuries later, the pious
[Shaykh Ahmad
Sirhindī](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/06/wilbers-atmanism-vs-the-saints-encounter/)
would insist on that distinction as crucial (“not ‘all is Him’, but ‘all
is from Him’.”)

But in *between* Plotinus and Sirhindī, a significant number of Sufi
Muslim thinkers, influenced by Plato and Plotinus, had indeed proclaimed
the oneness of everything – while having relatively little contact with
the South or East Asian worlds. For them, it’s not just that we come
*from* God, but at some level we indeed *are* God. Perhaps most
notorious of these was
[al-Hallaj](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Hallaj), executed for
proclaiming the nondifference between God and a self fully understood.
Later [ibn ‘Arabī](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ibn-arabi/) became
perhaps the most influential Muslim philosopher in the world by
proclaiming the unity of all existence (*wahdat al-wujūd*). Ibn ‘Arabī’s
thought found a natural home in India, and indeed the Mughal
philosopher-prince [Dara
Shukoh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dara_Shikoh) sought to create a
merged philosophy that blended ibn ‘Ārabī with the Upaniṣads. (It was
that very Muslim nondualism that Dara’s contemporary Sirhindī felt the
need to write against.)  
  
Nondualism may well be the single most popular philosophical theory in
human history. I’m not sure I can think of any other major philosophical
idea that flowered so much in so many different places, more or less
independently. I think that gives us *prima facie* reason to think the
nondualists were on to something important. In that, at least, I am
cautiously with the perennialists. But the perennialists typically take
this too far, in that they tend to assume that this nondualism must have
come out of mystical experiences. It’s not an unreasonable assumption,
in that mystical experience often involves a perceived transcendence of
subject-object distinction. But it is crucial that most of the thinkers
I’ve named here [do *not* cite
experience](https://www.academia.edu/3846106/Beyond_enacted_experiences)
as the ground of their claims. Wilhelm Halbfass in *India and Europe*
reminds us that Śaṅkara never refers to any experiences of his own;
Chinese nondualists like Zhiyi didn’t either, according to John McRae
and Robert Sharf. But if anything, I think that nondualism’s
non-experiential provenance gives it *more* plausibility. That is,
nondualism’s exponents did not merely see it in an altered state of
consciousness, but viewed it as somehow a logical necessity.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/perennial-nondualism)
