+++
title = "Theodicy is not the core"
full_title = "Theodicy is not the core of karma"
date = "2020-08-02"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/02/theodicy-is-not-the-core-of-karma/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/02/theodicy-is-not-the-core-of-karma/).

Theodicy is not the core of karma

I will close out
[this](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/of-shopping-carts-and-cherry-picking/)
[latest](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/)
[round](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers)
[of](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-in-society/)
[replies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/what-would-santideva-do-without-rebirth/)
[to](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/santidevas-passages-on-enemies-and-their-context)
Evan Thompson with a recap: It is simply not the case that karma “is
fundamentally about” why bad things happen to good people (or vice
versa). To try to portray karma in that way, it seems to me, requires
*more* cherry-picking and selective quoting of sources than does
portraying it as a form of eudaimonism. Obeyesekere’s study of the
concept’s origins, [which Thompson originally cited as his
source](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
[shows that its formation is in something quite
different](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/).
The passages that Thompson quotes from Śāntideva [do nothing to
establish](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/what-would-santideva-do-without-rebirth)
that karma for him is about why bad things happen to good people. The
sociological studies that he now cites [do not even claim to establish
any such
thing](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-in-society/), and
their evidence does not imply it either – so they would not establish
this claim even if they had been studies of Buddhists, which they are
not. Going by Thompson’s own sources – historical, philosophical *and*
sociological – we see *absolutely no* reason to believe that the
question of theodicy is or ever was at “the beating heart” of the karma
concept, for Buddhists or anybody else. Actual anthropological studies
of karma beliefs in context [establish its core as something very
different](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-in-society/),
[just as Obeyesekere’s study itself
does](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/).

Why then does Thompson continue to insist that bad things happening to
good people and vice versa –the core problem of [Christian
theodicy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/)
–is also the core problem of traditional Buddhist karma, when it has
turned out multiple times that even his own sources provide no reason to
believe this claim? Thompson himself is clearly deeply bothered by the
fact that bad things happen to good people, which [he
calls](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
“shocking and disturbing”, a “cosmic affront to our human sense of
fairness”. It is hardly unreasonable to be bothered by this fact in this
way, and Thompson is entitled to be so. What is not acceptable is to
then reread this preoccupation back onto traditional Buddhist sources.

But it appears to be just such a rereading that Thompson wants to do.
Thompson says that “from a position outside the world of the text” of
the Upaniṣads, “using historical, anthropological, and cognitive
scientific methods and evidence, we can redescribe the text as grappling
with the question of why people are born into strikingly different
fortunate and unfortunate circumstances, and why people experience
strikingly different fortunes and misfortunes in their lives.” Sure, we
*can* totally redescribe the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad’s relevant passage
that way if we want to. We can *also* redescribe it in the terms of
eudaimonism! Both are *re*descriptions. Thompson is clearly bothered by
the fact that bad things happen to good people in a way that the
Bṛhadāranyaka Upaniṣad just as clearly isn’t, and that’s fine. He can
read his concern with that problem into the text as a way of helping
himself address the problem constructively, and that’s also fine –but
what he *can’t* legitimately do is pretend that that concern of his is
the concern of the original text. Thompson says “This is the question
that the ethicized idea of karma is supposed to answer.” No, it’s not
–unless it is only him that is doing the supposing! That question is
not there in the Bṛhadāranyaka Upaniṣad itself and never was; it is only
there in Thompson’s modern redescription of it. There is nothing wrong
with such a redescription, but that redescription is at least as far
from the original text as any eudaimonistic reading.

The Bṛhadāranyaka Upaniṣad does not care about Thompson’s theodicean
concerns, and it is a disrespect to the original text to pretend that it
does. Thompson’s post-Christian theodicy is every bit as much a
*re*description, a *re*reading, a *re*interpretaiton, as any rebirthless
eudaimonist interpretation is. If what Thompson means to say is that
20th- and 21st-century social-scientific evidence gives us reason to
think that the Upaniṣads were turning to karma to answer questions of
theodicy, well, neither his sources nor mine establish that that is the
core of karma beliefs in everyday Buddhist society [*even
now*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-in-society/) –let
alone giving us licence to read the concerns of 20th- and 21st-century
people back on to ancient texts with the assurance that the intervening
three thousand years made no significant difference in the way people
think about anything. Obeyesekere, it is important to point out again,
does not himself indulge in anything close to such a rereading. He is an
anthropologist by trade, one who did most of his fieldwork in his home
country of Sri Lanka, so he is extremely aware of how karma functions in
that Buddhist society now –and, it bears repeating for a
[third](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/is-karma-about-why-bad-things-happen-to-good-people/)
[time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/),
he *never once* tries to claim that the original purpose of the rebirth
doctrine, *or* its later ethicization in terms of karma, was to explain
why bad things happen to good people. Obeyesekere does describe karma as
an “eschatology”, but theodicy is [not what he means by that
term](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/),
nor is it what “eschatology” means in any other sort of theological
discourse.

By contrast, Śāntideva claims multiple times that our good actions and
habits bring good results to us (and vice versa), in this life *and*
future ones. Thompson himself has agreed with an effectively
eudaimonistic description of
[so-called](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/)
“karmic eschatology” according to which, in his words, “in the long
run—in the next life—people will receive the good results of their good
actions, and the bad results of their bad ones.” Śāntideva agrees with
this statement with one modification: the long run in which we get the
results of actions does not *only* include the next life, but also this
one. Śāntideva himself is a deterministic eudaimonist, and his
eudaimonism can be deterministic because it does includes future lives.
I do not believe in a future life, at least not one with the kind of
ethical causality Śāntideva sees, and therefore my eudaimonism [cannot
be deterministic but must be
probabilistic](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/bad-things-good-people-and-eudaimonism/).
To make the eudaimonism deterministic rather than probabilistic is
indeed a departure from Śāntideva’s views, but the basic eudaimonism
itself is contiguous with them. For that reason, I submit, reading
Śāntideva’s view of karma as eudaimonistic is considerably *less* of a
form of cherry-picking than is reading it as theodicy in the way
Thompson wishes to do. I therefore reaffirm that my reading of karma is
congruent with sources like Śāntideva’s texts ([which are the important
ones](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/philosophical-texts-for-philosophers))
–as much, anyway, as Śāntideva’s Mahāyāna is congruent with the
teachings of the historical Buddha! (It is quite possible the move from
early Buddhism through Mahāyāna through East Asia to modernism as a
relatively [continuous process of
Descent](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/09/the-story-of-buddhisms-descent/).)

I am sensing that at the edges of Thompson’s critiques so far there may
be a genuinely powerful Buddhist critique of eudaimonism to be made, one
that has to do with eudaimonism doing an insufficient job of revaluating
our life priorities –something, perhaps, to do with self-transcendence
and the connection of the cosmos to the meaning of human lives.
([*Actual*
eschatology](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/),
as opposed to theodicy, can speak to such questions.) Thompson’s closing
discussion of authenticity hints at such a critique, and I would be
interested in hearing more critiques along that line. But I think that
any such points have mostly gotten lost in the discussion so far, and
will continue to get lost as long as Thompson continues to insist on the
evidenceless claim that Buddhist karma is fundamentally about explaining
why bad things happen to good people.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/theodicy-is-not-the-core-of-karma).
I have now edited the [index to our
correspondence](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/)
to reflect this latest round of replies.
