+++
title = "Resolving cliffhangers"
full_title = "Resolving cliffhangers in a book"
date = "2020-08-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/09/resolving-cliffhangers-in-a-book/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/09/resolving-cliffhangers-in-a-book/).

Resolving cliffhangers in a book

For some time now I have realized: *it is time for me to write a book.*
It’s time to take ideas that I have circulated in blog-post form and
develop them into a more systematic, coherent constructive argument. It
has now been about seventeen years since Robert Gimello told me that the
project that I had wanted to do for my dissertation was a [twenty-year
project](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/03/the-twenty-year-project/),
and as it turns out, I have spent much of those ensuing years working
toward exactly that.

The questions that drove [my
dissertation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/05/lele-dissertation.pdf)
–the ethics of emotion around attachment, anger and external goods
–have continued to drive my thoughts over the thirteen years since I
finished it, through twists and turns like [declaring myself
Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/). The
dissertation could not resolve them; it ended on a cliffhanger.
Śāntideva had good reasons for his views; Martha Nussbaum had good
reasons for hers; where do we go from here? By 2013 I’d been [thinking
here about ways to resolve that
cliffhanger](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/03/the-twenty-year-project/),
but I now think the approach I took at that time was exactly the wrong
one: I had tried to *generalize* Śāntideva’s and Nussbaum’s views,
viewing them as exemplars of integrity ascent and intimacy descent
worldviews respectively. As I said at the time, that approach helped me
spell out my *problématique* – but it still didn’t bring me any closer
to *resolving* it.

It was Alasdair MacIntyre who pointed me to a surer path, as I started
to [write a paper on MacIntyre’s
methodology](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/roots-of-a-project-on-method/).
At the heart of deep ethical disagreements like those between Śāntideva
and Nussbaum are [different standards of practical
rationality]((http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/11/the-need-for-substantive-standards-of-rationality/))
– standards by which we judge whether actions or feelings or habits are
good or bad. The dissertation had explicitly restricted itself to
endorsing only a thin standard of rationality (in which contradictions
are bad), one on which Śāntideva and Nussbaum could agree. But that’s
not enough. Śāntideva’s and Nussbaum’s views don’t make sense without
their thicker standards of rationality, their first principles and
foundations of ethics, which can each only be developed with the
resources provided by their traditions.

I wrote that paper on MacIntyrean method and presented it at the
Metaphysical Society of America in 2017, but I never published it. I did
[circulate it online at the Prosblogion
blog](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/paper-on-methodology-up-at-prosblogion/);
it appears that the Prosblogion no longer exists and the link to the
paper no longer works. (Such is often the way of online writing –itself
a big reason to write something that will exist in physical paper copies
in libraries.) The reason I never tried to publish that paper is that,
as written, it was still relatively close to MacIntyre’s view that
traditions are incommensurable with each other. Since then, following
[Imre
Lakatos](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/06/the-middle-ground-in-philosophy-of-science/),
I’ve become [more skeptical of that
view](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/09/how-can-traditions-be-commensurable/)
of MacIntyre’s. I do expect to eventually revise and publish that paper
in some form – which might turn out to be a methodological chapter in
the book itself.

Key to that revision is this. In an [excellent 1991 debate in
*Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research*](https://www.jstor.org/stable/i336939), J.B. Schneewind had
criticized MacIntyre’s tradition-centred view of ethical inquiry as
follows:

> MacIntyre allows that traditions have beginnings. Aristotle and
> Augustine and Aquinas, he holds, were founders of traditions. Why then
> might there not be among us today those who are originating new lines
> of thought? Their views may some day come to be seen as having started
> a tradition; but even if this occurs, it will not be right to describe
> an initiator as working within the traditions he starts. (166)

MacIntyre responded that “innovation in enquiry almost always involves
drawing upon the materials afforded by traditions and self-definition in
terms of those traditions. So it was with Descartes, in spite of his
protestations to the contrary, as Gilson showed; so it was with Marx, as
he himself would willingly have agreed.” (176) But the implication of
this response, which MacIntyre doesn’t take up, is that
“tradition-centred inquiry” is not *as* tradition-centred as it looks:
one can start a new line of inquiry by means of a synthesis of the old,
as long as one recognizes it as such, as Marx did and Descartes did not.
MacIntyre’s own discussions of Aquinas’s method in *Three Rival Versions
of Moral Inquiry* show Aquinas doing exactly this.The problem is that
when MacIntyre puts out his methodological injunctions for people who
are not Aquinas or Marx, he tends to urge far more caution, advising us
to be followers rather than leaders. We should be doing not as MacIntyre
says, but as MacIntyre’s Aquinas does.

What does all of this mean for my book? Against the earlier approach
that turned to general categories like ascent/descent and
intimacy/integrity, I agree with MacIntyre that the book’s inquiry needs
to be tradition-centred. Specifically, I need to acknowledge that the
work is drawing above all on Buddhist and Aristotelian traditions – the
latter including the works of both Nussbaum and MacIntyre himself, with
some degree of [qualitative
individualist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/10/naming-the-be-yourself-ideal/)
spin. The justification of its arguments needs to be in the context of
Buddhism, Aristotelianism and qualitative individualism; I can’t expect
to justify myself in terms that would be accepted by Muslims or Kantians
or Vedāntins, who are beyond the book’s scope. By taking that approach,
it’s much easier to come to a [dialectical
synthesis](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2013/04/synthesis-via-dialectic/)
of the views I do draw on. And what I need to do now is explicitly build
that synthesis, of an Aristotelian Buddhism. It needs to be a
*synthesis*, as I think [Damien Keown’s work is
not](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/);
it needs to *resolve* the differences between the two traditions rather
than pretending they’re already saying the same thing when they aren’t.
It needs to get down to the very foundations of ethics, in order to say
something true that is *definite* –not provisional, not a cliffhanger.

How to do that? More next time.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/resolving-cliffhangers-in-a-book)
