+++
title = "Losing the Thread A"
full_title = "Losing the Thread A Response to Lele (Guest Post by Evan Thompson)"
date = "2020-08-11"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/).

Losing the Thread: A Response to Lele (Guest Post by Evan Thompson)

(In the last months, the IPhblog has hosted a long discussion on Evan
Thompson’s last book, *Why I am not a Buddhist.* We are grateful to the
participants, namely Amod Lele and Evan Thompson himself for their
patience and accuracy in discussing so many details of the book and its
written and unwritten assumptions and consequences. We aim at hosting
further similar discussions in the future…although perhaps not that
long! This also the reason for publishing this reply as a single post,
although it in fact consists of an overall answer and of detailed
points.–EF)

I had hoped to give Lele the last word in our exchange after my previous
post, [“Cherry Picking the Bodhi
Tree.”](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)
This seemed only fitting, since he had begun the conversation by giving
attention to my book at his *Love of All Wisdom* blog and had been
willing to engage in a further exchange about it here at *The Indian
Philosophy Blog*.

In his latest, seven-part follow-up reply, however, he declares that
“\[t\]here is a great deal of conceptual confusion” in what I wrote and
that “the goalposts may have been moved.” He also says that I’m
“entirely wrong” about Śāntideva, and that I “disrespect” the text of
the *Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad.*

In this post, which will be my last one in our exchange, I will reply to
these statements. But first I will explain why I think Lele has lost the
thread of the argument and hasn’t squarely faced the fundamental issues
that have arisen in the course of our exchange.

The fundamental issues are about karma, but they also encapsulate larger
issues about Buddhist modernism. I say that the concept of karma is
inherently eschatological-theodicean (I’ll say more about these Greek
words below); Lele denies this, and says that the concept is inherently
only eudaimonistic (another Greek word). Note that I don’t deny that the
concept of karma has a eudaimonistic element. Rather, I say that this
element by itself isn’t sufficient for what karma means, because the
concept of karma necessarily includes eschatology and theodicy. So, the
crucial issue is whether can you remove the eschatology-theodicy from
the concept of karma and still legitimately claim to be talking about
karma. Lele thinks you can, whereas I think you can’t.

What Lele does is to invent a new concept. He deletes the idea that
karma operates across former and future lives. This immediately raises
the problem of how karma can possibly work, given that many people act
in good ways and experience bad results, and act in bad ways and
experience good results. Lele’s answer is that karma works
probabilistically: good actions are more likely to produce experienced
good results in this life, and bad actions are more likely to produce
bad experienced results in this life. Karma is “probabilistic this-world
karma.”

I’d call this *shwarma*, not *karma*.

If you think I’m being tendentious, here’s an evolutionary analogy.
Under certain selective pressures (modernity), adaptive genetic
mutations occur (the deletion of the eschatology and soteriology
gene-complexes and the addition of the naturalism gene-complex), and a
new species is formed. “Probabilistic this-world karma” may descend
historically and conceptually from karma, but it’s a new species of
concept.

Let me make clear that I have no objection to conceptual evolution or
invention. I’m also not arguing for ethicized rebirth—the existence of
former and future lives determined by good and bad karma. (I’ll come
back to this point later.) What I object to is saying that you’re
preserving the core of the traditional concept when you’re actually
engaging in radical, modernist, conceptual invention. This is what
Buddhist modernists say and do. This is what Lele says and does. He
invents a new concept while claiming that he’s also preserving the core
of the traditional concept. It’s an example of what I mean when I say
Buddhist modernists want to have their cake and eat it too.

Suppose Lele were to say the following (he does say many of these things
but not all of them): “I consider myself to be a Buddhist, because the
Buddha, his teaching , and his community are what I trust and rely on to
guide me in life, especially in the face of impermanence and death. I’m
a philosopher and want my thinking to be informed by the deep tradition
of classical Indian Buddhist philosophy, especially Śāntideva. I’m
inspired by his writing, and his understanding of good and bad mental
states and their effects. But I find myself unable to accept rebirth, I
don’t want to reject worldly life, I don’t think the removal of
suffering should be our only ultimate goal, and I’m doubtful about
*nirvāṇa*, at least if it’s understood in strictly otherworldly terms.
This puts me in a difficult position with regard to traditional
concepts, such as karma. Since my convictions rule out traditionalism,
I’m going to have to pick and choose (and traditionalists pick and
choose anyway). One way to do this, if you’re a philosopher, is
[conceptual
engineering](https://philpapers.org/browse/conceptual-engineering#:~:text=The%20key%20idea%20of%20conceptual,what%20these%20concepts%20should%20mean.).
This means you don’t just ask what concepts mean; you ask what they
should mean. So, I’m going to ask, ‘Which concepts should I as a modern
Buddhist embrace, and what do I think they should mean for us today’? In
working out my answers, I’m going to radically alter some traditional
concepts and thereby invent new ones. I’m going to cherry pick
traditional sources. I’m going to combine what I cherry pick from
Buddhist philosophy with what I cherry pick from other traditions and
philosophers, such as Aristotle. This kind of cherry picking is
unavoidable, given what I’m trying to do, which isn’t to give a faithful
interpretation or reconstruction of classical Buddhist sources, but
rather to use them as resources for my new, conceptually engineered
inventions. Although these inventions aren’t going to be able to
correspond to traditional Buddhist concepts, they’ll be descended from
them and they’ll be part of an evolving Buddhist intellectual tradition
with which I identify.”

If Lele were to say something like this, I’d have no objection (at least
not yet). This is what philosophers do, in contrast to historians and
philologists. He’d be owning up to cherry picking, and so wouldn’t be
trying to have his cake and eat it too (to mix metaphors). He’d be
thinking as a Buddhist and as a cosmopolitanist (in the philosophical
sense of cosmopolitanism I advocate in *Why I Am Not a Buddhist*). I’d
say, “I sympathize with your situation, more power to you, let’s see
what you can do, and let’s see how others inside and outside the
tradition respond.” For me, the proof would be in the pudding (to add
another metaphor).

In the case at hand, the pudding is “probabilistic this-world karma.”
This is the conceptual engineering we’re being offered. I don’t think it
works.

“Probabilistic” properly speaking applies to a scientific causal model.
When we have a causal model consisting of a set of variables, we can
define a probability measure over propositions about the variables and
their values. But what is the model in the case of eudaimonistic karma?
What are the variables and parameters? Unless we can specify these, we
don’t really know what we’re talking about. Are we supposed to use game
theory and decision theory to answer these questions? But these theories
typically abstract away from individual moral virtue, which is the key
concept of eudaimonistic thought. These theories and the concept of
karma don’t seem to fit together very well.

I worry that we’re dealing with the same kind of scientism that infects
much of Buddhist modernism. By “scientism” I mean using scientific
concepts where they’re not appropriate. “Eudaimonistic karma” is a
normative concept. It refers to good and bad individual mental
intentions and actions. Normative concepts operate in the logical space
of reasons—the logical space of being able to justify what you say in
relation to norms and values. The concept of probability, however, is a
descriptive one that operates in the logical space of causes. When you
say “probabilistic karma” you just code switch between the normative and
descriptive languages without helping us to think about their relation.

There are other problems. [As I wrote
before](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
the proposition that good and bad actions are more likely to produce
experienced good results, and bad actions are more likely to produce bad
experienced results isn’t obviously true as a general empirical
proposition about the world. Maybe it’s true, and maybe it’s false.
Maybe it’s true for some people in some contexts, but not for others.
So, appealing to it as the principal reason for being good doesn’t look
very compelling (at least to me).

Suppose, however, the proposition is true. Why is it true? Is it true
because of some inherent causal power on the part of good and bad
intentions, as traditional Buddhists believe? (Mādhyamikas are an
exception, because they deny that anything has inherent causal powers.)
Or is it true because of social and political structures that regulate
human behaviour? If the latter factors carry more of the causal weight,
then eudaimonistic karma loses causal relevance in proportion.

Here’s another problem. Traditionally, karma is operative in this life
from conception and continues until the moment of death (and then into
the next life). But eudaimonistic karma, as Lele conceives of it, can
operate only when we have virtuous agents. We don’t think of babies and
very young children as virtuous agents. (Aristotle believed children
couldn’t be virtuous agents.) So, exactly when does karma start? And
does it end if we lose mental competence?

These questions about karma don’t make sense from a traditional Buddhist
perspective. They do make sense, of course, if we substitute the
Aristotelian idea of a virtuous agent or the Lockean idea of a person
for “karma.” This is more evidence that we’re not really dealing with
the concept of karma anymore but rather with an ersatz concept. We’re
dealing with Greek and European ideas in Buddhist terminological
wrapping. That’s a typical Buddhist modernist kind of package.

One more problem and then I’ll end this line of thought. If non-human
animals aren’t capable of being virtuous agents (as is generally
believed), then eudaimonistic karma can’t apply to them. This conflicts
with the traditional Buddhist idea of the diversity of karma (karma in
all the diverse realms of sentient beings, including animals). So, the
concept Lele is offering is actually “probabilistic this-world
human-only karma.” This is still more evidence that the meaning of karma
has changed so fundamentally from what it traditionally means in
Buddhism that we’re really talking about something else.

Given these problems, the idea of “probabilistic, this-world, human-only
eudaimonistic karma” seems useless to me. It’s bizarre from the
perspective of traditional Buddhism, and it raises more questions than
it answers from the perspective of contemporary cross-cultural
philosophy. In my estimation, it doesn’t work as conceptual engineering.
It looks to me like another case of philosophically unsound Buddhist
modernist thinking.

Let’s turn to Lele’s charges that I’m conceptually confused and I’ve
been moving the goal posts.

In using the term “eschatology,” I was following Obeyesekere. *Eschatos*
means “last” and eschatology is the part of theology concerned with “end
things”—what happens to the soul at death, the afterlife, the final
events of history, and so on. Lele says Obeyesekere is misusing the
term, but this isn’t the case. Obeyesekere uses “eschatology” to refer
to that part of a cosmology that describes what happens to the soul at
death. This is a perfectly legitimate usage.

Here’s a quick summary of Obeyesekere’s theory. In some eschatologies,
the soul goes to another world at death and stays in that world. In a
“rebirth eschatology,” however, by definition the soul’s stay in the
otherworld is temporary because the soul must eventually be reborn in
the human world. The crucial factor that transforms a rebirth
eschatology into a “karmic eschatology” is “ethicization.” The
ethicization of religion involves the following interrelated things:
understanding actions that are morally good or bad, according to
societal norms, as also religiously good (merit) or bad (sin); the
presence of priests (Vedic religion), prophets (the biblical tradition),
or ascetics (Buddhism, Jainism) who enforce that understanding; the
transformation of the otherworld into a world of reward and retribution;
and, in the specific case of a rebirth eschatology, the idea of rebirth
into the already ethicized human world according to “the principle of
the contingency of reward,” whereby good and bad rebirths are based on
the quality of the person’s actions during their previous lifetime, and
where “good rebirth” means health, wealth, and high social status. In
this way, given ethicization, a rebirth eschatology turns into a karmic
eschatology.

By the way, the question “Why do bad things happen to good people?” is
shorthand for the problem of why there is evil and an unequal
distribution of happiness and suffering in the world. Why do bad things
happen to good people, and good things happen to bad people, now, in the
past, and in the future? Why are some people born into low and
impoverished stations, and why are some born into high and privileged
stations? Why are some people born sick and weak, and others are born
healthy and robust? And so on. It seems to me that Lele is being
literal-minded in how he understands the question.

Although Obeyesekere doesn’t state explicitly (to my knowledge) that a
karmic eschatology explains why bad things happen to good people and
vice-versa, it’s pretty obvious from everything he does say that this is
one of the big explanatory upshots of a karmic eschatology. Indeed, the
Buddha makes this kind of explanation explicit in the
[*Cūḷa-kammavibhaṅga-sutta*](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.135.nymo.html)
(“The Shorter Exposition of Karma,” *Majjhima Nikāya* *135).*

Lele says Obeyesekere confuses eschatology with soteriology, but this
charge is also incorrect. On the contrary, Obeyesekere carefully
distinguishes between the two. He explicitly argues that the concept of
salvation or *nirvāṇa* can’t be derived from just a karmic eschatology.
Rather, salvation or liberation is an additional religious element,
which, when joined to a karmic eschatology, must be conceived of as
happening outside of the cycle of rebirths (*saṃsāra*) and as resulting
in the cessation of rebirth and karma. Thus, *nirvāṇa* necessarily is
otherworldly. (This is one reason why Nāgārjuna’s famous statement that
there’s no difference between *nirvāṇa* and *saṃsāra* is radical and
paradoxical.)

Lele says I confuse eschatology with theodicy. In fact, [in my first
post](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
I wrote: “The idea of karma functions analogously to a theodicy; it
answers to question of the problem of evil.” Eschatology and theodicy
are closely interrelated concepts: eschatology explains what happens at
the end; theodicy deals with the problem of evil and suffering. Accounts
of what happens at the end can help to give an answer to the problem of
evil and suffering. This is precisely what a karmic eschatology does,
among other things: it gives an answer to the problem of evil and
suffering.

So, there’s no conceptual confusion on my part. I’m using “theodicy” and
“eschatology” to talk about various aspects of one and the same package.
For this reason, Lele’s remarks about eschatology being concerned with
the future, theodicy with the present, and karmic theodicy with the
present in light of the past are beside the point (namely, that karma is
inherently eschatological-theodicean).

Lele says I “disrespect” the *Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad* by treating it as
concerned with eschatology and theodicy. He may disagree with my reading
but the claim of disrespect is without merit. I refer Lele to
Obeyesekere’s analysis of the emergence of karmic eschatology in the
*Bṛhadāraṇyaka* and *Chāndogya* *Upaniṣads.* Again, although Obeyesekere
doesn’t state explicitly that the Upanishadic karmic eschatology
explains why bad things happen to good people and vice-versa, it’s
pretty obvious from what he does say that this explanation is a
significant upshot of the karmic-eschatological framework.

Some readers may be getting frustrated by all these Greek
terms—eschatology, theodicy, soteriology, and eudaimonia. Why are we
using Greek terms with their sedimented Aristotelian, Hellenistic, and
Christian meanings to talk about Indian philosophy and religion? I agree
this is unfortunate. If you want to propose better Sanskrit terms, I’m
all ears.

One last point about karmic eschatology. As I said earlier, I’m not
arguing for the existence of rebirth. Lele refers to psychiatrist Ian
Stevenson’s research on purported memories of past lives, especially in
young children. Stevenson claimed that these purported memories were
strongly “suggestive” of reincarnation. Lele mentions them as a
“potential anomaly” for the current scientific consensus that there’s no
evidence to support the survival of consciousness after bodily death.
Even if we took the Stevenson cases in the way Stevenson suggests,
however, they wouldn’t necessarily be evidence that rebirth happens
according to a moral principle. In other words, they wouldn’t
necessarily be evidence for a karmic eschatology (ethicized rebirth).

Without getting into metaphysical issues about consciousness, I don’t
think there is scientific evidence for the survival of personal
consciousness after bodily death. In [*Waking, Dreaming,
Being*](http://cup.columbia.edu/book/waking-dreaming-being/9780231137096),
I examined the Stevenson cases and near-death experiences as possible
evidence for survival but concluded that they don’t warrant this
conclusion. Here’s what I wrote about Stevenson:

Although Stevenson’s presentation of these cases often makes for
compelling reading, all the evidence is anecdotal and derived from
interviews where there is a large amount of room for false memory and
after-the-fact reconstruction. The interviews weren’t conducted directly
with the children when they first reported the memory, but only some
time later, so there had been plenty of time for the child to assimilate
information gotten from family members and to repeat it as if it were
his or her experience. And sometimes the children weren’t interviewed at
all; only family members were. Finally, it’s hard to know how to assess
whether a memory report about a past life exceeds chance probability,
and critics have pointed to a number of serious flaws in Stevenson’s
statistical reasoning. For these reasons, I don’t find Stevenson’s
evidence convincing, though it does seem possible in principle to
investigate claims of past life memories using scientific methods (p.
290, with endnote references deleted).

On to goalpost moving.

Lele suggests I’m moving the goalposts when I say that exegesis of
philosophical texts isn’t the right method for determining the core of
the concept of karma. But my assumption was never that our discussion
should be confined to Buddhist ideas as they’re presented in Buddhist
philosophical texts. Our whole exchange started with Lele’s posts about
my book, which is a philosophical discussion of Buddhist ideas as
they’re embodied and expressed in many kinds of texts, communities, and
meditation practices. A philosophical discussion need not be about just
philosophical texts. In addition, a philosophical analysis of a
philosophical text can make use of methods and data from other
disciplines, such as anthropology (hence my use of Obeyesekere’s work),
and history and cognitive science (which I use in *Why I Am Not a
Buddhist*).

Of course, I’m not saying that philosophical analysis of philosophical
texts isn’t important; I’m saying it’s not sufficient. (I think this is
clear from the wider context of my whole post.) *Karma* isn’t like
*apoha* (exclusion) or *svasaṃvedana* (reflexive awareness); it’s not a
technical philosophical concept invented by philosophers. Philosophers
can refine a concept like *karma* or God, and they can use it for their
own ends. They can give us insight into what it means but they’re
neither the creators nor final arbiters of its meaning. That meaning
comes from the larger religious and cultural tradition. To get at that
meaning we need other disciplines and methods besides philosophy.

This is the main reason why I linked to the social-psychology and
cognitive-science-of-religion studies about how people think about
karma. I think this kind of research provides important and
philosophically relevant information about the cultural and religious
significance of the concept of karma. I don’t have the space to talk
about these studies here, so I will let readers come to their own
judgements about their relevance. But I do want to take back one thing I
said. I said that these studies “indicate” the concept of karma is
fundamentally a way to handle the problem of evil. This is an
overstatement. Rather, they support this claim, especially when taken in
tandem with Obeyesekere’s analysis of the concept’s formation and
function. They provide further evidence that karma is an
eschatological-theodicean concept, so that if you remove eschatology and
theodicy from karma, you’re no longer talking about the same thing.

The last three paragraphs have been about methodological issues, but
there’s also a substantive issue in the vicinity. Lele thinks that
Buddhist philosophers are to Buddhism, and Christian philosophers are to
Christianity, as scientists are to science. I don’t share this
viewpoint. Scientists are the ultimate arbiters of science, but Buddhist
and Christian philosophers aren’t the ultimate arbiters of Buddhism and
Christianity respectively (nor should they be simply by virtue of being
philosophers). Of course, we read philosophers to learn about karma or
God (nothing I wrote implies otherwise), but they’re just one voice in a
much larger conversation that includes artists, counselors, social
workers, meditation teachers, ritual masters, activists, politicians,
and so on. Concepts such as “karma” or “God” span and interconnect these
many areas of human life in ways that technical philosophical concepts
typically don’t. I agree with Lele that we should learn from traditions
“at their best,” but in the case of Buddhism and Christianity (and
Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, etc.) there are more ways to be “best” than
there are in science (even allowing for all the ways to be excellent in
science). Philosophy is just one of them. Buddhism has Buddhaghosa and
Basho; Christianity has Boethius and Bach.

Time now for Śāntideva. Lele says I’m “entirely wrong” that the
eudaimonistic aspect of karma has no warrant and motivation for
Śāntideva without the karmic eschatology. I discern two reasons in
Lele’s counterargument, though he presents them as one.

First, Śāntideva states that good actions bring about good results, and
bad actions bring about bad results, in this life. This is eudaimonistic
karma in this life, and it doesn’t depend on rebirth.

We know, however, that sometimes good actions bring about bad
experienced consequences instead of good ones, and bad actions bring
about good experienced consequences instead of bad ones. So, we’re right
back to the problem of evil and the unequal distribution of suffering
and happiness in the world. As far as I can see, Śāntideva doesn’t have
an answer to this problem without the karmic eschatology. Lele’s answer
is probabilistic (this-world, human-only) karma, which I’ve already
discussed.

Second, Śāntideva states that good actions generate pleasant mental
states, and bad actions generate unpleasant mental states, in this life.
This is eudaimonistic karma in this life, and it doesn’t depend on
rebirth.

But can’t bad actions also generate pleasant mental states? Suppose
someone were to say, “I like tormenting and killing small animals (or
worse, young children) because of the thrillingly pleasing mental states
it gives me.” What can Śāntideva say in response without relying on the
karmic eschatology?

One response would be to say that the person is deeply deluded, because
the mental states aren’t pleasant; they’re actually unpleasant. I’ve
heard modern mindfulness teachers say this kind of thing: You only think
anger is pleasant; you’d see it’s unpleasant if you were truly mindful.
You only think smoking is pleasurable; you’d see the sensations are
intrinsically unpleasant if you were truly attentive to them, and that
would motivate you to quit smoking. It’s possible this idea is true, but
I’m doubtful. To show it’s true you’d have to rule out the possibility
that the sensations become unpleasant as a result of subjecting them to
metacognitive attention and cognitive reappraisal according to the
conceptual framework of mindfulness practice. I also find it hard to
believe the Buddhist statement that all sentient beings fundamentally
seek to be happy. I suggest Buddhists go read Freud on the death drive.
In any case, what’s to stop our imaginary person from saying, “So what
if I’m deluded by your lights? To deludedly take myself to be
experiencing pleasure means that it seems to me that I’m experiencing
pleasure, and that’s all I care about.”

Again, as far as I can see, Śāntideva doesn’t have a compelling response
to this line of thought unless he invokes the karmic eschatology. It’s
the karmic eschatology that enables him to say that the evil things
you’re doing now will come back to you and make you absolutely
miserable, far more miserable than the misery you’re inflicting on
others, if not in this life, then in the long succession of lives to
come.

Lele says that *Bodhicaryāvatāra* 6:42 on previous harm to sentient
beings doesn’t depend on rebirth: “In the past, I too have inflicted
such pain on sentient beings; therefore, I, who have caused harm to
sentient beings, deserve that in return.” “In the past” includes this
present life, so the statement doesn’t have to depend on rebirth.

But if we restrict the statement’s scope to just this present life, what
grounds the “therefore”? In other words, how does it follow that I
deserve to be harmed because I’ve harmed others? Of course, I know that,
as a matter of empirical fact, if I harm others, it’s likely I’ll be
harmed in return, but I can always take steps to try to prevent that.
This is a prudential matter, not a moral one. The question is what
grounds the *ethical principle* that I *deserve* to be harmed in return?
Not much, for Śāntideva, it seems to me, without the karmic eschatology.
It’s the karmic eschatology that enables me to see my actions—indeed, my
very being—as inseparably interwoven with yours all the way back across
the beginningless succession of lives and all the way forward until all
sentient beings are liberated. From this perspective, not only must
every harm I inflict come back to me, but also the very distinction
between your suffering versus mine falls away, and there’s just
suffering and the need to remove it.

Lele points out that what I call the mind-expanding Mahāyāna narrative
in which every sentient being has been your mother doesn’t appear in
Śāntideva but only in later Tibetan commentaries. He says that’s one way
to interpret Śāntideva but it’s no less an innovative interpretation
than naturalized Buddhism is.

I disagree, and think there’s a huge difference between the two
interpretations. Śāntideva is a Mahāyānist. In the Mahāyāna universe,
karma and former lives are beginningless, and we’ve all been related to
each other in innumerable ways. If the Tibetans are innovating, they’re
doing so by making explicit straightforward implications of what
Śāntideva thinks. Naturalistic Buddhists, by contrast, are innovating by
asserting things that are straightforwardly inconsistent with what
Śāntideva thinks (no former and future lives, no consciousness that
survives bodily death), and are adding things that don’t follow
logically from what he says (probabilistic karma).

Lele asks us to imagine Śāntideva being presented with compelling
evidence that there’s no rebirth, and hence no basis for a karmic
eschatology. Do we really think he’d abandon Buddhism and either adopt
another tradition or become a libertine? No, probably not. (Although a
lot would depend on his personality, of which we know nothing.) But that
question is easy and isn’t the relevant one. The relevant question is
harder: What exactly would Śāntideva think? Would he embrace Lele’s
version of apolitical eudaimonistic Buddhism? Or would he combine
eudaimonistic Buddhism with socially and politically engaged Buddhism
(as Seth Zuihō Segall does)? Would he reject eudaimonism and opt instead
for consequentialism, as Charles Goodman and Mark Siderits do in their
reconstructions of his thought? Or would he try to defuse the whole
problem through Madhyamaka anti-realism or quietism? (Let’s not forget
he’s a Mādhyamika.)

I have no idea what the answers are to these questions, and I dare say
neither does Lele. I share [Stephen
Harris’](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/566763) doubts about our being
able to ascribe any ethical theory to Śāntideva using our familiar
Western philosophical categories. As Harris points out,
*Bodhicaryāvatāra* is best read as first and foremost a meditation
manual, not as a constructive philosophical text like Aristotle’s
*Nicomachean Ethics*.

Indeed, it seems to me that Lele misses the import of his own question.
This is that there is such a profound incommensurability between the
concept of karma and Śāntideva’s practice, on the one hand, and modern
philosophical sensibilities and practice, on the other, that building
philosophical bridges between the traditions is much harder than
Buddhist modernists realize. Śāntideva would indeed be in a tough spot,
and which way he’d choose to go forward is impossible to say.
