+++
title = "Summary study of"
full_title = "Summary study of Karmayoga"
date = "2020-08-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/04/summary-study-of-karmayoga/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/04/summary-study-of-karmayoga/).

Summary study of Karmayoga

When teaching my World Philosophy course, I try to highlight the ways
that Daoist notions of *wu-wei*, Stoic (and in particular, Epictetus’)
notion of living in accordance with nature, and the Gītā’s idea of
*karmayoga* are three ways to approach the union of contemplation and
action.

To this end, I recently made a summary analysis of *karmayoga* for my
students, serving as an appendix to my translations of the relevant
portions of the Gītā. I provide it below for your consideration.
Comments are welcome.

\*\*\*

With *karmayoga*, the *Bhagavad-gītā* presents the reader with a notion
of acting in the world which is meant to be revolutionary. It is said to
bring peace even in the tumult of life’s struggles, and help one come to
true self-knowledge and realization of the ultimate reality behind all
things (*brahman*). Unlike ordinary action, it does not generate any
*karmic* residue or entanglement. *Karmayoga* is the key to the Gītā’s
teachings that action and meditation can be unified. Importantly, the
very word *yoga* when usedby itself usually simply means *karmayoga*,
especially in the early sections of the Gītā which introduce yoga as a
practice*.*

What makes *karmayoga* so different from normal activity such that it is
described as “inaction within action”(4.18) and the *karmayogin* is said
to “do nothing at all” (4.20; 5.8-9) while performing various deeds? I
would suggest three major components of the discipline that underscore
its difference from ordinary action:

1.  a *karmayogin* is detached from the results of action,
2.  while motivated by a combination of *dharma* (role ethics), the
    spirit of sacrifice, a concern to maintain the world, and the quest
    for yogic self-discovery,
3.  and reconceptualizing reality in accord with yogic teachings.

Here, I will examine each of these in order.  
  

1\. The first major difference is that someone performing *karmayoga* is
“detached from the results” (C.f., 2.47, 2.49, 2.51, 4.20, 5.12) and,
consequentially, “free from duality” (2.45, 2.50, 2.57, 4.22, 5.3).
Ordinary intentional actions are typically initiated and governed by
desires or aspirations for certain outcomes thought to bring personal
satisfaction. To say that the *karmayogin* is detached from results does
not mean that she doesn’t care what happens in the manner of a
sociopath. Indeed 18.25 explicitly says that it is of the nature of
*tamas* to act with complete disregard to the outcome. What detachment
means here is that such matters are out of the *yogin’s* control, and
the value of the act is thus not derivative of her personal stakein the
outcome. As 2.47 teaches, her entitlement is to *work*, but not to its
*results*.

This detachment from results is what generates peace and freedom from
duality. It is not that the *yogin* has been anesthetized such that they
don’t feel anything. Rather, their motivation is no longer to squeeze
the a specific result from an activity. They simply wish to surrender to
doing what is right, while recognizing their lack of ownership over the
outcome. Therefore whether the outcome is pleasurable/painful or brings
fame/infamy or success/failure is irrelevant to them. They are not
trapped in the duality of “good” and “bad” as they would be if they
approached work through a pre-set attachment to a specific outcome. And
because they don’t view work through such a lens, they achieve peace and
*even-mindedness* (5.12), the very definition of *yoga* (*sammatvaṃ yoga
ucyate*)(2.48).

The Gītā seems to refer to two different sorts of outcomes in the
context of a *karmayogin’s* detachment. First of all, the *immediate*
results of action. This is underscored by saying that a someone with
steady wisdom is the same in “success or failure,” “honor or dishonor,”
“pleasure or pain” and so on. A second meaning of “results” is the
karmic seeds generated by actions. The Gītā accords with mainstream
Indian religiosity by understanding that actions generally create the
seeds of our future lives, which tend to be better if we act properly,
and worse if we do not (18.12). But unlike the Vedic ritualists who are
criticized in Chapter 2, a *yogin* is not trying to gain good *karma* or
avoid bad *karma* through their actions. They are “off the karmic grid”
so to speak; their actions don’t generate any *karma* at all (Cf. 2.38.
4.36-37. 5.7).

 2. If one’s motivation is not personal attachment to
specific outcomes, then why act at all? And if one is dispassionate
toward the results of work, is there anything that he is concerned
about? It seems clear that a concern advanced in Gītā scholarship, “how
could one act if they are free from desire?” doesn’t seem that pressing
when applied to *karmayoga.* The text explicitly presents four reasons
for action that are supposed to motivate the *yogin.*

The first is merely to *perform one’s dharma* (2.47, 3.35, 18.46-48). A
useful way to understand this motivation is with the notion of role
ethics. We have various roles in life, like parent, child, teacher,
student, citizen, community-member, etc., and doing what is right
requires us to carry out the responsibilities that are entailed by these
various roles, simply because *they are our roles.* Were one to ask,
“Why are you taking care of that girl?” to answer “Because I am her
father” is enough. Being a father entails various responsibilities, and
if it is a role that I have, my duty is to carry out such
responsibilities as well as I can. To do it for some selfish reason like
“I want other people to respect me” is to be attached to the results of
actions and to forsake genuine *yoga*. From the perspective of role
ethics, surrendering to *dharma* is itself what constitutes success, and
as seen above, not a specific personal outcome that one hopes to gain
for oneself.

 Another motivation is to *act as a sacrifice*. This is the
major theme of Chapters 3 and 4. In 3.9-16, Krishna explains that
sacrifice is a way to approach the world where one gratefully enjoys its
bounty, within the bounds of *dharma*, and consciously reciprocates by
giving back. To approach the world in this way is to participate in and
perpetuate the cycle of sacrifice, and keep the world in balance. The
culture of sacrifice includes virtues like *gratitude*, *reciprocity*,
and a *willing acceptance of one’s place* *in the larger whole.*

In the Chapter 4, Krishna uses sacrifice as the crucial metaphor for the
liberating insight that, when applied to *dharmic* action, transfigures
both the action and the agent into *brahman* (4.23-4). Speaking of the
“sacrifice of insight” as opposed to the mere sacrifice of goods (4.33),
he suggests that it has the capacity give the individual a complete
transformation of experience, upon which, they realize that all beings
are identical with one’s self, and united in God (4.35). This
transformation is underscored when Krishna says that the act of
sacrifice itself transfigures “material” things, such that they go from
being sources of bondage to sources of liberation (3.13, 4.31). My
reading of this deeper notion of sacrifice is that it is still centered
on virtues like gratitude, reciprocity, and willing acceptance of one’s
place in the larger whole. But when informed by knowledge of the deep
self, sacrifice takes on a fuller, existential sense, which is identical
with yoga itself. Here, the *yogin* understands that his own self is
grounded in the ultimate reality (4.35), and his sense of dependence,
gratitude, and holistic participation are informed by that vision.

With this identification of yoga and sacrifice, some passages come close
to *bhakt-yoga* (self-sacrificial, loving devotion to the personal
Lord), as taught later in the Gītā (Chapters 7-12). A *yogin* is said to
be “devoted to me (Krishna)” (2.61), to “resign all of their actions
unto me (Krishna)” (3.30), and to “resign their actions unto *brahman*”
(5.10). Culminating this line of thought is the final verse of Chapter
5, “One who recognizes that I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices and
penances, the Great Lord of all people, the dear friend of all
beings—that person attains peace” (5.29).

 With this understanding of sacrifice, we can see why the
Gītā is so critical of those who practice Vedic sacrifices only from a
desire to gain some good result for themselves by means of ritual
(2.42-46). While such people do participate in sacrificial culture and
their acts are consistent with *dharma*, their motivation is
nevertheless self-centered and they are utterly attached to the results
of action. Therefore, their sacrifices can never blossom into genuine
*karmayoga.*

 The notions of sacrifice and reciprocity blend into to a
third motivation, *to maintain the world*. Krishna notes that even
someone utterly self-realized, with no selfish interests, still has a
reason to act: they seek to maintain or preserve the world (3.20, 3.22).
Engaging in one’s *dharma* and perpetuating the reciprocal relations
which support the social (and cosmic) balance of things prevents the
world from collapsing. A *yogin* is motivated to act in order to prevent
such a collapse. This is a world-affirming reason to act in yoga. One
*should* care about the world although they recognize that they have
have no control over the success of their actions, and therefore, they
are dispassionate toward the results. To underscore that a *yogin* is
not merely fixated on their own personal liberation, the Gītā stresses
that even after someone is enlightened, they are still “devoted to the
welfare of all beings” (5.25).

 A fourth, and final motivation to act is *to achieve yogic
self-discovery*. One acts in *karmayoga* for the same reason that an
inactive *yogin* sits and meditates: to purify their mind and to
discover the deep self. The earliest verses on *karmayoga* claim that
holding fast to one’s duty while tolerating the various troubles that
arise as one does so leads one to liberation (2.14-15). The core insight
here is that performance of one’s duties in life forces them to
inevitably confront hardships and challenges. If one refuses to run away
from such challenges and hardships, but rather trains one’s mind not to
be disturbed by them, they overcome the pull that the external world has
on them. The Gītā provides a vision of yogawhere this quest for
purification animates one’s actions. “With the body, the mind, the
intellect, and even with the senses, *yogins* engage in action, without
attachment, in order to purify their hearts (5.11).” The desire for
self-realization, and even for the peace and joy that come with it
(5.23-24) are not mundane attachments to the outcomes of action, so long
as one approaches them without a false sense of control over the
process.

What all of the four possible motivations above (*dharma*, sacrifice,
maintaining the world, and yogic self-discovery) have in common is that
in each case, the *yogin* is not motivated by a personal desire to
appropriate the results of action. Each of the four possible motivations
lead one to perform their roles in life, with vigor, commitment, and
purpose, but without selfishness. In all four cases, one’s actions are
fit to be transfigured into *yoga*.

3\. While the first two elements of *karmayoga* are largely about
motivations and affective states, the third is about cognition.
*Karmayoga* involves *a reconceptualization of reality in accord with
yogic teachings*. Early on, the Gītā suggests that a sage experiences a
different world from the mass of people: “What is night for ordinary
people is the time of awakening for the self-controlled, and the time of
awakening for ordinary people is night for the sage who truly sees”
(2.69). This radical shift has two major aspects: a re-seeing of
oneself, and a re-seeing of the world.

Those who aren’t *yogins*, who are not practicing *karma-yoga*, tend to
see themselves as crucially and fundamentally enmeshed in the
fluctuations of the world. Changes in the world produce changes in them.
Because of this, their happiness is dependent on the luck of having
favorable fluctuations, and they mistakenly try to assert control over
fluctuations that are beyond their influence (3.27-8). They are trapped
in the duality discussed above. *Yogins*, on the other hand, understand
that their deepest essence, the true self, is buoyant and above the
fray. Action arises by the confluence of many factors, and only one of
which is an individual self (18.15). In ignorance, someone only focuses
on themselves, their desires, and their agency, as centrally important
within action. But someone who is wise recognizes that there are many
other forces operative, and their personal agency is derivative and
partial (18.14-16). Much of the changes that occur in the world are
carried on through the fluctuations of matter operating independently of
the individual’s influence (5.8-10; 5.13, 14.19, 14.23). They also
recognize that each person’s essence is the deep self, standing aloof
from its current conditions of embodiment. This is why *yogins* have
“equal vision” toward various beings in various states of embodiment
(5.18).

At its roots, the self is grounded in *brahman* or God (4.35) and a
*yogin* acts as informed by that deep connection (5.10, 5.19, 3.30). The
Gītā underscores that such a transformation of vision is not something
that is merely believed or hoped for in a future life. When
self-knowledge is internalized through lived *karma-yoga*, it is said to
be realized as direct experience. “Those whose minds are settled in
equanimity have conquered the material creation while still in it. As
*brahman* itself is balanced and faultless, they are situated in
*brahman*” (5.19).
