+++
title = "The Householder Debates"
full_title = "The Householder Debates in the Dharmasūtras An Initial Puzzle"
date = "2020-08-08"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/08/the-householder-debates-in-the-dharmasutras-an-initial-puzzle/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/08/the-householder-debates-in-the-dharmasutras-an-initial-puzzle/).

The Householder Debates in the Dharmasūtras: An Initial Puzzle

**The Householder Debates in the Dharmasūtras: An Initial Puzzle**

The dharmasūtras of Gautama and Baudhāyana argue that only the
householder is legitimate. Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha, in contrast, argue
against the claim that the householder is less legitimate than the other
*āśramas*. For Gautama and Baudhāyana, the householder is the best of
the *āśramas*. For Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha, the householder is just as
good as the other *āśramas*.

Despite this difference, the dharmasūtra authors advance many of the
same arguments in favor of the householder. One argument cites the
householder’s performance of sacrifices (ĀpDh 2.23.10, BDh 1.10.26,
2.11.33, VaDh 8.14). A second praises the householder for having
children (GDh 3.3, ĀpDh 2.24.3, BDh 2.11.27, 33, 2.16.5, 9, VaDh 8.11,
8.15). A third argument notes that the householder provides material
subsistence to those who depend on him – including the student, forest
dweller, and renunciate (VaDh 8.16).

According to Patrick Olivelle, these texts count payment of the three
debts as the central consideration in favor of the householder. The
three debts include the debt of vedic study to the *ṛṣis*, a son to
ancestors, and the performance of sacrifices to the gods. In discussing
Baudhāyana, Olivelle says,

Baudhāyana’s argument would go something like this. There are express
vedic injunctions requiring every man to beget offspring. Baudhāyana
himself says that there are an innumerable number of such texts, and
cites two… The second is the *Taittirīya Saṃhita* (6.3.10.5) passage on
the three debts. One of these debts, of course, is that of a son, a debt
that one owes to one’s ancestors. Since a person can beget offspring
legitimately only as a householder, these texts implicitly enjoin
everyone to become a householder (89).

*Śruti* enjoins payment of the three debts to *ṛṣis*, ancestors, and
gods. Since only the householder has children, only the householder
might pay the three debts. The householder is superior to the other
*āśramas* for this reason.

Gautama might be taken to advance the same basic argument. Like
Baudhāyana, he notes that only the householder has children (GBh 3.3),
and that the householder is explicitly enjoined by the Vedas (GBh 3.36).
His point might be that only the householder pays the three debts in
accord with vedic injunctions.

While Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha claim that all four *āśramas* are equally
legitimate, their references to the householder having children and
performing sacrifices seem central to their arguments for his status.
Vasiṣṭha repeats the claim that the householder is “the best of the four
*āśramas*” (VaDh 8.14) – even though it contradicts his official
position (VaDh 7.1-2) – in the context of praising the householder for
performing sacrifices and having children (VaDh 8.14-15).

These arguments might seem to imply that the dharmasūtra authors derive
the householder’s legitimacy from his fulfillment of obligations to
others, and his contributions to the prosperity of family and community.
In paying the debt to ancestors, the householder has a son who will
perform the *śrāddha* ceremony after he is no longer able to do so. The
performance of the *śrāddha* ceremony, in turn, guarantees that seven
generations of ancestors greatly enjoy heaven (BDh 2.16.9, ĀpDh 2.24.3).
The householder satisfies the gods by performing sacrifices. The gods,
in turn, satisfied by these sacrifices, ensure the general prosperity.

If the householder’s legitimacy derives from his contributions to the
welfare of others, then the position of Gautama and Baudhāyana should
seems well-justified. Since the householder benefits others in a wide
range of ways that the other *āśramas* do not, only the householder is
legitimate.[\[1\]](#_ftn1) The position of Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha, in
contrast, requires an explanation. If the householder benefits others in
a wide range of ways that the other *āśramas* do not, how can all four
*āśramas* be equally legitimate?

I can think of a couple of answers that might seem initially promising.
I’ll consider these two replies here, and raise doubts about their
plausibility. In my next post, I will outline a novel suggestion.

First, it might be that Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha take the householder to
sacrifice his own well-being in securing the prosperity of others. Yes,
the householder benefits others in a wide range of ways that the other
*āśramas* do not. The other *āśramas*, however, attain a higher state of
*personal* prosperity – and this personal prosperity balances the lost
benefits to others. On this reading, Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha weigh
personal benefits against the benefits that accrue to others, and
conclude that they are equivalent.

This reading seems contradicted, however, by passages in both texts that
suggest that all four *āśramas* attain the highest level of well-being.
Āpastamba claims that there is general agreement that any virtuous
*āśramin* might attain “everything” (*sārva*) (ĀpDh 1.23.6). In another
verse, he says that a person engaged in any of the four *āśramas*
attains bliss (*kṣema*) (ĀpDh 2.21.2). Vasiṣṭha claims that so long as
he is virtuous, the *brāhmaṇa* attains *brahmaloka*, regardless of his
*āśrama* (VaDh 10.31, Cf. 8.17, 9.12). If the householder attains the
same level of personal prosperity as the permanent student, forest
dweller, and renunciate, however, then the reasons that weigh in favor
of the householder clearly outweigh those that weigh in favor of the
other *āśramas*. So Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha should count the householder
as the best of the *āśramas*. 

A second possibility is that Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha count the
householder as superior to the other *āśramas* after all. Remember that
Vasiṣṭha claims that the householder is the best of the four *āśramas*
(VaDh 8.14), even though it contradicts his more explicit statement that
all four are equally legitimate (VaDh 7.1-2). Perhaps the latter, rather
than the former, is his true position. This reading, however, is not
supported by commentaries or contemporary scholars. So some other
solution is needed.

**Works Cited**

Āpastamba Dharmasūtra in Olivelle 2003.

Baudhāyana Dharmasūtra in Olivelle 2003.

Gautama Dharmasūtra in Olivelle 2003.

Vasiṣṭha Dharmasūtra in Olivelle 2003.

Olivelle, Patrick. 2003. *Dharmasūtras: The Law Codes of Āpastamba,
Gautama, Baudhāyana, and Vasiṣṭha* (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. 1993. *The Āśrama System: The History and
Hermeneutics of a Religions Institution* (Oxford: OUP).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) The permanent student and forest dweller might
perform certain sacrifices. Only the householder, however, performs the
full range of sacrifices, including those that require the participation
of a wife (ĀpDh 2.23.10).
