+++
title = "The Householder Debates"
full_title = "The Householder Debates in the Dharmasūtras Another Solution"
date = "2020-08-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/17/the-householder-debates-in-the-dharmasutras-another-solution/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/17/the-householder-debates-in-the-dharmasutras-another-solution/).

The Householder Debates in the Dharmasūtras: Another Solution

In a post
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/08/the-householder-debates-in-the-dharmasutras-an-initial-puzzle/)
last week, I argued for an initial puzzle in the dharmasūtras of
Āpastamba and Vasiṣṭha. Both authors argue that the four *āśramas* are
equally legitimate. Their arguments for the importance of the
householder, however, seem to imply that the householder is actually
superior to the other three *āśramas*. This apparent contradiction is
especially pronounced in Vasiṣṭha, who says explicitly that the
householder is the best of the four *āśramas* (VaDh 8.14), despite
endorsing the view that all four *āśramas* are equally legitimate (VaDh
7.1-3).

I initially reviewed two possible solutions to this problem, and argued
that they are implausible. In my replies to comments, I elaborated on
what Olivelle says about this passage, and addressed a separate
suggestion from Amod. In this post, I argue for the interpretation that
I (currently!) take to be the most plausible.

In both Baudhāyana and Āpastamba, the debates over the status of the
householder appear in the context of their replies to the *purvapakṣin*.
In Baudhāyana, the passage begins with the opponent arguing that all
four *āśramas* lead to the same goal of unending prosperity (*ajyānim*
*ajītim*) (BDh 2.11-12). This, again, contradicts Baudhāyana’s own view,
since he claims that only the householder is legitimate. In Āpastamba,
the relevant passage begins with the opponent’s claim that the celibate
*āśramas* attain immortality at death, while the householder only
attains rebirth (ĀpDh 2.23.4-5). The opponent also claims that members
of the other three *āśramas* might develop supernatural abilities,
including the ability to manifest objects by mere thought
(*saṃkalpasiddhi*), telepathy (*dūre* *darśana*), and so on (ĀpDh
2.23.8). These considerations imply that the householder is inferior to
the other *āśramas*, contrary to Āpastamba’s view that they are equal.

The replies of both Baudhāyana and Āpastamba cite many of the arguments
I mentioned in my last post. Baudhāyana defends the view that only the
householder is legitimate by noting that the householder has children
(BDh 2.11.27, 33, 34), performs sacrifices (BDh 2.11.34), and pays the
three debts to *ṛṣis*, ancestors, and gods (BDh 2.11.33). Āpastamba
makes many of the same points. Only the householder has offspring (BDh
2.24.1) and performs sacrifices (BDh 2.23.10). Only the son of the
householder benefits ancestors in heaven by performing the *śrāddha*
ceremony(BDh 2.24.3), and so on.

Again, these arguments might seem to imply that the dharmasūtra authors
derive the householder’s legitimacy from his fulfillment of obligations
to others, and his contributions to the prosperity of family and
community. Within these discussions, however, both authors repeatedly
emphasize that the householder himself prospers from fulfilling his
obligations. Baudhāyana explains that the householder “wins worlds with
a son, attains immortality by a grandson, and then, with the grandson of
a son, rises above even heaven” (BDh 2.16.6). He notes that the seven
generations of ancestors that the father benefits by having a son
include the father himself. “The person who attains a good son saves
seven subsequent \[generations\] and seven antecedent \[generations\]
from fault and fear – six others and the seventh, himself” (BDh 2.16.9).
His point is that having a son benefits the ancestors and the
householder alike. Other verses state that a person becomes free
(*vimukto*) only by paying the three debts to *ṛṣis*, ancestors, and
gods (BDh 2.16.4-5). Since only the householder pays the three debts,
only the householder might attain freedom. Āpastamba’s reply to the
opponent notes that the prosperity and immortality that the renunciate
seeks are attainable by having children. “Immortality consists of
offspring (*prajātimamṛtam*)” (2.24.1-2), and the father prospers both
from performing sacrifices himself (2.16.1) and from the sacrifices that
his son, grandson, and so on perform (2.24.3-6). The result, for the
householder, is “the highest, unending fruit called heaven
(*paramanantyaṃ phalaṃ svargyaśabdaṃ*)” (2.23.12).

When these broader arguments are seen in the context of a response to
the *pūrvapakṣin*, the claims about the householder’s own prosperity
should seem central. The fact that the householder benefits *ṛṣis*,
gods, ancestors, and others does not, by itself, constitute a reply to
the opponent’s claim that the prosperity of the other *āśramas* exceeds
that of the householder. After all, it might be that the householder
contributes greatly to the well-being of others, but only by sacrificing
his own welfare. Indeed, this, presumably, is just the opponent’s point.
The householder forsakes optimal prosperity by dedicating his life to
the fulfillment of his obligations to others, rather than his own.

Baudhāyana and Āpastamba refute this view, but only by outlining the
great benefits that accrue to the householder himself as a result of
fulfilling his obligations. Since Baudhāyana counts only the householder
as legitimate, his point is that the householder attains optimal
prosperity – by means of fulfilling his obligations – but the other
three *āśramas* do not. Āpastamba, in contrast, counts all four
*āśramas* as equally legitimate, because all four attain the highest
level of personal prosperity. The householder’s path to prosperity
essentially involves his fulfillment of obligations to others; the paths
of the other *āśramas* do not.

If this is Āpastamba’s position, then his references to the benefits
that the householder provides to *ṛṣis*, ancestors, gods, and others
make good sense, even in the context of a reply to the opponent’s claim
that the householder does not attain optimal personal prosperity. His
primary point in citing the householder’s fulfillment of obligations is
to explain how the householder personally prospers in doing what he
does. In the context of his direct reply to the opponent, references to
the welfare of others is secondary.

At the same time, the householder is presumably praiseworthy for the
prosperity that he produces for others. Vasiṣṭha explicitly says that
the householder is the best of the *āśramas* in the context of a concise
review of the benefits that the householder provides to others.

“The householder alone sacrifices. The householder performs austerities.
Of the four *āśramas*, certainly the householder is best. As all rivers
end up in the ocean, thus all \[people\] end up in the householder. As
all living beings live having depended on their mothers, thus all
renuciates live having depended on the householder” (VaDh 8.14-16).

The householder performs sacrifices and austerities. Members of all four
*āśramas* return to the householder (as their father) in rebirth, and
when they are born, their householder father supports them. The other
*āśramas* provide no equivalent benefits. The householder is *superior*
to the other *āśramas* in this sense. As a further result of benefitting
others, the householder attains the same great prosperity that the other
*āśramas* might attain. The householder is equal – *but not superior* –
to the other *āśramas* in this second sense.

**Works Cited**

**Primary Sanskrit Texts**

*Dharmasūtra* of Āpastamba in Olivelle 2003.

*Dharmasūtra* of Baudhāyana in Olivelle 2003.

*Dharmasūtra* of Vasiṣṭha in Olivelle 2003.

**Edited Volume**

Olivelle, Patrick (ed.). 2003. *Dharmasūtras: The Law Codes of
Āpastamba, Gautama,*

* Baudhāyana, and Vasiṣṭha* (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass).
