+++
title = "A book on how virtue"
full_title = "A book on how virtue helps us flourish"
date = "2020-08-16"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/16/a-book-on-how-virtue-helps-us-flourish/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/16/a-book-on-how-virtue-helps-us-flourish/).

A book on how virtue helps us flourish

I’d like to now envision [the book I am working
on](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/resolving-cliffhangers-in-a-book).
This post is something like a proposal for the book, both to clarify my
thoughts on it and (more importantly) to hear yours. As I write it I
keep in mind the wise advice of my dissertation advisor, Parimal Patil,
that fundamentally a dissertation proposal is telling a lie. You don’t
actually know what the final result is going to be, or you would have
already written it; the act of researching it will necessarily make it
something different from the proposal. You just don’t know *how* it will
be different. With that in mind, let me attempt to say some more, in a
nutshell, about what the book will be.

One of the reasons I’ve put so much attention into my [debate with Evan
Thompson](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/)
is that it has helped me sharpen my view of what I intend my book to be
arguing. Fundamentally, I intend the book to articulate a Buddhist
eudaimonism: to make the claim that being good, generally and
probabilistically, makes our lives better. Before Thompson started
criticizing that view so hard, I hadn’t been as clear to myself that it
was the view I wanted to articulate. Now, I see it as the core
philosophical position I want to put forward and defend.

I want to open the book (possibly following a [discussion of
method](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/resolving-cliffhangers-in-a-book))
with what I take to be the bare foundations of ethics. For me this is to
point out that we always begin ethical inquiry with a set of preexisting
ends, cares and aims, and I think these must be the starting points for
such inquiry. I accept [Bernard Williams’s
argument](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/moral-luck/internal-and-external-reasons/055B6EC455C5A0210BFC59BB7B593FE2)
that we cannot really be said to have reason to do something unless a
new motivation to do it “could be in some way rationally arrived at,
granted the earlier motivations”. I also think that human ends do
generally fall within a predictable range, and that many of our
preexisting ends – such as the desire to punish wrongdoing –are bad
ones, and can be judged as such with reference to reflection deriving
rationally from our other motivations together with the nature of the
world.

I intend to take up this line of reasoning to articulate a concept of
human flourishing which includes multiple categories of intrinsic ends
and goods. I think that traditional Indian Buddhist philosophy allows
only two such ends – [seeing
correctly](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/05/mere-convention-vs-seeing-correctly/)
(*yathābhūtadassana*) and the removal of suffering (*dukkhanirodha*) –
which it takes to be almost identical. I argue, for [reasons I brought
up](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/)
in conversation with Thompson, that a good human life does include ends
beyond this, and in that I depart from traditional Buddhist philosophy
(though [not necessarily
practice](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/03/naturalized-kammatic-buddhism/)).
I don’t attempt an exhaustive account of what these ends could be, but I
think they at least include love, justice and self-respect, defined in
particular ways, and likely some form of achievement or
self-actualization. I also depart from contemporary qualitative
individualists like [Martin
Hägglund](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/This_Life:_Secular_Faith_and_Spiritual_Freedom)
who give the removal of suffering basically *no* role. (I intend to say
more about Hägglund soon.)

With such a conception of flourishing in mind, I argue virtue conduces
to this flourishing: it makes our life better. Virtue does so in
multiple ways. First, virtue partially *constitutes* some of our ends:
the virtue of kindness is itself a constitutive part of the end of love;
the virtue of our being just is part of the justice and self-respect we
seek in life; the virtues of serenity and patient endurance partially
constitute the contentment that follows the removal of suffering.
Second, virtue does indeed *tend to* help us achieve those ends: our
being kind and just tend to make others more likely to be kind and just
to us, our being self-disciplined and mindful helps us achieve success
at our projects. All of this is how I understand the nature of karma, as
the [Thompson
debate](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/)
has discussed in detail.

Possibly the most important reason that virtue leads to flourishing is
that *[external
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/05/external-goods/) are less
important to our flourishing than we human beings, across cultures, tend
to think they are*. It is this statement that I see at the core of a
genuine synthesis between the views of Śāntideva and Nussbaum as I
discussed them in the dissertation. It isa middle ground very different
from the one [proposed by Mark
Berkson](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/09/virtuous-and-vicious-means/)
based on other texts outside these traditions, where one performs
worldly acts on the outside but is a renouncer on the inside. Rather,
against Śāntideva and with Nussbaum, external goods *do* matter for our
well-being, because goods other than the removal of suffering matter.
But the removal of suffering matters too, and against Nussbaum and with
Śāntideva, the causes of suffering are primarily mental, for reasons
that I think are indeed [confirmed by contemporary
psychology](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/).
To the extent that that is the case, external goods matter less for our
flourishing, and virtue matters more.

I intend to spell the case out further with a detailed discussion of
four particular virtues: four habits we can build that both make us
better people and make our lives better. The first is a
[serenity](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/10/the-wisdom-of-serenity/)
which sees clearly how many external goods *are* external, and is
willing to accept the things it cannot change – a virtue that perhaps
reaches its hypothetical peak in Śāntideva’s claim that [a bodhisattva
can be happy even while
tortured](http://loveofallwisdoma.com/blog/2019/07/the-importance-of-being-thich-quang-duc/).
The second is patient endurance, *kṣānti* – the reduction ([not
repression](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/repressing-and-reducing-anger/))
of anger in all cases outside of what Nussbaum calls “Transition-Anger”,
given the damaging effects that anger has on ourselves and others. (This
is one point on which Nussbaum and Śāntideva have already [come closer
to
agreement](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/07/nussbaums-revised-view-of-anger/)
without my help!)

The final two virtues are kindness and justice. I think it is important
to examine such other-regarding virtues because they are typically
foremost in the minds of [opponents of
eudaimonism](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/):
we all know kind and just people who do not seem to be flourishing, and
vice versa. Again it’s important here that the eudaimonism is
probabilistic: kindness and justice don’t guarantee good lives, they
just make our lives better than they would be without them. Kindness
(composed especially of generosity and gentleness) not only partially
constitutes the love we seek, it is itself a pleasure. As far as justice
(a virtue generally [less informed by
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/09/on-justice-and-activism-in-pali-buddhism/)):
[we need other
people](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/04/our-need-for-other-people/)
for most of our ends, so in order to live well we must rely on them
–and that requires filling roles and reciprocal obligations, which can
fall apart quickly if we do not live up to our end of them. Essential to
living well amid such a web of expectations is a [good
conscience](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/can-justice-make-you-happy/),
which also requires living up to one’s genuine obligations, the
legitimate expectations that others can have.

There’s a lot more to say about all of this, of course. And that is
another reason it’s going to be not just a blog post but a book.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/08/a-book-on-how-virtue-helps-us-flourish)
