+++
title = "Why do people respond to"
full_title = "Why do people respond to commands?"
date = "2020-08-29"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/29/why-do-people-respond-to-commands/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/29/why-do-people-respond-to-commands/).

Why do people respond to commands?

Why do people obey to commands? Because they are immediately inclined,
in a behaviourist way, to obey? Or because they realise that the action
commanded is an instrument to the realisation of a coveted goal? Or are
there further explanations?

This question has been debated at length in Sanskrit philosophy,
oscillating especially among three main positions. I discussed these
positions with some accuracy in previous posts, but this time I would
like to try a bird-eye view about what is at stake.

On the one side, Maṇḍana claimed that the only motivator for undertaking
actions is the awareness of the fact that the action to be undertaken is
the means to obtain a desired goal. On the other, Prabhākara’s followers
claimed that we immediately obey to commands because we feel enjoined,
and only later analyse what is being asked and why. The role of the
mention of the listener’s desire in commands such as “If you want to
lose weight, try this shake!” is not meant to say that the enjoined
action is an instrument to realise the desired output. Rather, the
mention of the desire is meant for the listener to understand that they
are the person addressed by the prescription. It picks up the person,
who immediately relates with their own desires, but does not describe
the existence of an instrumental relation between enjoined action and
result. The last position can be connected to Bhartṛhari’s pratibhā
theory. As depicted by Maṇḍana, this is a general theory about meaning,
which includes both commands and descriptive sentence. According to it,
human as well as non-human animals have innate inclinations which make
it possible for them to perform activities they could have never learnt
but are still able to perform, such as swimming or breastfeeding in the
case of a baby. The pratibhā theory can be extended to commands which
one would respond to because of an innate inclination.

Maṇḍana’s theory has the clear advantage of being a reductionist theory.
By following it, one does no longer need an ad hoc semantic theory for
commands, which can be reduced to descriptive sentences explaining the
relation between the action enjoined and the expected output. Similarly,
Maṇḍana provides a single theory covering all aspects of motivation to
act, both in the case of commands and in the case of autonomous
undertakings of action. In all cases, one is motivated to act because
one thinks that the action is the instrument to get to the expected
result. What are the disadvantages of this theory? First of all,
Prābhākaras have a point when they describe our first response to
commands. We immediately feel enjoined even before starting to analyse
the action we have been required to perform. Secondly, Maṇḍana’s theory
might have problems when it comes to people who know what would be best
for them, but still don’t act. Can this all be explained just in terms
of desires and instruments?

**As declared at the beginning, the above is my attempt to give a short
overview of the debate. Comments are welcome!**
