+++
title = "sadāśivastuti"
full_title = "sadāśivastuti"
date = "2019-07-04"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/07/04/sadasiva-stuti/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/07/04/sadasiva-stuti/).


					sadāśiva-stuti:				



[ July 4, 2019 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/07/04/sadasiva-stuti/ "Permalink to sadāśiva-stuti:")

-   in
    [Uncategorized](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/uncategorized/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2019/07/04/sadasiva-stuti/#respond)

# sadāśiva-stuti:

A modest attempt:

ककपालपालकपाल।  
कलपाककालपाकाकाल॥  
कालपापकलापपाकपालक।  
कालकलकलाकलाकालाकलपाक॥

kakapālapālakapāla।  
kalapākakālapākākāla॥  
kālapāpakalāpapākapālaka।  
kālakalakalākalākālākalapāka॥

Lyrical/Free-Flowing Translation (for easier comprehension)

You with brahmā’s Skull as Begging Bowl; the Protector of brahmā!

You, the timeless one, who cooks Time himself, who cooks the souls bound
by limited agency (and other limiting factors)!

You who protects that which cooks/burns up the the dark mass of sins!

You who perfects the two classes of souls who are no longer bound by
limited agency : One which becomes unbound only at the uproarious end of
time during dissolution & One which becomes unbound without such
time-bound conditions.

Translation with word by word breakdown:

क-कपाल-पाल-क-पाल

ka-kapāla-pāla-ka-pāla

You, the protector (pāla) of brahmadeva (ka) who has the skull of
brahmadeva (kakapāla) as his begging bowl (pāla)!

One could interpret this as either: a. That śiva has graced brahmā by
that act of removing the fifth head; or b.one who protects brahmā even
as he holds the skull of the fifth head. A symbolic meaning of the
removal of the 5^(th) head is given by tryambakaśambhu in his
kiranāgama-śisuhitavṛtti as the awakening of the kuṭilā-śakti in the
heart region, which is seen as the abode of brahmā in the kāmikāgama.



कल-पाक-काल-पाक-अकाल

kala-pāka-kāla-pāka-akāla

This verse, for convenience, can be rewritten as two distinct parts,
with the term, “kāla” duplicated.

You, the timeless one (akāla) who cooks the time (kāla-pāka) itself, who
cooks the kala-s (kalapāka), that is the sakala class of jīvātmas, ones
covered with kalādi (kalā/कला, etc)bandha-s i.e. limited souls like us!

kala-pāka-kālaḥ—Here, kālaḥ/time is the subject of the sentence; the
kāla which “cooks” the souls immersed in bondage due to a sense of
limited agency (the sakala-s, the kala-s/कला:, who are bound by kalā).

kāla-pāka-akāla—Here, kāla/time becomes the object, with akāla becoming
the subject in the vocative case (sambodhana-vibhakti). You, the
timeless śiva, who is the very destroyer of time (I.e. destroys time)!

Please do not confuse kāla/काल (time) with kalā/कला, which is a unique
concept in śaiva philosophy (particularly well-developed in the
siddhānta flavour of śaivam), which, to put it simply without
complicating excessively, refers to the idea of “limited agency” that we
all have: “I am a particular individual who is the agent of these
actions and the enjoyer/sufferer of their fruits”. Those who keep
suffering due to the effect of kalā; they are sakala-s, like us, whom I
have referred to here as kala-s. These souls keep getting “cooked” by
time in the fires of repeated birth and death.

Do note that the term, “pāka”, occurring in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th lines,
is used in different senses.

2nd line: Cooked in the fire of repeated saṃsāra  
3rd line: Refers to the cooking/burning off of sins by the purifying
śivajñāna (Wisdom of the siddhānta)  
4th line: Refers to the cooking (spiritual
ripening/perfection/maturation) of two categories of souls, who are
above us, the ordinary, sakala category of souls



काल-पाप-कलाप-पाक-पालक

kāla-pāpa-kalāpa-pāka-pālaka

You, the protector (pālaka) who cooks the bundle (kalāpa) of dark sins
(kāla-pāpa). Or alternatively, it could mean the one who protects the
śivajñāna (i.e. the siddhānta), which cooks the bundle of dark sins!



कालकलकलाकलाकालाकलपाक

kāla-kalakala-akala-akāla-akala-pāka

The ones who become akala-s only during pralayakāla, which is the
uproarious moment of kāla (kāla-kalakala-akala), that is the
pralaya-akala-s (pralayākala class of jīvātmas).

Those who are akala-s outside the boundaries of time (akala-akāla); that
is, the vijñānākala-s (vijñāna-akala-s); you, the one who causes their
mala to ripen, that is, malaparipAka; literally and figuratively, you,
the one who cooks both of them to spiritual perfection (pāka)!

Or simply put: You, who “cooks” (i.e. perfects or causes to
mature/ripen) the pralayākala and vijñānākala categories of souls!

