+++
title = "Proximity, semantic"
full_title = "Proximity, semantic fitness and syntactic expectancy as criteria for the sentence meaning"
date = "2018-02-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/07/proximity-semantic-fitness-and-syntactic-expectancy-as-criteria-for-the-sentence-meaning/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/07/proximity-semantic-fitness-and-syntactic-expectancy-as-criteria-for-the-sentence-meaning/).

Proximity, semantic fitness and syntactic expectancy as criteria for the sentence meaning

Words (for the Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā authors) get connected into a complex
sentence meaning through proximity (*sannidhi*), semantic fitness
(*yogyatā*) and syntactic expectancy (*ākāṅkṣā*).  
These three criteria correspond to the requirement of being uttered one
after the other with no intervening time (unlike in the case of the
words `a cow" and`runs” pronounced on two different days), being
semantically fit to connect (unlike the words `watering" and`with fire”)
and being linkable through syntactic expectancy (as in the case of a
verb and its arguments).  
It is in this connection noteworthy that the example of expectancy
always refer to syntax rather than semantics and typically have a verb
expecting a complement or vice versa.

The Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā authors also adopt the same criteria in order to
rule the understanding of the sentence meaning out of the connected
words and avoid the objections (mentioned above) about the fact that out
of a random heap of words one would not know how to start to get to the
sentence meaning.

But what exactly do proximity, fitness and syntactical expectancy refer
to? The question arises because they seem to conflate different levels,
insofar as fitness is necessarily semantic and therefore appears to
refer to word-meanings, expectancy is syntactic and proximity seems to
refer only to the proximity of the uttered *words*. However, in
Sucarita’s discussion proximity is also attributed to the *mental*
proximity of words or meanings. This can make it possible for the
Prābhākara opponent voiced by Sucarita to get to the complex sentence
meaning “The door is to be closed” out of “The door!” only, since the
words “is to be closed” are mentally proximate. This is needed also in
order to explain how one-word sentences can denote a meaning although,
according to Prābhākaras, words denote a meaning only once connected. In
fact, explains the Prābhākara opponent embedded in Sucarita’s text,
one-word sentences such as *pacati* ‘\[s/he\] cooks’ denote a complex
sentence-meaning together with other words which are proximate in one’s
mind, e.g. ‘rice’ or ‘pulses’.

Conversely, this **mental aspect of proximity** makes it possible for
the Bhāṭṭas to interpret all three criteria as referring to meanings,
whereas Prābhākaras would still need to understand at least fitness as
referring to meanings, not words. How can Prābhākaras still claim that
the three criteria lead one to get to the sentence meaning without the
intermediate step of the word-meanings? In other words, if word-meanings
do not play any role, how can fitness play a role? A possible way out is
Śālikanātha’s suggestion that word-meanings, though not denoted by
words, are remembered by them. In this case, one might speak of fitness
among the remembered word-meanings as leading one’s understanding of the
denoted sentence-meaning.

Alternatively, **a contemporary Prābhākara** might suggest that some
preliminary understanding of word-meaning is immediately denoted by each
word, but that each new word adjusts the meaning of the previous one
through the above mentioned criteria in a hermeneutic circle. This
solution is not explicitly discussed, at least in the texts I am aware
of, possibly because it implies a preliminary (and therefore
epistemologically unsound) step within linguistic communication and
could have therefore jeopardised the role of linguistic communication as
an instrument of knowledge.

I discussed the Mīmāṃsā theories of sentence meaning at
[this](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/11/28/meanings-of-words-and-sentences-in-mimam%cc%a3sa/)
post.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com), where you
can also read some interesting comments)
