+++
title = "The Center for Buddhist"
full_title = "The Center for Buddhist Studies Department of Philosophy, University of Mumbai Organizes an International Conference On Buddhist Phenomenology, Culture and Society Between February, 15th, 16th and"
date = "2018-02-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/13/the-center-for-buddhist-studies-department-of-philosophy-university-of-mumbai-organizes-an-international-conference-on-buddhist-phenomenology-culture-and-society-between-february-15th-16th-and-17t/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/13/the-center-for-buddhist-studies-department-of-philosophy-university-of-mumbai-organizes-an-international-conference-on-buddhist-phenomenology-culture-and-society-between-february-15th-16th-and-17t/).

The Center for Buddhist Studies Department of Philosophy, University of Mumbai Organizes an International Conference On Buddhist Phenomenology, Culture and Society Between February, 15th, 16th and 17th of 2018

Dear Indian Philosophy Bloggers

I am currently in Mumbai. I have been invited to deliver the keynote
talk for :

-   The Center for Buddhist Studies Department of Philosophy, University
    of Mumbai International Conference On Buddhist Phenomenology,
    Culture and Society Between February, 15th, 16th and 17th of 2018.

The title of the talk I am giving is: “Buddhist Ethics and the Case of
‘Bad’ Dharmas”

“**Abstract:**I distinguish between two methodologies of reading and
understanding: interpretation (explanation by way of what one takes to
be true) and explication (explanation by way of validity).
Interpretation is easily shown to be irrational and subjective (it
violates validity and is contingent on the beliefs of the interpreter),
while explication is reasonable and objective (it respects validity and
is not contingent on the beliefs of the interpreter). Explicated, every
philosophical perspective (*darśana*) entails a theory that entails its
controversial claims. Explicated, Buddhism, as a *darśana* entails a
theory of dharma that entails the *darśana*’s controversial claims about
dharma, like all other schools of Indian philosophy, and what such
theories disagree about is the objectivity of morality: *the* *Right or
the Good*. However, early Buddhists texts distinguish between two
varieties of dharmas: dharmas that are helpful and should be emulated,
and an opposite variety of dharmas, which are unhelpful and should not
be emulated. The Buddhist categorization of the latter phenomenon as an
instance of “dharma” is often taken to be evidence against the notion
that Buddhist talk about dharma is always ethical. But this criticism is
not a result of explication, but interpretation. Explicated, Buddhist
dharma is a version of Consequentialism, in which all goods—all dharmas—
are of agent neutral importance and justify moral action, and the
objectionable dharmas are not bad but *wrong*: while we should not
emulate them, they constitute agent neutral justifications of ultimate
Buddhist practice: *mindfulness.”*

Buddhist philosophy is of course a massive area so I am looking forward
to learning from all the other participants in this conference.

While at the University of Mumbai, I have also been asked to deliver two
lessons to the philosophy students there. The title of these two lessons
are:

\(1\) The Irrationality of Interpretation and the Discipline of
Philosophy.

Here I talk about the distinction between interpretation and
explication, their origins in contrasting views of thought, and their
implications for the study of philosophy.

\(2\) Yoga: The Fourth Moral Theory.

Applying explication to the study of Indian philosophy, and ethics in
general, I note that there are four basic possibilities:

*Virtue Ethics:* The Good conditions or produces the Right.

*Consequentialism*: The Good justifies the Right.

*Deontology*: The Right justifies the Good.

*Bhakti/Yoga*: The Right conditions or produces the Good.

For reasons that have to do with basic models of thought assumed in the
western and Chinese traditions (that link thought with linguistic
meaning) the fourth option is not present there, but it is salient in
the Indian tradition. I note in my work that not only is it ubiquitous
in Hindu traditions, the core of the argument constitutes the foundation
for Gandhi’s policies of direct action, which in turn had an influence
on Martin Luther King and the civil rights movement in the US. It forms
the bed rock of activist moral theory, which maximizes the disruptive
potential of disciplined action for transforming public spaces
intoonecharacterized by autonomy(*kaivalya*).

I hope to be lucid enough to report back on my stay at Mumbai. (It’s a
shocking time change coming from Toronto, and I’m here only for the
week.) The times that I have had the good fortune of the company of
philosophers in India have been great. I’m sure my stay will continue
that trend.








