+++
title = "Unconscious illusions"
full_title = "Unconscious illusions"
date = "2018-02-04"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/04/unconscious-illusions/).

Unconscious illusions

Buddhist texts frequently stress the liberating power of *prajñā* or
*paññā*, metaphysical insight. It is one of the three major components
of the path in early texts, one of the six perfections in Mahāyāna. To
know the truth about existence – its nature as impermanent, essenceless,
unsatisfactory – is to liberate one’s mind and be unattached. In the
[Pali Vinaya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vinaya_Pitaka), the Buddha’s
first disciples Sāriputta and Moggallāna attain liberation from
suffering as soon as they hear the Dhamma Eye: the phrase “Whatever can
arise, can also cease.” Śāntideva at Śikṣā Samuccaya 264 says *na
śūnyatāvādī lokadharmaiḥ saṃhriyate*: one who takes the position of
emptiness will not be attached to worldly phenomena.

But something seems odd about these claims – perhaps especially to a
beginning student of Buddhist philosophy. We might well acknowledge the
tradition’s supposed truths as truths – and yet still be just as mired
in suffering as we were before. I know *I* didn’t get liberated upon
hearing that what can arise can cease, and you probably didn’t either.
David Burton in his [Buddhism, Knowledge and
Liberation](https://www.amazon.com/Buddhism-Knowledge-Liberation-Philosophical-Philosophies/dp/0754604357)
puts the problem well:

> I do not seem to be ignorant about the impermanence of entities. I
> appear to understand that entities have no fixed essence and that they
> often change in disagreeable ways. I seem to understand that what I
> possess will fall out of my possession. I apparently accept that all
> entities must pass away. And I seem to acknowledge that my craving
> causes suffering. Yet I am certainly not free from craving and
> attachment. (Burton 31)

So what’s going on here? How is it that one can sincerely state that
things are empty, sincerely hold that claim in one’s mind, and yet still
feel attachment to those things?

In attempting to answer such questions I have found it extraordinarily
helpful to think in terms of the powerful psychological theory put
together by Daniel Kahneman and the late Amos Tversky, and expounded in
Kahneman’s [Thinking, Fast and
Slow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinking,_Fast_and_Slow). Kahneman
provides both experimental evidence – much of which has [been
successfully
replicated](https://www.nature.com/news/psychologists-strike-a-blow-for-reproducibility-1.14232),
in a way [far too rare in contemporary
psychology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replication_crisis) – and
intuitive examples like illusions, to demonstrate how much of our
thought happens *automatically*, in ways we are not aware of.

![müller-lyer](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/müller-lyer-300x206.gif)

This is not merely a sub-verbal phenomenon, either: it is involved in
linguistic and even mathematical activities. If Iask you “2 + 2 = ?” or
“What is the capital of France?” you are not able to prevent your mind
from supplying an answer; it just comes. And Kahneman shows how a great
deal of this unconscious mental activity is *erroneous*: we think
automatically in ways that are demonstrably wrong. An example is the
famous Müller-Lyer illusion: if you measure the two lines in this
picture you will see that they are the same length, but your mind will
still perceive the bottom one as longer.

Kahneman’s work is at some level an exploration of what Freud would have
called the unconscious mind, the portion of our mental functioning that
we do not control or even perceive. Later research has shown Freud
unquestionably right about the basic fact that there *is* an unconscious
mind; what he got wrong was the reasons it exists. I recall one
contemporary psychologist putting it beautifully: “The unconscious is
unconscious not because it’s repressed, but because it’s not conscious.”
To think that *repression* is what makes thought unconscious, is already
to give too much privilege and priority to the conscious mind. The
unconscious comes first; we always already have it and are in it.
Conscious thought is a very small part of our mental lives. One might
well say the bigger puzzle for psychology is not why there is
unconscious thought, but why there is conscious thought.

The classical Buddhists did not do Kahneman’s experiments; they had not
even seen the Müller-Lyer illusion. But they deeply understood the
importance of unconscious thought. When you measure the Müller-Lyer
lines, do you *believe* that they are of equal length? Yes, and no. At
the level of your conscious attentive mind you can reason to a belief
that the lines are equal; but you still *see them as* different. It is
this “seeing as” that a great deal of Buddhist thought is concerned
with. It are why the Buddhist path is not merely a matter of reasoning,
but of other practices –including restrained conduct (*sīla*) as well
as meditation. You must train your unconscious mind to deeply recognize
what your conscious mind fleetingly affirms. The only reason Sāriputta
and Moggallāna could get liberated on hearing the Dhamma Eye is that
they had already been on a long path of monastic self-cultivation that
prepared them to understand it properly.

The perspective I am attributing here to classical Buddhists – and to
Kahneman – is one that I have elsewhere referred to, following Aaron
Stalnaker, as [chastened
intellectualism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/chastened-intellectualism-and-practice/).
But I am wondering at this point whether it even needs an “ism”. Given
the number of ways that [humans undermine
themselves](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/07/the-dark-side-of-human-nature/),
this point begins to seem like it should be obvious. Aristotle
understood it well enough in his theory of
[akrasia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akrasia). What may *really*
require investigation is why some Western thinkers, like Descartes and
perhaps Plato, ever thought that human thought would be easily
transparent to itself in the first place. Burton’s problem may come
because we are still too beholden to their mistaken theories of belief.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/01/unconscious-illusions/)
