+++
title = "Ethics of disposition,"
full_title = "Ethics of disposition, not decision"
date = "2018-02-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/18/ethics-of-disposition-not-decision/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/18/ethics-of-disposition-not-decision/).

Ethics of disposition, not decision

I’ve been thinking further on the [decision/capacity
distinction](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/11/decision-and-capacity-philosophical-and-historical/)
[first articulated by Andrew
Ollett](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/10/12/niti-and-the-two-ways-of-using-texts/),
and I want to take a further step. So far Andrew and I have merely
acknowledged the *existence* of this distinction – identifying different
thinkers on either side and exploring the distinction’s implications for
philosophical methodology. But I am, at this point, ready to make a more
substantive claim: the “capacity” approaches are *better*. In ethics, we
*should* be “capacity” rather than “decision” thinkers. I had [stressed
before](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/11/decision-and-capacity-philosophical-and-historical/)
that we can and should address the “capacity” approach philosophically
and not merely historically; now I want to actually *do* so, and say
that it is correct.

Before getting into the substantive issues, I would like to propose a
revision of the categories that Andrew employed: the approach that we
should juxtapose against individual choices or decisions is not capacity
so much as *disposition*, predisposition, habit. It’s not just about
what we’re *capable of* doing – the implication of “capacity” – but
about those features of our natures and our personalities that lead to
and constitute our actual everyday actions, the vast majority of them
that occur *without* any “decision” or “choice”. Not just what we *can*
do, but what underlies the things we actually *do*. In a sense, the
“capacity” language is still *too* oriented toward decision – it
suggests that we are thinking about capabilities we develop which we can
then reflect on and make a decision one way or the other, such that the
decision is what *actually* defines what is done. Rather, in most cases,
there is no decision at all; there is more than capacity, there is a
predisposition that leads to the action without thought.

Now to the reasons to advocate a disposition rather than a decision
approach. I say this partially as a Buddhist and a wavering
Aristotelian; both of these traditions put far more emphasis on our
dispositions and habits than on individual choices. [Śāntideva’s
argument against free
will](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/02/goodness-as-preventing-suffering/),
if successful, makes the concept of choice or decision meaningless
outside of a larger context; in a very different Buddhism, [Buddhaghosa
too](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/)
is concerned with capacity and not decision; Aristotle is considered the
paradigm of a “virtue ethicist”. (I had previously argued that [the term
“virtue ethics” is
unhelpful](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/),
but I suspect I was wrong; [the term *can* be
helpful](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/02/is-it-wrong-to-eat-your-dead-dog/)
in pointing out the ways in which premodern ethical traditions focus our
attention on dispositions and character traits rather than moments of
individual choice.)

But just as much, I say this because of the evidence from contemporary
psychological observation and experiment. [Last
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/02/unconscious-illusions/) I
noted how Daniel Kahneman’s work shows us that most human thought
happens at an unconscious level – including such supposedly rational
activities as mathematical reasoning. As far as I can tell, this point
applies just as much to reasoning we would consider ethical or moral.

Suppose we were *actually* faced with the [trolley
problem](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/02/the-problem-with-the-trolley/)
in real life: suppose we actually were driving a trolley about to hit
five people that we could redirect to hit one. Would we consider the
utilitarian and deontological foundations of our thought and weigh the
different rational considerations for each in order to come to our
decision on what to do? Of course not! We wouldn’t have *time* for that.
Any “decision” – if that is even the right term, and it probably isn’t –
would be a *snap* decision, based on our habits more than on any
deliberative thought. The point suggests to me that the real focus of
ethics and moral philosophy should be *on* the habits we work or do not
work to train ourselves in, rather than on science-fictional thought
experiments about extreme cases. And such habits are just where the
focus of Buddhist ethicists like Buddhaghosa and Śāntideva lies. If we
insist on “ethics” being about principles for calculated decisions,
then, [like Damien
Keown](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/01/on-the-very-idea-of-buddhist-ethics/),
we may come to think that there is no such thing as Buddhist ethics. But
I submit this is because Buddhist philosophers, *unlike* analytical
ethicists, put their ethical focus where it *should* be: on dispositions
of mind rather than on discrete decisions.

An analytic philosophy course I took once refused the question “How
should we live?” as too vague, preferring “What should we do?” – the
standard focus of analytical ethics, concerned as it is with questions
of individual action like the trolley problem. But if “How should we
live?” is indeed too vague, its replacement should not be “What should
we do?” but “What sort of people should we *be?*” The former question is
[quite appropriate for a
robot](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/06/on-the-ethics-of-robots/),
which does indeed precisely calculate the most appropriate individual
action to take in an individual case. But that is not how human beings
work. If we were ever somehow faced with a trolley case in real life, we
would not turn to our weighing of consequentialism and deontology to
figure out what to do – or if we did, by the time we figured it out, the
decision of non-decision would already have been made for us. Rather, we
would make a snap decision based on existing habits, dispositions, of
mind.

To think about ethics in terms of dispositions rather than decisions is
not merely theoretical; it has practical implications. When we think in
terms of dispositions, we see why [it is morally wrong to eat one’s dead
dog for
pleasure](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/02/is-it-wrong-to-eat-your-dead-dog/):
not because the action itself causes any harm, but because one is
thereby the sort of person who would think nothing of taking such an
action toward what should have been a beloved companion. The most
fundamental thing to evaluate is not the action taken in isolation, but
the person’s character.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/02/ethics-of-disposition-not-decision)
