+++
title = "January Talks in India"
full_title = "January Talks in India"
date = "2018-02-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/28/january-talks-in-india/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/02/28/january-talks-in-india/).

January Talks in India

Apologies for the long absence from posting. As academics we are all to
familiar with the amount of work from all sorts of places that gets
piled on. I wanted to kick this post off by picking up on Malcolm’s post
about India, especially the conference at RMIC.

First I wanted to note that the conference at the RMIC in Kolkata, which
focused on Mind, Knowledge, and Reality, was the first in a series of
conferences that I and Jay are aiming to organize together. It is
important to note that both the topics and methodology of the first
conference are not at all indicative of a research paradigm of content
or method. The central goal that Jay and I have as a vision for having a
conference at RMIC every year or every other year in January is to focus
on cross-cultural and multi-disciplinary engagement. Sometimes that
might look more like analytic philosophy + Nyāya, something we might all
be a little tired of, other times it might look like phenomenology +
buddhism. For example, for the next conference we are considering having
the discussion be on : Attention, Causation, and Suffering. Where we
focus on phenomenological accounts of attention and suffering in
relation to classical Indian philosophical accounts of attention and
suffering while discussing causation in psychiatry and Indian
philosophy. And I can easily imagine future conferences that aim simply
to discuss issues about the history of Indian philosophy, Sanskrit
studies, and continental philosophy. The aim is to get people from
different cultural zones of philosophy to engage with other disciplines
and each other with the hopes of having an enlightening conversation
that showcases new work across various levels, from novice to expert.

Second I wanted to note that although we are trying our hardest to have
a regular spot in India, such as the RMIC, we are open to other centers
in India for future conferences. On this very trip I made it out to
Kerala, to the Sree Sankaracharaya University of Sanskrit. I also think
this is a great place to hold a conference, and then head either to the
ocean or the mountains of Kerala.

Third, I want to use Indian philosophy blog comments thread or perhaps
an email list to construct a conversation with other scholars working in
the area about: (i) what topics would be of interest to them for a
conference in India? (ii) what locations in India would be interesting?
(iii) what dates are best in January for going to India?

I am attaching a short video:https://youtu.be/6EJ3PLEMd6k

In case you want to get a sense of some of the places I went and what it
was like.I went to Santiniketan as well to give a talk, and I also
believe this would be an inspirational place for a conference.

Glad to be back. Will be posting more soon!




