+++
title = "Through the rearview"
full_title = "Through the rearview mirror"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2024/08/17/through-the-rear-view-mirror/"
date = "2024-08-17"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2024/08/17/through-the-rear-view-mirror/).

Through the rear-view mirror

A trail of memories, both victorious and unkind,  
In the rear-view mirror’s gaze, I find.  
Through the dusty glass, I see my past,  
A journey in Indian dust marked by shadows cast.  
Yet in the mirror’s chipped frame, I discern,  
Among wreckage flying by, some triumphs won.

Somakhya and Lootika lay cozied up together — they knew well that the chance for certain pleasures comes only once and must be seized right away — any wait and one might never have them again. On the other hand, they had people advise them from early in life that a key to a life of success was to delay gratification — denying the instant, often destabilizing, pleasure for a later, more satisfying and stabilizing one. However, they had learnt early on that there was an optimum in the curve. Act too soon and you have no fuel left for later in life. Deny acting on it too long, and you are dead without experiencing any pleasure. As Lootika and Somakhya’s minds were, for long, in good tune, both were thinking of the same, even as they took in the pleasure of the moment. Realizing this resonance, Lootika spoke forth: “It is good we are at least able to cash in on this pleasure of saṃyoga now. I remain thankful for whatever we get, reminded of the ghost of the rich man who was ordered to take Vaivasvata’s ladder early.” S: “Dear Jālikā, what was his tale?” L: “He dropped by in my early youth when I was attempting ghost-dictation with some relatives in the vicinity of Triśūla-kṣetra. There was nothing remarkable to his tale beyond its sorrowfulness. Still, it forcefully brought home the fact that denial of instant gratification for delayed enjoyment can also be a failing strategy in certain circumstances. The said phantom had been a rich banker-businessman in life who had saved up enormous wealth, denying himself any pleasures while slogging through his 20s and 30s, intending to lead a long, retired life, starting in the second half of his 40s. He reasoned that he would still have some vīrya left in him to enjoy various pleasures of life while also having the autonomy most prized by Father Manu by virtue of his wealth. Indeed, he had achieved that type of mahādhana, but shortly after his retirement, he received the call from Vivasvān’s son in the form of an irrepressible roga and entered phantomhood without having enjoyed the wealth he had accumulated or leaving behind any offspring to enjoy it on his behalf.” S: Dear Ūrṇāyī, that reminds me of that day in school when you expounded the tale of Bhairavānanda and his wicks and the eternal question of when to cash the cheque.” Lootika continued: “Indeed dear, but when I think of this phantom’s visitation, my mind wanders back to a specific journey from the old days, as though viewing life itself through the rear-view mirror of a vehicle speeding to the ladder house.” It was then that she uttered the above verse, which opens this narrative.

At Somakhya’s behest, Lootika took him through the wandering narrative of that journey: “O scion of Bhṛgu, it was the summer vacations, a couple of years before we first met. Much of life still lay ahead — a vision of the unknown — it was like our ārya ancestors looking out at the vast steppe, unlike the current view, which seems like via a stained and cracked rear-view mirror. My mother was repeatedly called by her relatives, then posted in the vicinity of the Triśūla-kṣetra, to visit them with our entire family. However, she was quite unwilling to impose her entire brood of curious daughters on them. Hence, when she finally took them up on the offer, she left Varoli and Jhilleeka behind with our father and proceeded with just me and Vrishchika. She had jitters about how my father would handle them without her appui but gave in as he said it might give her a much-needed break from dealing with her prodigious but rather needy kids all at once. Thus, Vrishchika and I set out with our mother on a train journey to our said relatives. We first proceeded from our city to the dreadful Visphoṭaka, teeming with a great mass of humanity and a stench that can churn one’s gut into emesis even at the distance of a yojana from it. However, we had some way on the train before hitting the stomach-turning gusts emanating from Visphoṭaka. As you know well, the previous generation of our families used to take along an enormous bag of assorted foods to eat on the train as though it was a gala picnic. Indeed our mother had packed such viands that she expected me and Vrishchika to eat through our journey. However, our eyes were set on the aubergine bhṛjjikā-s that were being temptingly hung out by the seller going from compartment to compartment. We made an attempt to see if our mother might accede to our request to buy them for us. However, she remained unmoved both by our entreaties and the obviously false-looking promises of good behavior we offered if she bought us the bhṛjjikā-s. Instead, she used the opportunity to introduce us to Enterobacteria and their pathogenesis. Given our temperament, both Vrishchika and I soon set aside our craving for the aubergine fries and listened to our mother’s lecture in rapt attention. While its initial intention was to dissuade us off the bhṛjjikā-s by placing in us a deep fear of disease borne by unhygienically handled food, our incessant questioning on the nuances of the topic led us through a wide-ranging intellectual tour that tested the very limits of our mom’s knowledge. By the time we reached Visphoṭaka, we had wandered off from enterobacterial pathogenesis to pseudomonads, to clostridia and finally landed up with the disgusting Actinomadura. Thus, as we pulled into the Visphoṭaka station, which was buzzing like a hive, we had taken sufficient revenge on our mom for denying us the fries by shaking her with questions about things like resistance plasmids and whether the bacterial toxins she had introduced us to were related to snake toxins.

Having gotten off at Visphoṭaka, we headed to the house of relatives of my mother — indeed, by virtue of our remote blood relationship on that side of the family, they would be long-lost relatives of yours, too. I believe they also have some distant ties to Mitrayu’s family. They had a nice house near the seashore and Vrishchika and I spent some time at the beach near their house collecting shells and using a handbook of molluscs to classify our haul. Among those relatives was my mother’s young cousin, who had just returned for a break from abroad with a degree in the biological sciences. Her father, a mahāmahopādhyāya, in Sanskritic philosophical texts, had died when she was young but had passed some of his proclivities, evidently via his genes, to his daughter. While she had intended to originally pursue graduate studies in a biological field, she quit after this degree and was going to pursue a further degree in philosophy. My sister and I had no use for philosophy at that time and instead probed the depths of her biological knowledge. She was soon exhausted by our questioning but gifted us her textbooks and notes. We totally lost track of our time in Visphoṭaka between that bonanza of reading material and studying the molluscs from the beach. Somakhya: “Indeed, the collective knowledge of molluscs you sisters displayed when I first came to know you all was rather impressive.” L: “The beginning of it was from that work we put in during our stay at Visphoṭaka.

L: “Having thus reconnected with our relatives and finished the first wing of our vacation at Visphoṭaka, we proceeded to visit our second set of relatives in their more remote but stately outpost. These relatives of mine lived blessed lives: their workload was relatively low, their power was immense in their local settings, they lived in places where there was still a touch of the old Indian fauna and flora, and their kids (my cousins) were satisfied with their lives. But the gods indeed give everything in finite measure to the mortal: as you know, all this was to be disrupted when one of them was [bitten by a cobra](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2015/08/12/the-winding-narration-of-deaths-and-counter-deaths/) a few years down the line and lost their toes. Having made ourselves comfortable at our kinsfolks’ home, we started reading the old paper issues of a foreign English magazine in their loft along with our cousins, who were older than us. Piqued by our unwomanly precociousness, our cousins entertained themselves and us by asking questions from their secondary school science textbooks, which we smashed around even as Neanderthals might have tackled big game.

Running out of options in picking our brains, they promised us something interesting and introduced us to their ghost-ware. Unlike my parents, who were big on theory but short on practicals (frustratingly skeptical, I’d say), my kinsfolk were all in when it came to ghostware. They had some excellent planchettes and a ringer bell that would be dinged by sprites in response to our queries. Their whole family routinely plied the planchette after dinner in the evenings on weekends. They also communicated with ghosts using a lamp placed in a human skull, as described in certain Śrikula traditions. We, for our part, deciding to put theory to practice, deployed the āveśa-prayoga for the first time to induce our cousins to perform ghost dictation. During one such session, the sprite of the banker-businessman came through. Then, as though hinting something interesting, but with the intention of playing a rough prank on us, our cousins led us out of their compound to a field beside it. Being a small town, the field was fairly clean and dotted with patches of grass and some low shrubs. On one side, some boys were playing cricket, while at the far end, a band of girls were chatting. Right in the middle of the field was an old gnarly nyagrodha tree. My cousins said something curious about it: “It is said that in the course of their wandering while being hotly pursued by the Bhārgava and his forces, Dattātreya and Arjuna Kārtavīrya rested under this tree. Most people are afraid of nearing it because they believe a Vaṭayakṣiṇī stays under its canopy. Let us see if you can hear the song of the Yakṣiṇī.” Their statement really aroused our curiosity, for we had never experienced a Yakṣiṇī until that point. Going to the tree, we wandered a bit under its canopy when I mysteriously got some bad scratches on my hand and belly. However, my sister Vrishchika was fine. For all the trouble, we heard nothing of the Yakṣiṇī. I had an instinctive sense that the scratches were not due to the Yakṣiṇī but some other entity residing under the nyagrodha. During a subsequent planchette session that night, it revealed itself as a naṃṣṭṛ. Vrishchika had some natural immunity due to certain siddhi-s she shares with her husband regarding Rājarāja — she did not know them then, but they were already lying latent in her. It was then that I realized that my cousins had played the prank of getting me scratched by that entity. My mother repelled the naṃṣṭṛ away from me using a defensive knife she carried as a siddhakāṣṭha with the Daityāntaka-Nṛsiṃha-mantra from the Ḍāmara tradition. It was a rare occasion in which her theory translated into something genuine. Indeed, this mantra had been practiced by the ancient mantravādin-s from the Dramiḷa and Andhra countries, who, having received the Ḍāmara mantra-s from their Vāṅga teachers, completely mastered their mysteries. However, only after we met did we fully unravel the mystery of this and related naṃṣṭṛ-s. Like this one, they had often been conjured by jaina or marūnmatta magicians who retained some of their old magic.”  
S: “Yes dear, I recall the counter-marūnmatta prayoga-s we had to perform to repel and bind naṃṣṭṛ-s. That marked the culmination of our journey into the root of tāntrika-mantra-śāstra — the realization of the Rudrādhara of the śāstra — the Ḍāmara-mantra-s”

L: “However, I have been rambling for a while, so let me conclude with the most interesting highlights of that visit to the environs of Triśūla-kṣetra. My cousins took us to a group of low hills that lay between Triśūla-kṣetra and the town. In fact, we could walk there within 25 minutes. At the base of one of the hills was a derelict caitya that the locals worshiped without really knowing why. There was a large liṅga beside it. We were bothered by the fact that even some marūnmatta-s were visiting it as though it were a maẓār. My cousins showed me an inscription at the caitya and we managed to decipher it thus: Durjayavajra, the student of Kukkura-rāja, the student of the Mahācārya Śaṃkarānanda-nātha of Oḍḍiyāna. He taught the Bhairava-aṣṭa-vetāla-sādhana in the cemetery of … It was an odd combination — Durjayavajra was evidently a vajrācārya — a bauddha; however, his grand-teacher from Oḍḍiyāna seemed to have a Śaiva name. For some reason, Vrishchika and I felt an urge to meditate a bit in the quiet of that derelict caitya. Thus, with our cousins providing cover, we did so, ignoring the occasional visitor staring at us. That night, Vrishchika and I had strange complementary visions. While they might have seemed like dreams, they had an impression of spatio-temporal reality that was very different from a dream. I’ll conclude by narrating my visions.

I found myself in an śālā of a learned brāhmaṇa situated in the midst of a ring of low hills, still with some snow on them. The song of a blue whistling thrush resounded in his yard. He was teaching the Paippalāda-śruti to his students. At some point, he paused the teaching of the recitation of a sūkta to provide a vyākhyāna. He stated that there was a continuity between the oṣadhi-s taught in that Atharvan sūkta and those in the Ḍāmara-tantra-s. He then went on to say that the Atharvanic Ucchuṣma-rudra was the forerunner of the Ḍāmara tradition. Then, the scene shifted. He had dismissed his class and headed off into the dusk toward the town center. It was then I realized that I was witnessing the glorious Oḍḍiyāna just before its defilement by the rakṣas-es of Makkha-viśaya. To my surprise, the V1 headed to a liquor shop to purchase a pitcher of wine fermented from the grapes growing on the slopes of Paro-mūjavant. The lady running the shop uttered an incantation that I could not fully discern as she handed it over to him. He now crossed over to the other side of the city and proceeded to its southern limit. There, he slipped into a frightening cemetery. There were grunts and hisses of roosting vultures feeding on the corpses of both Hindus and Bauddha-s. In the distance, their silhouettes could be seen on a tumulus, where they were cleaning up the skeletons of deceased Iranians. Our V1 advanced to a small shrine of Muṇḍamālā-sarasvatī and offered her some flowers from a corpse. Beside the Sarasvatī was a shed with two eka-mukha-liṅga-s: one with the Ambikā head and the other with the Aghora head. From the shadow of the treeline, a fair woman suddenly peeped out, holding a peculiar vīṇā. The V1 sighted her and showed the chomma of the crocodile. She responded with that of the two swans. He then showed the chomma of the trident, and she responded with that of the umbrella. This continued with displays of other chomma-s of the Vāmasrotas — even though these chomma-s were sahaja, seeing them in this vision reawakened them in me. However, I fully grasped their significance only when we exchanged them for the first time. She then came out and joined him in the shed, where they performed liṅgārcana. Shortly thereafter, they were joined by another group of people. One of them, along with his dūtī, made an entrance on all fours, imitating canine barks. I was reminded of the folk reciters of the tale of Mārtāṇḍa-bhairava doing the same. He addressed the V1 as Śaṃkarānanda-nātha Mahāsvāmin, the simultaneous master of the Dakṣiṇasrotas and the Vāmasrotas and his dūtī as Varṇamekhalā. He, in turn, addressed the dog-man as Kukkura-rāja and his dūtī as Jambukāvati. There after, Kukkura-rāja and his dūtī, twanging their vīṇā-s, broke out in a recitation of a daṇḍaka to Tumburu and the Caturbhaginī, even as the other members of the cakra danced mimicking the ānandatāṇḍava with which the Īśāna-srotas associates Tumburu in his famous mantra.

The scene shifted again. This time, Kukkura-rāja was in a vihāra with paṇḍita Devendrabuddhi, who had just returned from China. He was a learned exponent of Vajrayāna, who had formerly been a Kaṭḥa Yajurvedin. Kukkura-rāja himself had previously studied the Mādhyaṁdina-śruti. Devendrabuddhi:“O Kukkura-rāja, before you resorted to śvavṛtti for Bhairavācara, you were Cakrasena, the good V1. For a V1, the śruti is sacred. Hence, how could you take refuge in a mata that calls the śruti a paśu-śāstra and act like the demon whom the Bhṛgu-s drove away? K-R: O Devendrabuddhi, on what authority can you say that, when you have yourself forsaken the śruti for the tāthagata-mata, which does not even acknowledge the śruti?” SD: Listen, o Kukkura-rāja, the Tathāgata’s dharma is actually a continuation of the śruti. The Tathāgata himself said that his teaching was ārṣa, respected the Sāvitrī as a high mantra, and called on the V1s to continue studying the śruti. Moreover, in Bhairavācara or Bhaginī-mata, the center of the Veda has been violently displaced by the eko Rudraḥ. After all, the Vedamata is not complete without the offering to the mighty Vajrahasta — verily, the culmination of a kratu happens when he who is called haryoḥ sthātā vajrasya bhartā pṛśneḥ pretā arrives! While the Śākyasiṃha was the tathāgatan manifestation on earth, in this infinite universe, pervading all, is the supreme cosmic Buddha Vajradhara — he is none other than the deity praised in the śruti as the Soma-drinker. Moreover, for the protection of the illusory phenomenal world, he emanates the bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi, who too was seen by the seers of the śruti as the same deity. Hence, Vajrayāna is none other than the tāntrika counterpart of the śruti centered on Vajrahasta!” With such and other arguments, Devendrabuddhi converted Kukkura-rāja and Jambukāvati to the Bauddhamata. Kukkura-rāja now declared that he was not a teacher of the Dakṣiṇasrotas but of Vajrabhairavācara.

The scene shifted again. Kukkura-rāja was in his last moments. Speaking with difficulty, he said to his student, the acārya Durjayavajra, who was beside him: “I had hurled the cakra of Yamāri and destroyed the saiddhāntika-śaiva-s led by Jñānanandin in the Pāñcanada. I converted the Śivālaya he had founded to this vihāra. But the said time has passed since the death of the Śākyasiṃha when the dharma itself might vanish from this earth. The rakṣa-s of Makkha-viśaya have come upon Bhārata. Jagaddala and Vikramaśīla have gone up in smoke. We cannot be fighting among ourselves. The śaiva-s are merely worshiping Kālacakra and Visvamātṛ by their own vidhi of lower enlightenment. We have to join forces with them and their mahārāja to fight the Makkha-piśāca-s — the successors of the camel-gulping Mūsa, Īsa and the wicked Mahāmada from the Marukṣetra.” Saying so, Kukkura-rāja passed away. Durjayavajra was returning after the funerary rites of his famed teacher. He saw the Vihāra deserted. A single Karmavajrin came running towards him and told him that the news had reached them that the town was going to be sacked by Nusrat Khan. Durjayavajra asked him to flee to safety and entered the vihāra by himself. He went to the temple of the Heruka in the cremation ground. He remembered how, as a youth, he was a student of the śivācārya Vijñānanandin, who had taught him the Vetāla-sādhanā. As soon as Vijñānanandin instructed him with the mantra and sprinkled water on him, uttering “vyomin vyomin vyāpin vyāpin…’ he obtained instant siddhi of it. After his conversion to the saugata-mata, he had a vision of the same event, but now, instead of his śaiva teacher, he saw the cosmic buddha Vajradhara himself teaching a “vajrified” version of these mantra-s. He wrote down those revelations and others as a tantra revealed by the tathāgata himself. He practiced the mantra-s of the 8 Vetāla-s in the shrine of the Heruka for a while. Suddenly, a Vetāla animated a corpse, and it walked towards him, uttering the words “After you enable the bandha-s of Buddhakapāla and Hayagrīva, you will enter samādhi…”

Everything blacked out thereafter, and I could not hear the rest of the conversation. Then, like a dream within a dream, I witnessed the final scene as though through Durjayavajra’s vision. My head seemed to ache, and it was like seeing a scene through the reflection of the stained rearview mirror I alluded to. A horde of green-robed, equestrian marūnmatta Turks led by Nusrat Khan appeared on the horizon, galloping towards the town. The stragglers who had not fled the town for one or another reason were swiftly cut down by the marauders. Among them was an old teacher of the mahāyāna doctrine who had not been able to flee. With him died a lame student who had served him to the end despite his disability. The Mohammedans then rushed to the temple of the Heruka led by a sthaviravādin from the Sindhu. Along the way, he struck a deal with the pillagers to share the spoils from the shrine. Nusrat dismounted and rushed with his ghulām-s to plunder the shrine rich in precious metals. Out of nowhere, he felt a pole being thrust into his belly. He fell back. His fellow ghāzīs rushed madly to aid their leader and seize the plunder. Wooden rafters fell on their heads, killing some and trapping others.

In a dimly lit recess in the shrine, the attackers saw Durjayavajra in serene meditation, like the Śākyasiṃha before the approaching māra-s. He was entering samādhi. The images of Buddhakapāla and Hayagrīva, along with their consorts and yoginī-s, successively vanished into the śūnyata as ordained in the tantra. But he saw not śūnyata. Instead, as Brahman and Viṣṇu in the days of yore, he saw the colossal liṅga of light. Though he perceived space, it was now transformed into an ideal state — as if in the śuddha-bhuvanādhvan. Time ebbed away next in the form of the nine śakti-s of the Vāmadeva yajuṣ in the form of waves being absorbed into the ideal liṅga. Now, there was only the ideal yantra specified by the glorious mantra of Īśāna known as the vyomavyāpin. Durjayavajra had become a siddha as his first teacher had said he would become when he imparted to him the vyomavyāpin.

Zafar Khan, the enraged assistant of Nusrat, along with his men, fired a volley of arrows at Durjayavajra. Though impaled by them, he seemed to glow with a mysterious luminescence. The Turks rushed into the temple to plunder its rich images and utensils. In their frenzy and satiation over the loot of the main Heruka image, they forgot about the liṅga from the original śivālaya that lay below the main image. That was still left standing in the ruins when they fired the shrine. The next day, a great rain came upon the Turks and washed away their camps. Nusrat barely made it with his life, but Zafar and many others perished from a dysentery. A young karmavajrin who had survived the onslaught by hiding all the while came out once the Turks fled the place and saw the still undecayed corpse of Durjayavajra. He built a tumulus over it and left behind an inscription in his memory.

Symmetrically, Vrishchika had a dream about the tale of the śaiva-s, Jñānanandin and Vijñānanandin. But that is something you would have to hear from her.”  
S: “Pretty remarkable, because this was the conduit by which a key element, the chomma-s, of your sahaja-siddhi were reawakened for the next chapter of your life. That aside, Śaṃkarānanda-nātha was indeed right in seeing the Atharvanic Ucchuṣma-s as the root of the Ḍāmara-tantra-s, and one could say from there the śaiva tantra-s. However, could there be any truth to what Devendrabuddhi thought about Vajradhara and Vajrapāṇi as tāntrika reflexes of the aindra-focal religion? An interesting thought, but thus far, it is hard to establish on purely philological grounds.’’
