+++
title = "Śabara on sentences"
full_title = "Śabara on sentences"
date = "2015-06-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/10/sabara-on-sentences/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/10/sabara-on-sentences/).

Śabara on sentences

The discussion on the epistemological validity of sentences starts in
Jaimini’s *Pūrva Mīmāṃsā Sūtra* (PMS) and in Śabara’s commentary thereon
when the opponent notes that, even if —as established in PMS 1.1.5—
there were really an originary connection between words and meanings,
this would still not mean that the authorless Vedas are a reliable
instrument of knowledge, since they are made of sentences, not just of
words. And clusters of words are either made by human authors or are
just causally put together by chance and are thus meaningless.

The only way to counter this objection would be by showing that, just
like there is a natural connection between word and meaning, so the
sentence-meaning can arise naturally out of the word-meanings, without
the need of an authorial intention.

Accordingly, the opponent goes on by showing that the sentence meaning
is something altogether different from the word meanings, and thus
cannot arise out of them.

Śabara’s answer is of key importance for the development of Indian
linguistics and epistemology, since he claims that words denote their
meanings and these denote the sentence-meaning. This occurs naturally,
so to say, since the denoted word-meanings automatically connect. This
is possible insofar as word-meanings have a hierarchical relationship
among each other and word-meanings denoting qualities automatically
point to a substrate (a word-meaning denoting a substance). The same
occurs within words, where the meaning of the case ending specifies the
meaning of the theme (*prātipādika*).

Although Prabhākara lived long time after Śabara, Śabara seems also to
address Prābhākaras *ante litteram* where he explains that it is not
possible that (as later Prabhākara will claim) *words* denote the
sentence-meaning. Rather, only word-meanings can connect into the
sentence-meaning, as proved through *anvaya* and *vyatireka* insofar as

1.  A sentence-meaning can be understood also out of *artha*s which have
    not been conveyed by words
2.  The sentence-meaning is not understood out of words which are heard
    but whose meaning has not been understood (perhaps because the
    listener had head-ache)

Concerning the first point, Kumārila will mention the example of one who
sees a patch of white and hears the sound of hooves and of neighing and
achieves the unitary cognition “A white horse is running” —though not
having heard any of the words composing this sentence.

Many thanks are due to S.S. for reading the relevant text passages with
me.

(cross-posted on my personal [blog](http://elisafreschi.com))
