+++
title = "Can one understand a"
full_title = "Can one understand a sentence without believing its content to be the case?"
date = "2015-06-23"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/23/can-one-understand-a-sentence-without-believing-its-content-to-be-the-case/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/23/can-one-understand-a-sentence-without-believing-its-content-to-be-the-case/).

Can one understand a sentence without believing its content to be the case?

Well, yes… isn’t it?  
The problem is less easy than it may look like and amounts to the
problem of non-committal understanding. Is it the normal attitude while
listening to a speaker or just an exception or an a posteriori
*withdrawal* of belief once one notices that the speaker is in any way
non reliable?  

In Classical Indian philosophy, Naiyāyika authors should uphold the
possibility of a non-committal understanding of sentence-meanings, since
they are convinced that cognitions need to be proved to be valid in
order to be such and that such validation comes from outside (in the
case of testimony, typically out of the reliability of the speaker).
Mīmāṃsā authors, by contrast, would claim that belief is withdrawn but
that the default understanding of a sentence implies the belief that it
states something true.

Now, the problem with the non-committal understanding is that it seemse
to have been theorised (and called *śābdabodha*) as such only in Navya
Nyāya. Taber (1996) discusses the possibility of such a hypothesis
already in the 10th c. Jayanta, but his arguments are critically
analysed in Graheli (2015, forthcoming in *Kervan*).

By chance I read of a similar discussion in the Port Royal *Logique* in
[this](https://philosophymodsquad.wordpress.com/2015/06/15/understanding-sentences-port-royal-locke-and-berkeley/)
post, where the problem is also how to account for the distinction
between understanding a sentence and believing that its content is the
case. The post is highly recommended!
