+++
title = "Loving God for no reason"
full_title = "Loving God for no reason"
date = "2015-06-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/30/loving-god-for-no-reason/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/30/loving-god-for-no-reason/).

Loving God for no reason

Why does a devotee love God? Because He is good, merciful, omniscient…?
Or just out of love?

This seems to be one of the moot issues between the two currents within
the form of Vaiṣṇavism later to be known as Śrīvaiṣṇavism, since Piḷḷai
Lokācārya (13th c.) stresses that loving without reason is superior to
loving with a reason, just like Sītā’s ungrounded love for Rāma is
superior to that of Lakṣmaṇa, who loves Rāma for his good qualities (see
Mumme 1988, p. 150).

![Rāma between Lakṣmaṇa and Sītā (r.)](http://i.imgur.com/H5Rgz.jpg)

In fact, one might add, Lakṣmaṇa would stop loving Rāma if he were no
longer good, or might even start loving someone else, if that other
person had better qualities than Rāma. Thus, one who loves with reasons
is like a mercenary who is ready to serve a new warlord. Similarly, one
might further speculate, one who loves God for His qualities is in fact
in love with the qualities, not with God as a person. By contrast, when
one loves a person, even her defects seem attractive to one.

This all makes sense, perhaps even a lot of sense. Yet… this means that
there is no *intrinsic* reason to say that loving God is better than
loving a demonic being who demands from us that we kill and torture
living beings. If we love the latter, we will encounter consequences
among human beings, such as jail, and possibily also in the after-life,
since God is more powerful than demonic beings and will punish the
people whe are not His devotees. Yet, there is no reason whence loving
God should in itself be a reason for distinguishing better people. In
fact, theoretically there might even be people who love a saintly being
who is even ‘better’ (more compassionate, for instance) than God. And
yet, they would not be compensated for choosing the more morally perfect
being, since God would only compensate His devotees…

**What is then the alternative to mercenary love and indiscriminate love
for whomsoever?** (I guess Amod (or Justin) could say “not loving any
god”…).

(cross-posted, with minor modifications, on my personal
[blog](http://elisafreschi.com)).
