+++
title = "Book Review of The"
full_title = "Book Review of The Śrīvaiṣṇava Theological Dispute by Patricia Y Mumme"
date = "2015-06-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/26/book-review-of-the-srivai%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%87ava-theological-debate-by-patricia-y-mumme-reviewed-by-elisa-freschi/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2015/06/26/book-review-of-the-srivai%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%87ava-theological-debate-by-patricia-y-mumme-reviewed-by-elisa-freschi/).

Book Review of The Śrīvaiṣṇava Theological Dispute by Patricia Y. Mumme (Reviewed by Elisa Freschi)

**Patricia Y. Mumme. *The Śrīvaiṣṇava Theological Dispute.
Maṇavāḷamāmuni and Vedānta Deśika.* xviii+320 pp., index. Bangalore:
Navbharath Publications, 2000 (1st ed. Madras 1988). 25 USD.**

The book is a unique contribution to the study of Śrīvaiṣṇavism insofar
as it takes into account chiefly classical Tamil sources, thus offering
a different perspective on the development of this theological school
than the one offered by other scholars based on Sanskrit sources (in
order not to name other names, let me refer here to my own contribution
on Free Will in Viśiṣṭādvaita Vedānta in *Religion Compass*). The choice
of the sources also leads Mumme to focus on thinkers who were later
considered part of the Teṅkalai current within the school. As pointed
out by Mumme herself (and as shown also in Raman 2007) the division
between Vaṭakalai and Teṅkalai is in fact much later (17th c.), but
Mumme convincingly argues that the two currents have a prehistory in the
geographical division among what she calls Kanchipuram ācāryas and
Srirangam ācāryas, out of the two main centers of Śrīvaiṣṇavism in
Southern India.

The division among the two currents has very much to do with their
theological conception of free will and grace. The Srirangam ācāryas
stress the fact that a) God is omnipotent and in this sense there can be
no limitation to His free choice of whom to save and b) the souls are
completely dependent on Him and in this sense can perform no independent
action towards their own salvation. The Kanchi ācāryas, instead, stress
that a) would lead to the undesired consequence of either the liberation
of all souls (if God were merciful) or His cruelty (if He can save all
and decides not to do so).

From a practical point of view, this amounts to saying that for the
Kanchi ācāryas one should keep on adhering to all dharmic prescriptions
throughout one’s life, whereas for the Srirangam ācāryas a single act of
complete surrender, *prapatti*, is enough to be saved, since salvation
is completely in God’s hands and one just needs to become aware of that.

The basic opposition between God’s grace and the soul’s agency is then
developed by Mumme from various points of view in seven chapters. After
the historical introduction in chapter one, chapter two discusses how
dependency or agency are constitutive of human nature. Chapter three
discusses the relation between *prapatti* ‘self-surrender’ and *bhakti*
‘devotion’, with the Srirangam ācāryas claiming that *prapatti* demands
the abandonment of everything else, including *bhakti.*Chapter four
discusses the role of the soul’s acceptance of God’s grace, with the
Srirangam ācāryas claiming that even this acceptance is a *result* of
God’s grace. Chapter fivediscusses the concrete life of the one who
has surrendered, and chapter six covers the core problem of God’s
omnipotence and the soul’s agency. Chapter seven discusses the role of
mediators, namely Lakṣmī and the teachers. Lakṣmī acquires in fact a
more significant role for the Srirangam ācāryas, given God’s perfection,
out of which it is impossible that He is moved by the prayers of human
beings.

Mumme’s book has the further advantage of stressing also the literary
aspect of the controversy. The Srirangam ācāryas, she notes, are not so
much interested in making careful arguments in favour of their theses
and either try to suggestively convince, with rhetorical devices and
examples from the epics and Purāṇas. The Kanchi ācāryas, by contrast,
are much more part of the *śāstric* discourse and feel the need to
develop compelling and consistent arguments.

The book includes also an accurate and useful historical chart of the
thinkers of the school from Rāmānuja onwards, and an index of works,
authors, and terms cited.

Mumme appears throughout the book as a sympathetic reader of the
Śrīvaiṣṇava theology, perhaps even more so of its Srirangam subdivision.
This allows her to take into account and discuss also hagiographical
material, and to try charitable readings of the theories she discusses.
Personally, I am very much in favour of the latter attitude of
charitable reading (as I explained
[here](http://warpweftandway.com/interpreting-philosophy-works/)). The
former attitude has also sure advantages, since it enables one to
appraise the tradition’s inner voices. Yet, it may lead one to
overestimate the unity of the tradition one is examining, since one is
influenced by the tradition’s self-awareness of itself as a single
school. This is particularly apparent when Mumme deprecates the
*division* of Śrīvaiṣṇavism into the two schools of Vaṭakalai and
Teṅkalai, although her very book suggests the possibility of at least
another hypothesis, namely that the Srirangam and Kanchi ācāryas started
discussing at a certain point and have not always recognised themselves
as part of the same philosophical school.

*Reviewed by Elisa Freschi, Austrian Academy of Sciences
(http://elisafreschi.com)*
