+++
title = "Strategic Analysis"
full_title = "Strategic Analysis"
date = "2012-04-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/04/08/strategic-analysis/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/04/08/strategic-analysis/).

Strategic Analysis

I have been asked to discuss Iran’s nuclear weapons potential – and I
will, but I’m going to take a broader look.

The short answer is that the centrifuge approach that Iran is pursuing
is capable (when mature) of producing either low-enriched uranium(LEU),
useful for power reactors, or HEU, highly-enriched uranium, which can be
used to make a fission bomb, among other things. Just for general
information, natural uranium is about 0.7% U-235. LEU means that the
fraction of U-235 is somewhere under under 20% (3%-5% in light water
reactors) , while HEU is more highly enriched. Typical uranium nuclear
weapons are usually \>85% U-235, although the real nuclear players use
plutonium cores nowadays . You can make a gun-type fission bomb with
highly enriched HEU, which is simpler to develop than implosion,
although less efficient.

Given sufficient highly enriched HEU, making a gun-type bomb is not too
hard. South Africa managed it. Probably Iran could as well.
Producing the fissionable material, in the case of HEU, is harder than
using it in a bomb. For plutonium, which requires implosion, designing
and building the weapon is difficult, possibly more difficult than
preparing the fissionable material.

Times have changed. Back in the 1940s, no one had mastered the
centrifuge approach, and the US used cumbersome and expensive gaseous
diffusion, along with even more expensive calutrons. Enrichment was
hard, and it was easier to make LEU and run a breeder reactor to make
plutonium, which could separated by chemical processes.

Zippe, confined in a sharashka in Siberia after WWII, made centrifuges
work. After his release (and isn’t that a strange thing?), his work
was commercialized by a European consortium, Urenco. Zippe further
improved the method’s efficiency by switching the rotor material from
aluminum to maraging steel: the productivity of these gizmos varies
directly as the square of the strength-to-weight ratio. Later, people
used carbon-fiber reinforced materials.

Since these centrifuges run at 1500 revolutions per second or more,
figuring out how to make them work wasn’t easy. Some bright guys failed
before Gernot Zippe. However, assuming that the recipe has already been
developed and you have it, developing Zippe-style centrifuges is
possible, although still tricky. Abdul Qadeer Khan, a Pakistani
engineer who worked for a Uranco subcontractor, got that recipe and
took it home, where it became the basis of the successful Pakistani
nuclear program. Later, he, or more likely the Pakistani government,
traded that recipe to Iran, Libya and North Korea.

At one time, the Bush administration thought, or at any rate claimed,
that Iraq had a centrifuge-based atomic program, but that wasn’t the
case. I thought the claim of a nuclear program was obviously false
before we invaded. My reasoning was as follows. Iraq was broke, except
for the oil-for-food program, and we tightly controlled all that
money. It was also under pretty tight sanctions, limiting the technical
goodies that could be imported even if they had had any money. Iraq
wasn’t able to make the goodies locally: they had a very limited
technical base. The Baathists also had very limited human resources
available: something like 80% of the population was Kurdish or Shiite
and thus untrusted, leaving about 4 million Sunni Arabs as potential
physicists and nuclear engineers. That was manpower enough for South
Africa, and for Israel, but let’s be real. The Arabs are near-zeros in
science and engineering and have been so for centuries. Sheesh, a big
fraction of Iraqis were illiterate.

And the icing on the cake was that this all had to be done in a way that
was invisible to our ‘national technical means’ – which means spy
satellites, but other things as well, such as communications
intercepts, detecting funny xenon and krypton isotopes, etc. This would
also include humint, if we were any good at it, which we’re not.

Everything that the Bush administration said about this was bullshit.
There were technical types employed by the Feds in the national labs –
Sandia, Livermore and Los Alamos, Oak Ridge, who knew better, but they
were ignored. Try to remember that the decision-makers in our
government, the elected and appointed people, know nothing. They don’t
know anything technical. They don’t know much about history *or*
biology. Silvestre Reyes, who used to be head of the House
Intelligence Committee, has no idea whether Al Qaeda was Sunni or
Shiite. He was a Democrat: but of course the Republican committee
members didn’t know either. Nor did top FBI antiterrorism officials.
Or McCain. Or Bush. While the general public still can’t find Iraq or
Iran on a map.

But I digress. Can Iran make this work? Sure looks like it. Iran has
some money. It has a better technical base than Iraq, basically because
they don’t completely live off oil. They make cars, trucks, steel: Iraq
didn’t. If you look at available human resources, I would guess that
more than half of Iran’s population of 70 million would be clearable on
such a program. This is not to say that they are any smarter than
Iraqis, but numbers and resources help.

Do I think that Iran is or will become a strategic threat to the US?
No.













