+++
title = "CfP Comparison and"
full_title = "CfP Comparison and Comparative Method—The sixth Coffee Break Conference"
date = "2014-09-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/13/cfp-comparison-and-comparative-method-the-sixth-coffee-break-conference/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/13/cfp-comparison-and-comparative-method-the-sixth-coffee-break-conference/).

CfP: Comparison and Comparative Method—The sixth Coffee Break Conference

The Coffee Break Conference began as an attempt to encourage the kind of
critical and open-ended discussions that have unfortunately been
confined to short coffee breaks at most academic conferences. Coffee
Break Conferences give scholars the opportunity to critically discuss
their work, especially new work, in an interdisciplinary setting.
Discussions at these conferences have tended to focus on scholarly
methodology and all types of comparisons: between areas of study,
between the approaches of different disciplines, between the concepts
and vocabulary of different traditions of scholarship. The next Coffee
Break Conference, to be held in Venice on September 10-12 2015, will
directly take up the theme of comparison. In a series of panels,
including a conference-wide roundtable session, we will discuss the form
that comparison takes in scholarly work, what its advantages and
liabilities are, and the philosophical and political issues that
comparison raises. Scholars are invited to submit papers to one of the
proposed panels, listed below, or to propose a panel on the theme of
comparison. Younger scholars are encouraged to participate.

The current plan of the conference, subject to modification, is as
follows:

1\) Linguistic Selves: Language and Identity in the Premodern World
(contact person: Andrew Ollett, andrew.ollett@gmail.com)

2\) From cross-cultural comparison to shared epistemic spaces: educating
desire in the “medieval” epistemic space (contact person: Marco Lauri,
marco.f.lauri@gmail.com)

3\) The “Religion” Challenge: Comparative Religious Studies and the
Trouble to Transfer Conceptional Terms from Europe to Asia (contact
person: Ann-Kathrin Wolff, ann-kathrin.wolf@rub.de; Madlen Krüger,
madlen.krueger@rub.de)

4\) Is Theology comparable? Comparison applied to “Theology” and “God”
(contact person: Elisa Freschi, elisa.freschi@gmail.com)

5\) Knowing the unknown: extra-ordinary cognitions in a comparative
perspective (contact person: Marco Ferrante, marco.ferrante@oeaw.ac.at)

6\) The trans-cultural reshaping of psychoanalysis, or the perks of
comparative psychodynamics (contact person: Daniele Cuneo,
danielecuneo@hotmail.it)

Further infos on the CBCs in general and on the 2015 edition in
particular can be found here:
http://asiaticacoffeebreak.wordpress.com/  
and here:  
http://asiatica.wikispaces.com/2015+on+comparison
