+++
title = "“Words mean what they"
full_title = "“Words mean what they mean”"
date = "2014-09-03"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/03/words-mean-what-they-mean/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/03/words-mean-what-they-mean/).

“Words mean what they mean”

The title of this post is a reference to a “common-sense” principle that
might be called
[skhalīya-nyāya](http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/04/22/the-living-word),
since it is attributed to an Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court
(and because it tends to trip people up…) But the content comes from a
recent [workshop](http://www.ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Events/yoshimizu) in Vienna
with Kiyotaka Yoshimizu (covered in anticipation by Elisa
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/08/27/how-exactly-does-one-seize-the-meaning-of-a-word-k-yoshimizu-2011-and-kataoka-forthc-on-dignaga-and-kumarila/)),
whose lectures led more or less directly to this post.

As long as there was “Indian philosophy,” there was a lively debate
about what words actually mean. But regardless of the answer—Mīmāṃsakas
like Kumārila Bhaṭṭa insisted that the meaning of a word was always, in
the first instance, a universal (*jāti*) rather than a particular
(*vyakti*)—a related question remains open: do the meanings of words
remain stable across contexts of use? Mīmāṃsakas, like grammarians,
maintained that words had a stable and in fact “originary” connection
with their meanings. One might assume that, for Mīmāṃsakas, a given word
should mean the same thing in every context.

But this assumption is only half right. The meanings of individual words
are stable and timeless universals, but they enter into “discourse”
(*vyavahāra*) or “usage” (*prayoga*) through particular instantiations
of those universals. For a given instance of language use, there is not
only the question of what is denoted (*abhihita*), but also of what is
intended (*vivakṣita*). Although we commonly speak of “intention” in
psychological terms, i.e. what a particular person “had in mind” in
saying something, Kumārila maintains that it is possible to ask of an
impersonal text (i.e. the Veda) whether something is “intended” or not.
(See Yoshimizu in *ZDMG* 158 \[2008\]: 51-71). There are, in other
words, criteria for determining “intention” that do not make reference
to psychological states. These criteria refer to hierarchical
relationships within discourse, which it is the primary purpose of
Mīmāṃsā to explicate, as well as to a number of “discursive functions”
that Mīmāṃsakas appear to presuppose.

Kumārila and later Mīmāṃsakas allude to two complementary functions (see
especially the end of the *grahaikatva* section of the *Tantravārttika*,
on sūtras 3.1.13-14). They are *uddeśya* and *vidheya*, which can be
paraphrased as “that in relation to which something else is enjoined,”
and “what which is enjoined in relation to something else.” Before
Yoshimizu’s article (in *Acta Asiatica* 90 \[2006\]: 5-38), these terms
were commonly translated by the quasi-Aristotelian terms “subject” and
“predicate.” Yoshimizu suggested that they are closer to the roles of
“topic” and “comment” theorized in pragmatics: the “topic” identifies a
known or given entity, while the “comment” says something new about it.
(If he is right, this post will be filed in the “Euro-American
linguistic theory reinvents the wheel” category.)

These functions add another level to the “meaning” of a sentence, which
more or less corresponds to the level that modern linguists have called
“information structure.” Put otherwise, this additional level further
determines the “meaning” of a sentence: once the denotations are
available (*abhidhāna*) and arranged in a teleological hierarchy
(*viniyoga*), the discursive functions allow us to determine if
particular linguistic elements are intended or not. The basic principle
enunciated by Kumārila is that only elements that are expected
(*ākāṅkṣita*) can be intended (*vivakṣita*), and since there is no
expectation for the various delimiters (such as gender, number, and so
on) of the topic (*uddeśya*), they are considered to be unintended.
(Professor Yoshimizu referred to *Ṭupṭīkā* 1205.24-26 in the workshop:
*kriyā sādhyā sādhanaṃ tatparicchedakāni ca liṅgasaṃkhyādīn apekṣate,
ataḥ sarvaviśeṣaṇaviśiṣṭā kriyaiva vidhīyate*.)

I had three general questions. First, I purposely phrased this principle
without reference to human agents such as “readers” (or “speakers” or
“listeners”). I wonder whether it is possible to speak of “discursive
dependencies” in this case, similar to “syntactic dependencies,” which
do not necessarily refer to an actual psychological state of expectation
or anticipation, but rather to the constraints of information structure
(or syntax). Part of what makes this theory so elegant, I think, is that
intention so defined is not arbitrary, or equivalent to a speaker’s
“gist” (*abhipreta*), but the correlate of a particular configuration of
discursive functions.

Second, what are *uddeśyatva* and *vidheyatva*, really? How are they
defined? We briefly discussed “givenness” (as pragmaticists say) or
*prāptatva* (as Mīmāṃsakas say) as one of the conditions for
*uddeśyatva*. But it seems that this isn’t the whole story; these
functions can’t be reduced to old vs. new information.

Third, the most obvious outcome of this discussion is that words don’t
always mean what they mean, even for people who believe that linguistic
systems are eternal. A word like *graham*, which denotes a vessel in the
accusative singular, doesn’t always refer to a single vessel (in the
*grahaikatva* section, it refers to each of the vessels in a particular
ritual context). An interesting further consequence of this discussion
is that certain linguistic elements are present in a sentence not
because they are intended, or “motivated,” but as it were by default. (A
Mīmāṃsaka might call this *anuvāda* or “repetition.”) They are present
only because their absence would violate well-formedness constraints at
the level of morphology (e.g., all nouns need a gender, number, and
case), syntax, and perhaps information structure.
