+++
title = "Logic, mysticism, both"
full_title = "Logic, mysticism, both or neither"
date = "2014-09-06"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/06/logic-mysticism-both-or-neither/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2014/09/06/logic-mysticism-both-or-neither/).

Logic, mysticism, both or neither

In a recent
[exchange](http://scientiasalon.wordpress.com/2014/08/11/graham-priest-on-buddhism-and-logic/ "Buddhism and logic")
with Graham Priest, Massimo Pigliucci (who works mainly in philosophy of
science, and Stoicism) takes aim at this notion that most Western
philosophers’ disdain forBuddhism has to do with an aversion to
contradictions, easily understood ifone’s pursuit of knowledge and
truth is rooted in a recognition of the Aristotelian principles of
non-contradiction and the excluded middle. Priest, as is known, has been
defending for some timethe notion that Buddhist philosophy is full of
contradictions (most recently
[here](http://aeon.co/magazine/philosophy/logic-of-buddhist-philosophy/ "Beyond true and false"))
and that, actually, that might not be such a bad thing (if
[dialetheism](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/dialetheism/ "dialetheism")
is to have a place of pride in thelogical space of reasons).

Now, I am always happy to see mainstream philosophers take an interest
in what is being said aboutBuddhist philosophy by fellow mainstream
colleagues. The only problem is that whomsoever gets to speak on its
behalf matters to what is being said about it. Pigliucci should be
forgiven therefore for walking away with the impression that Buddhist
philosophy means Nāgārjuna and his *catuṣkoṭi*, and that much of what
Buddhist thinkers, both classical and contemporary, are concerned with
is figuring out what the Buddha said and did, and why.

And what Priest thinks Nāgārjuna’s Buddha meant is something like this:

“The language we use frames our conventional reality (our Lebenswelt, as
it is called in the German phenomenological tradition). Beneath that
there is an ultimate reality, such as the condition of the enlightened
dead person. One can experience this directly in certain meditative
states, but one cannot describe it. To say anything about it would
merely succeed in making it part of our conventional reality; it is,
therefore, ineffable. In particular, one cannot describe it by using any
of the four possibilities furnished by the *catuṣkoṭi*.”

And so here we go again: Eastern thought is intuitive and mystical and
Western philosophy is rational and argumentative, and the twain shall
never meet. No matter all those wonderful analogies between the
*contradictions* of Madhyamaka\* Buddhism and logical developments in
the West since Aristotle that Priest marshals, the damage is already
done. For Pigliucci all this talk of paraconsistency in Buddhism is just
a veiled attempt to import logic into mysticism and to make paradoxical
Buddhist ideas as rigorous as Western logic and math. As he puts it:
“the rigor in the latter comes out of the ability to very precisely
spell out formalism, build arguments and proofs, defend or abandon
axioms, and so on. Nothing of the kind appears to be the case within
Buddhist tradition.”

End of story!

Now, let’s just say for the sake of argument that Pigliucci had a
colleague at CUNY someone who was both a philosopher and a scholar of
Buddhist philosophy, say, someone like Mark Siderits, Jan Westerhoff, or
Jay Garfield (on the principle that one most often learns about
traditions of thought wholly outside one’s purview from one’s
colleagues, if at all). How might this exchange have gone? Let’s see.

Take Westerhoff, for instance. His Nāgārjuna is concerned not with why
ultimate reality cannot be described “by using any of the four
possibilities furnished by the catuṣkoṭi” because it is ineffable, and
saying anything about it renders it a part of our conventional reality.
Rather, the main concern is with precisely how we are supposed to
acquire knowledge of emptiness: that is, of the notion that things,
including the sources of knowledge we rely on to access them, lack the
intrinsic features typically ascribed to them. Now, Nāgārjuna’s critique
of epistemology is mainly the critique of a version of the Nyāya\*\*
theory of knowledge (the quintessentialschool of analytic philosophy in
early India, and the Buddhists’ arch-opponents). Nāgārjuna’s point is
that knowledge does not come from the use of a set of epistemic
procedures. Rather, the sources of knowledge and their objects are
mutually entailing: objects are established as such by the sources that
give us access to them, and in turn our successful practices establish
which sources and under what circumstances are trustworthy. The point
(for Nyāya) is to achieve what Westerhoff calls a “reflective
equilibrium”: our beliefs about the nature of what there is are put to
test by our best hypotheses about how we come to know what there is; at
the same time these hypotheses furnish us with basic modes by which we
assess what there is.

Unfortunately, the reflective equilibrium the Nyāya strives to achieve
is problematic, because methods determine outcomes: which sources are
deemed reliable is going to determine the type of reflective equilibrium
that is achieved. And here’s the real problem: there is no neutral
ground from which to deliberate about the different reflective
equilibriums!

Insofar as it showcases the presumed relativism of such epistemic
claims, Madhyamaka is surely no mysticism. And furthermore, the
Mādhyamika’s criticism leaves no epistemic stone unturned. Its stand is
no stand at all (at least on one version of the story). But, as Siderits
has convincingly argued ([“Nyāya realism, Buddhism critique,”
2000](https://books.google.com/books?id=1_wnvrMUV2QC&pg=PA225&lpg=PA225&dq=%22Nyāya+realism,+Buddhist+critique%22&source=bl&ots=_iu2kb0dh9&sig=bGtpyhzQ4vqwwDpp9k-EZuFFM9U&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CCQQ6AEwAWoVChMI8IfI_cHtyAIVxkcmCh2yMwBU#v=onepage&q=%22Nyāya%20realism%2C%20Buddhist%20critique%22&f=false)),
the Mādhyamika’s critique of epistemology rests on an internalist
framework of justification: one has to know somehow that one is
justified in rejecting the Naiyāyika’s realist epistemology. The problem
is that the Naiyāyika is an externalist about knowledge: reliable
cognition is the product of reliable causal processes and thus cannot be
subsumed under the internalist framework of justification the Mādhyamika
has assumed. So, onWesterhoff’s meticulous analysis of this project,
“the Mādhyamika’s criticism \[of epistemology\] loses its force, for it
is now based on an assumption––namely epistemic internalism––which its
opponent does not share” (Westerhoff, *Nāgārjuna’s Madhyamaka*, 217).

This is not a Madhyamaka wrapped up in paradox, but one we can make
sense of (even asthe story told here is awfully incomplete.It is true
that in his magnum opus, the MMK, Nāgārjuna does set out to deny that
causation is a mind-independent phenomenon capable of guaranteeing the
efficacy of those epistemic practices that rely upon it. But, as I see
it, there is a deceptive simplicity in Nāgārjuna’s argument: our
conception of causal relations entails cognition of the operations of
causality. If we can assume that cause precedes effect, then the missing
link between the existing cause and the not yet arisen effect is
supplied by cognition. Causation may transmit features of the object to
cognition, but only as grasped by a cognizer who can articulate its
structure.

This account of Nāgārjuna’s project is much closer to what Pigliucci
thinks is going on with, for instance, Kant’s delineation of an
“epistemically inaccessible zone”––one whose contents may be
inaccessible, but whose contours can be easily traced. There is no
contradiction is saying that cognition has an articulable structure,
even though the constitutive elements of that structure are conceivable
only in terms of our best ‘conventional’ epistemic practices. Drawing
the contours of ineffability is just an indirect way of marking off the
domain of the conventional. Surely, the relativism implicit in the
Mādhyamika’s focus on the conventional threatens our robust conceptions
of truth, of what there is and how we come to know it. But where is the
paradox in asserting that, although we can only talk about things as
experienced, what we experience does not exhaust what there is? It’s not
likeNāgārjuna establishes the truth of emptiness by claiming its
ineffability. Rather, the claim seems to be that
a*svabhāva\*\*\**-based view of reality is fundamentally incoherent.

Madhyamaka: logic, mysticism, both or neither? It really depends on
whom you ask.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*Madhyamaka (“Middle Way”) is the name of aschool, founded
byNāgārjuna. A follower of that school of thought is known as a
‘Mādhyamika’.

Nyāya\*\* (“School of Reason”) is the name of a school, founded by
Gautama. A follower of that school of thought is known as a ‘Naiyāyika’.

\*\*\**svabhāva*–This is a difficult term with no straightforward
philosophical equivalent in English. It encapsulates at once an
ontological (things defined in terms of their ‘essences’), a cognitive
(mental states as ‘intrinsically’ ascertained), and a semantic
dimension(meaning or truth as an ‘immanent’ feature of language).
