+++
title = "Typos"
full_title = "Typos"
date = "2012-02-27"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/27/typos/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/27/typos/).

Typos

In popular fiction, mutants are cool. They have special powers and look
like Hugh Jackman. In reality, though, mutations that have any effect at
all are almost always bad for you. Everybody has a number of mutations
of varying severity. Some completely destroy a gene’s function, while
others cause lesser degrees of harm. Mutations occur every generation,
while selection is always eliminating them. At any given moment, there
will be a small percentage of defective copies of each gene in the
population.

In a simple model, a given mutant has an equilibrium frequency μ/s, when
μ is the mutation rate from good to bad alleles and s is the size of the
selective disadvantage. To estimate the total impact of mutation at that
locus, you multiply the frequency by the expected harm, s: which means
that the fitness decrease (from effects at that locus) is just μ, the
mutation rate. If we assume that these fitness effects are
multiplicative, the total fitness decrease (also called ‘mutational
load’) is approximately 1 – exp(-U), when U is where U=Σ2μ, the total
number of new harmful mutations per diploid individual.

The mutation rate for any particular locus is low: for a typical gene,
something like 10-5. But over the genome as a whole, the total rate is
on the order of 1 per generation, or maybe a bit larger than that.
Suppose U is 1: then the average person has a fitness that is less than
two-thirds that of a mutation-free individual, one with all typos
corrected. Some estimates have U as high as 4.2 in humans: in that case,
average fitness is only about 1% of a mutation-free individual. This
big change occurs because U is up in the exponent.

Suppose that some human population had their mutation rate increase by
50%? What would happen? They would immediately experience an increase
in genetic disease. The first thing you would notice would be a higher
rate of dominant genetic diseases like Marfan syndrome and
neurofibromatosis. For the the case of a dominant lethal, the percentage
increase in the first generation would be the same as the increase in
the mutation rate – because dominant lethals must be generated fresh
every generation. Less drastic mutations would increase more slowly,
because there is already a substantial background level. Marfan syndrome
decreases fitness by about 25% – it would take something like a century
to reach the higher equilibrium rate. A mutation that decreased fitness
by 1% would require about 2500 years.

Those 2500 years would make the Dark Ages look like a picnic. Things
would get worse and worse. After a millenium or two, \_nobody\_ in this
hypothetical population would be as fit as as today’s average. You would
expect to see lots of changes, all bad. Lifespan would surely go down.
Infant mortality and miscarriage rate would go up. IQ would decrease,
probably more so than many other fitness traits, since more  
than half of all genes are expressed in the brain. It’s a a big
mutational target – more to go wrong. People would be crazier, too – as
if we didn’t have enough trouble already. In the long run, thousands or
tens of thousands of years, this population would adapt to the
consequences of the higher mutation rate, assuming that it didn’t go
extinct. Brains would cost just as much as they ever did, but would
deliver less fitness per cubic centimeter: under these conditions the
fitness-maximizing size would go down. Natural selection would also be
reshaping other traits – you’d still be seeing adaptation to disease
and climate and whatnot. But complex adaptations would not work as well.

Innovations, including useful innovations, are generated by a fairly
small number of smarter-than-average people. That fraction would drop
dramatically as average IQ decreased, because of the shape of the normal
distribution, which decreases more and more rapidly with increasing
distance from the mean. Innovation would probably stop. At the very
least, the rate of innovation we’ve grown to love, fast enough to keep
ahead of population growth, would falter. The world would become
Malthusian. You’d see cats and dogs living together.

All this assumes reasonably random mating. It also assumes that the
fitness-reducing effects of mutations are multiplicative, which seems
reasonable but is not at all certain. It is possible to imagine ways in
which certain patterns of selection could limit the increase in mutation
load. For example, suppose that only a certain fraction of people could
mate – say the top 30% in fitness – while others never reproduced. That
would severely limit the increase in mutational load, since each genetic
death would eliminate many bad alleles. This model, truncation
selection, is halfway plausible in a dog-eat-dog Malthusian world, but
nobody knows how close it is to reality. Geoffrey Miller would suggest
that sexual selection would ameliorate this problem. Even if some of
these optimistic scenarios are correct, people in our hypothetical
high-mutation population would be worse off. The question is exactly how
much.  
What would a spelling-checked person, one with no genetic typos, be
like? Since no such person has ever existed, we have to speculate. I
figure that kind of guy would win the decathlon, steal your shirt and
your girl – and you still couldn’t help liking him.

