+++
title = "Diamond on domestication"
full_title = "Diamond on domestication"
date = "2012-02-15"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/15/diamond-on-domestication/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/15/diamond-on-domestication/).

Diamond on domestication

Jared Diamond, in discussing animal domestication, claims that the local
availability of species with the right qualities for domestication was
key, rather than anything special about the biology or culture of the
humans living there. In some cases that may be true: there aren’t many
large mammals left in Australia, and they’re all marsupials anyway.
Stupid marsupials. He claims that since Africans and Amerindians were
happy to adopt Eurasian domesticated animals when they became available,
it must be that that suitable local animals just didn’t exist. But
that’s a non sequitur: making use of an already-domesticated species is
not at all the same thing as the original act of domestication. That’s
like equating using a cell phone with inventing one. He also says that
people have had only mixed success in recent domestication attempts –
but the big problem there is that a newly domesticated species doesn’t
just have to be good, it has to be better than already-existing domestic
animals.

Indian elephants, although not truly domesticated, are routinely tamed
and used for work in Southern Asia. The locals in Sub-Saharan Africa
seem never to have done this with African elephants – but it is
possible. The Belgians, in the Congo, hired Indian mahouts to tame
African elephants, with success. It’s still done in the Congo, on a very
limited scale, and elephants have recently been tamed in other parts of
sub-Saharan Africa, such as the Okavango delta. Elephants have long
generations, which makes true domestication difficult, but people have
made domestication attempts with eland, African buffalo, and oryx.
They’re all tameable, and eland have actually been domesticated to some
extent. If a species is tameable, economically useful upon taming, and
has a reasonable reproductive schedule, domestication is possible:
selection for even a few generations can change their behavior enough to
make dealing with them a lot easier.

As for the Americas – have you ever had a deer eating out of your hand?
Bison seem too wild and scary to have ever been domesticated, but then
I’m sure you would have said the same thing about the aurochs, the wild
ancestor of cattle.

In fact, in my mind the real question is not why various peoples didn’t
domesticate animals that we know were domesticable, but rather how
anyone ever managed to domesticate the aurochs. At least twice. Imagine
a longhorn on roids: they were big and aggressive, favorites in the
Roman arena.

Let me throw out an idea originated by an old friend, Ivy Smith.
Consider mice, cats, and toxoplasma. Toxoplasma is a protozoan with a
two stage life cycle: one in an intermediate host (mice and rats, among
others) and a definitive host (some feline). Toxoplasma only reproduces
sexually in the definitive host, and it ‘wants’ to end up there. It
manipulates the behavior of the intermediate host in ways that increase
the probability of transmission to the definitive host. For one thing,
it makes mice like the smell of cat urine, which elicits fear in
uninfected mice. In fact, it seems that toxoplasma-infected mice are
sexually excited by cat urine. How weird – a parasite rechanneling
sexual interest…

The idea is that at least some individual aurochs were not as hostile
and fearful of humans as they ought to have been, because they were
being manipulated by some parasite. The parasite might have caused a
general reduction of fear or aggression without infecting or aiming at
humans – or, maybe, humans really were the definitive host, and the
parasite knew exactly what it was doing. The beef tape worm – which we
originally acquired from lions or hyenas back in Africa a couple of
million years ago – might have gained from making infected bovines
quiet, passive, maybe even overly friendly in the presence of humans.
This would have made domestication a hell of a lot easier.

Parenthetically, such host manipulation may play a really important
ecological role. For all we know, if canids and felids had to rely
purely on their own abilities, they’d starve.

The beef tape worm may not have made it through Beringia. More
generally, there were probably no parasites in the Americas that had
some large mammal as intermediate host and Amerindians as the
traditional definite host. Amerindians simply hadn’t been there very
long. Domesticating bison may have too hard for unaided humans, back in
the day.

