+++
title = "Depths of Madness"
full_title = "Depths of Madness"
date = "2012-02-16"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/16/depths-of-madness/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/02/16/depths-of-madness/).

Depths of Madness

I’ve said it before, but it’s probably time to say it again. The most
likely explanation for human homosexuality is that it is caused by some
pathogen. It’s too common to be mutational pressure (and we don’t see
syndromic versions, as we would in that case), it’s not new, identical
twins are usually discordant (\~75% of the time), and it’s hell on
reproductive fitness. There is no way it is adaptive: the helpful gay
uncle notion, group selection, compensating advantage in females, etc:
these range from impossible to bloody unlikely. It doesn’t exist in
most hunter-gatherers: you have to explain what it is you’re even
talking about when you ask them. Presumably with diagrams.

As for Freudian explanations, exotic-becomes-erotic, etc: just reading
the social-science literature on the subject is enough to make you
wonder if the human brain really does exist to cool the blood.

A fair number of the smarter people interested in the subject agree with
me. Not that they think it proven, but they agree that it is the only
theory out there that makes any evolutionary sense. Bill Hamilton
thought it made sense. So does Alan Grafen. Mike Bailey thinks it more
likely than any other explanation tendered thus far.

My model – not the only possible model based on a pathogen, but
reasonable – leans on a couple of natural examples. One is
narcolepsy. We now know that narcolepsy happens when a particular kind
of neuron, concentrated in a little region in the hypothalamus, somehow
gets zapped. 99% of narcolepsy cases happen in the 25% of the
population that has a particular HLA type – which suggests that
something, probably a virus, triggers an overenthusiastic immune
response that zaps a neuron subpopulation that produce a particular
neurotransmitter (called hypocretin or orexin) that regulates appetite
and sleep patterns. And it doesn’t do anything else: narcoleptics
aren’t stupid. You can compare narcolepsy to type I diabetes or
Parkinson’s disease. Suppose there’s a neuron subpopulation that
performs a key function in male sexual desire: wipe out that
subpopulation, and Bob’s your uncle.

Another is toxoplasma, which we now know changes mouse behavior in ways
that increase a mouse’s chance of being devoured by a cat, the
definitive host for toxo. Infected mice are attracted to cat urine,
while uninfected mice avoid it. In fact, in infected mice, cat urine
apparently triggers activity in neural pathways involved in sexual
arousal. Microorganisms *can* reprogram sexual attraction in mammals.

I have had people complain that I’m neglecting the social aspects of
homosexuality, what it means, how people think of it. Let me tell you a
story. In certain parts of west Africa, boys are expected to start
menstruating around age 14. And they do, sort of: you start seeing
blood in their urine. When that happens, there’s a big ceremony,
everyone says ‘today you are a man’. Whatever. The thing is, that’s
about the time they put the boys into the flooded rice fields, where
they’re exposed to schistosoma haematobium, which causes urinary
schistosomiasis. It’s bad for you: it can impair growth and cognitive
development in children, reduces productivity, and is a potent cause
of bladder cancer over the long term.

Our explanation of male menstruation as urinary schistosomiasis must
undermine these people’s traditional culture. Eliminating
schistosomiasis would undermine it even further, just as the rubella
vaccine dealt a heavy blow to deaf culture by cutting the number of
congenitally deaf children in half. .

Isn’t that just too damn bad.

P.S. The title comes from the coolest response to this hypothesis I’ve
ever received, from some inspired fool in New Zealand: “And descending
into the most disturbing depths of madness and the most depraved abuse
of science yet conceived, we will even be told that homosexuality is
caused by a virus or a bacterium. “

