+++
title = "Unchanging Essence"
full_title = "Unchanging Essence"
date = "2013-02-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/02/17/unchanging-essence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/02/17/unchanging-essence/).

Unchanging Essence

John Shea is a professor of anthropology at Stony Brook, specializing in
ancient archaeology. He’s been making the argument that ‘behavioral
modernity’ is a flawed concept, which it is. Naturally, he wants to
replace it with something even worse. Not only are all existing human
populations intellectually equal, as most anthropologists affirm – all
are ‘behaviorally modern’ – all *past* populations of anatomically
modern humans were too! The idea that our ancestors circa 150,000 B.C.
might not be quite as sharp as people today is just like the
now-discredited concept of race. And you know, he’s right. They’re both
perfectly natural consequences of neodarwinism.

Behavioral modernity is a silly concept. As he says, it’s a typological
concept: hominids are either behaviorally modern or they’re not. Now why
would this make sense? Surely people vary in smarts, for example: it’s
silly to say that they are either smart or not smart. We can usefully
make much finer distinctions. We could think in terms of distributions –
we might say that you score in the top quarter of intelligence for your
population. We could analyze smarts in terms of thresholds: what is the
most complex task that a given individual can perform? What fraction of
the population can perform tasks of that complexity or greater? Etc.
That would be a more reasonable way of looking at smarts, and this is of
course what psychometrics does.

It’s also a group property. If even a few members of a population do
something that anthropologists consider a sign of behavioral modernity –
like making beads – everyone in that population must be behaviorally
modern. By the the same argument, if *anyone* can reach the top shelf,
we are all tall.

The notion of behavioral modernity has two roots. The first is that if
you go back far enough, it’s obvious that our distant ancestors were
pretty dim. Look at Oldowan tools – they’re not much more than broken
rocks. And they stayed that way for a million years – change was
inhumanly slow back then. That’s evidence. The second is not.
Anthropologists want to say that all living populations are
intellectually equal – which is not what the psychometric evidence
shows. Or what population differences in brain size suggest. So they
conjured up a quality – behavioral modernity – that all living people
possess, but that *homo erectus* did not, rather than talk about
quantitative differences.

The idea of behavioral modernity (as usually stated) makes no sense.
Ongoing adaptive evolution changed people. Upon expansion out of Africa,
admixture with archaics added quite a bit of new adaptive variation.
That changed people – some of them. Anatomically modern Africans mixed
with other archaic populations inside Africa, populations that were more
different than Neanderthals, having diverged something like a million
years ago – and that changed them. New tools, new cultural innovations –
above all agriculture – changed the selective pressures, and people
changed again. Culture influenced mutation rates as well. You don’t
expect to see sameness in either space or time – and we don’t.

Shea seems to think that a species – in particular, anatomically modern
humans – is some kind of Platonic type and has an unchanging essence. So
if all humans are ‘behaviorally modern’ today (they have to be, whether
they are or not), surely they were 200,000 years ago as well. Those
Australians are just pretending to have 15% smaller brains, while the
Ashkenazi Jews are just pretending to be smart. S. J. Gould seems to
have thought along these same lines, to the point where he would argue
with someone (Reznick) who found that a few generations of different
selective pressures (no predators above waterfalls) caused heritable
changes in guppy behavior. Gould disliked anything that suggested that
selective pressures could result in human behavioral differences. Since
everything suggests that, he kept busy. But archaeologists often get
their evolutionary theory from Gould, not knowing that he was a lying
jackass.

If the inner nature of a species stays always the same, where did
anatomically modern humans come from in the first place? Were they found
under a cabbage leaf?

Does Shea think that canines have an unchanging essence, so that
Pekingese and border collies and timber wolves are all really the same?
They really are different. I will stick my hand into a Labrador’s mouth
if Shea puts his hand into a pit bull’s mouth. Take a look at canine
venereal sarcoma (yuck!) – once a dog, now an infectious cancer. Where’s
the essence?

Shea says that no anthropologist in his right mind would think that
existing cultural variation among humans had anything to do with genetic
differences between existing populations. It will be interesting to
discover the alleles that made him say that.

