+++
title = "Whaddya know?"
full_title = "Whaddya know?"
date = "2013-02-23"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/02/23/whaddya-know/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/02/23/whaddya-know/).

Whaddya know?

I was noticing an article in the Atlantic by Rebecca Rosen – On Nuclear
Weapons as Units of Measurement. The gist of the article was that you
can’t really compare meteor explosions (like the one over Chelyabinsk)
to a nuclear weapon. Of course that lady is mistaken: the blast and
thermal effects are similar. No ionizing radiation, but blast and
thermal are the main killers. The only reason the explosion (about 500
kilotons) didn’t level Chelyabinsk was its high altitude, probably over
100,000 feet. She is mistaken because she doesn’t know anything about
the subject, and relied on info from atomic historian Allen Wellerstein
– who also knows nothing. He managed to misunderstand a Sandia report
that concluded that the Tunguska explosion was less powerful than
thought – but only because the rapid downward motion of the fireball
made the explosion more effective at causing ground damage than
expected. So Wellerstein only got it backward. Nobody’s perfect.

But then, what do people know? What do people in public life know? What
do specialists know outside their speciality? And while we’re at it,
what about all the things they know that aren’t so?

I think that native smarts is important, but so is knowledge. We know
that the average voter has what you might call a shallow grasp of detail
– for example, most of them can’t find Afghanistan on the map. Only a
bit more than half know that the Earth goes around the Sun in a year.
And so on. But what the people who run the show? My impression is that
they aren’t much better.

The practical question is what people in various jobs know, and what
extra knowledge would make them better at those jobs. Next, is it even
possible to substantially increase their level of knowledge? I tend to
rant about biologists who don’t know anything about evolutionary
genetics, but the problem is general. Professional historians give the
Bancroft Prize to some liar who claimed that guns were rare in colonial
America. Maybe they were liars too, but I’ll bet that sheer ignorance
played a role.

I certainly don’t have the data to be sure about this, but my
medium-strong personal impression is that this is getting worse.

