+++
title = "Dragon Man ascending two"
full_title = "Dragon Man ascending two geneticists discuss the latest paleoanthropological discoveries"
date = "2021-07-01"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/dragon-man-ascending-two-geneticists"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/dragon-man-ascending-two-geneticists).

Dragon Man ascending: two geneticists discuss the latest paleoanthropological discoveries



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F7006e54a-20dd-4856-b72e-252de5dcd49c_1200x675.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/dragon-man-ascending-two-geneticists?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

Last week two new hominin fossils were [published in the scientific
literature](https://razib.substack.com/p/here-be-humans), and
[extensively reported on in the
media](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/25/science/dragon-man-skull-china.html).
“Dragon Man”, [discovered in Harbin,
China](https://www.cell.com/the-innovation/fulltext/S2666-6758(21)00057-6),
and dating to 140,000 years ago is claimed to be a new species that is
the closest to the modern human lineage. Meanwhile, the [hominin
discovered at Nesha
Ramla](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/372/6549/1424) in Israel
dates to 120,000-140,000 years ago, and it seems most similar to
Neanderthals (though its tools are no different from modern humans to
the south and west in Africa).

I’ve given some thought to the implications of these results, and how to
interpret them. But I wanted to get the sense of another geneticist, my
friend Vagheesh Narasimhan. I’ve talked to [Vagheesh
before](https://brownpundits.libsyn.com/indian-ancient-dna-and-history)
in relation to his blockbuster paper, [The formation of human
populations in South and Central
Asia](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6457/eaat7487.editor-summary).
My goal for this podcast was to “nerd out” on human evolution from a
genomics perspective, and see if he had the same impressions that I did
of these papers.

![Vagheesh
Narasimhan](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F84831c5e-542c-433d-8bbd-05e5c137fe7d_596x604.png)

We discussed population structure in Denisovans, the importance of
ancient DNA and proteins, whether the “Out of Africa” theory even makes
sense, as well as new work on methylation patterns in the genome and
predicting physical characteristics. I did bring up statistical power in
“skull science,” and both of us expounded on why DNA, in particular, is
so powerful as a method of inference in comparison to traditional
morphology.

It was an hour spent slashing back and forth across these two papers and
circling around from a genetic perspective.

Both of us agreed that we can’t conclude Dragon Man is closest to modern
humans.

**Past paleoanthropology podcasts:**

-   [Chris Stringer: 1,000,000 years of human
    evolution](https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/chris-stringer-1-000-000-years-of-human-evolution/id1542136715?i=1000516463718)

-   [Chris Stringer on paleoanthropology in
    2020](https://podcasts.apple.com/ca/podcast/chris-stringer-on-paleoanthropology-in-2020/id1324744423?i=1000474609717)

-   [Chris Stringer and The Human
    Revolution](https://podcasts.apple.com/ca/podcast/chris-stringer-and-the-human-revolution/id1324744423?i=1000404302261)

-   [Multiregionalism is Dead...Long Live
    Multiregionalism!](https://insitome.libsyn.com/multiregionalism-is-deadlong-live-multiregionalism)

-   [A conversation with John Hawks: a life in
    paleoanthropology](https://unsupervisedlearning.libsyn.com/category/Human+Evolution)

-   John Hawks on Neanderthals:[part
    1](https://podcasts.apple.com/ie/podcast/neander-me-part-1/id1324744423?i=1000399026557),[part
    2](https://podcasts.apple.com/ie/podcast/neander-me-part-2/id1324744423?i=1000399569917)

-   [Lee Berger and the Dawn of "Big Data" in
    Paleoanthropology](https://insitome.libsyn.com/lee-berger-and-the-dawn-of-big-data-in-paleoanthropology)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/dragon-man-ascending-two-geneticists?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

