+++
title = "Bramhana Dharma ( code"
full_title = "Bramhana Dharma ( code of conduct for bramhana )"
date = "2014-06-30"
upstream_url = "https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/06/30/bramhana-dharma-code-of-conduct-for-bramhana/"

+++
Source: [here](https://animeshnagarblog.wordpress.com/2014/06/30/bramhana-dharma-code-of-conduct-for-bramhana/).

Bramhana Dharma ( code of conduct for bramhana )

   
  
Brahmana Dharma  


The Vedas are indeed countless and endless – ‘anantA vai VedAH’, it is
said. Even Brahma could not gauge the extent of the Vedas. The Lord
Himself had to incarnate on earth as Badarayana .i.e. Vedavyasa and he
collated a small portion of them into the four Vedas, which we have
heard of. It is indeed a very very tiny portion of the original Vedic
lore abstracted for the purpose of making a beginning and for paving the
way for Dharmic life. Even Badarayana, in truth, could not find the
beginning and end of the Vedas. As even these four Vedas, tiny portions
from the original which is limitless, cannot all be studied and
understood by anyone, even if he is allotted eons of life. Vyasa Bhagvan
taught each one of the Vedas (some little portion of each) to one
student each, each of whom was specially blessed with the full extent of
a Kalpa for their study. Paila learnt a small portion which goes under
the name of Rig Veda; Vaishampayana learnt another small portion which
goes under the name of Yajur Veda; Jamini learnt Sama Veda and Sumanta
learnt Atharva Veda. These at least they could learn, only because of
the special grace of their Guru, Vyasa Bhagwan. That being the case, how
ridiculous it is for any man, whose life span is so short to claim and
boast that he has mastered the Vedas!

Rig Veda has its auxiliary Ayurveda, the Science of Life. Its presiding
deity is Brahma. Its Gotra is Atreyasa. Its chandas is Gayatri. The Rig
Veda Purusha has red lotus like broad eyes and a three feet long shapely
neck. He has beautiful flowing locks of hair. Rig Veda has all in all,
12 sections or divisions. Its systematic recital, with the correct
intonation, endows greatest merit. Much of the portion of Rig Veda is
not known to any in the Kali Age.

Yajur Veda has its auxiliary Dhanurveda (the science of Archery and
weapons). Its presiding deity is Rudra. Its gotra is Bharadwaja. Its
chandas is Tristup. The Yajurveda Purusha has bright lotus like eyes,
with an effulgent body & majestic stature.

Yajur Veda has 86 Bedhas (Sections or divisions). It is humanly
impossible to explain every section of this Veda. Each section has so
many sub-sections, chapter, branches which are dealt with in great
detail, but are not easily comprehensible. They have profound meaning
and implications. They deal with sacrifices, Achara-Vidhis, the detailed
instructions governing the performance of sacrifices, the mantas for the
purpose and strict discipline to be observed by the Brahmin, especially
by the priests officiating at such sacrifices. This Veda broadly
consists of Mantras, Brahmanas, Samhitas and Aranyakas. This Veda has
eight Upangas namely: Pratipada, Abupada, Chandas, Bhasha, Dharma,
Mimasa, Nyaya and Tarka. It also has six Angas (limbs) namely Shiksha,
Kalpaka, Vyakarana, Nirukta, Chandas and Jyotisha.

Sama Veda has its Upaveda – Gandharva Veda. Its presiding deity is
Vishnu. Its Chandas is Jagati. Its Gotra is Kasyapasa. Sama Veda has a
Thousand Shakhas (sections). The Sama Veda Purusha dons on his neck a
beautiful flower garland and wears a white waist cloth. He has all the
virtues like sama and dama i.e., total mastery over senses and mind. He
has radiant eyes, a most fair complexioned golden-splendored body and is
9 feet in height.

Atharva Veda is full of Mantra Shastra. Its Upaveda is Astra Veda. Its
presiding deity is Indra. Its Gotra is Vaijanasa. Its Chandas is
Tristup. The Atharva Veda Purusha is of fierce form and of dark
complexion. He is not an austere as the other three Veda Purushas.
Atharvana Mantras can be used for malevolent purpose also and thus
misused. The Veda has chiefly Nine Bhedhas (sections) and five Kalpas.

The Vedas are most profound. They are the sole protection for mankind
both in the world here and worlds thereafter. They are to be worshipped
as Mother. Humility is the true mark of scholarship. However, the
knowledge, if at all anyone can gain and profess about the Veda, will be
just no more than a grain of sand while the Vedic lore is like the
unending stretch of the sandy shores of all seas of the earth.

The caste in which one is born is determined by his past Karmas (actions
and conduct). Good actions lead to higher birth, births in higher
castes; and sinful and bad actions lead to births in lower castes or
even in sub-human species. Brahmin is predominantly of Satwic (of pure,
serene and tranquil) temperament; he has a special duty and role in
society. He is the spiritual custodian of the people of all communities.
He has the great responsibility for the material and general well being
of all his younger brothers and sisters in the family. He has to observe
the strictest disciplines; he has to perform all the prescribed rituals
as per Vedic injunctions and his conduct should be a model and example
to all others. His daily rituals are for the well being of all. For that
purpose, the Brahmin has to consecrate his entire life. That was why
Brahmins of yore were ranked as equal to Gods, and even the rulers
(kings) used to honor them as such.

If a Brahmin fails in the discharge of his ordained duties, he will
slide down to birth in the lower castes. Apart from the duties ordained,
there are also actions prohibited. If a Brahmin indulges in any of the
prohibited actions, he gets born in the lowest castes or even as an
animal or may be even as a lowly creature. Among the many sins listed
which cause the downfall of men (Durgati in contrast to Sadgati),
especially of the Brahmins, the following are some:-

1\) Forsaking the Guru and the parents and ill treating them.

2\) Forsaking the wife and children.

3\) Committing of adultery, theft, etc. (even sensuous thoughts about
other women are as much a sin).

4\) Killing of animals or inflicting of even the least suffering upon
them.

5\) Separating away the calf from its mother.

6\) Non-observance of injunctions regarding food.

7\) Failure to perform the Shraddha ceremony to the departed souls
(ancestors) and forbears of the family.

8\) Indulging in slanderous talk, especially blasphemy against the
Vedas, Deities and Gods.

9\) Turning away the guests and not offering them food.

10\) Refusing to give water to thirsty person.

11\) Indulging in iconoclasm (breaking of idols) and causing damage to
temples and places of worship, or fouling tanks, well and rivers.

12\) Non-observance of the Nitya-Vidhis, the daily obligatory duties
enjoined on one.

The Prayaschitta Vidhi for the sins committed by a Brahmin are as
follows:

Krchra Vow observance is like this: Fasting for 3 days, followed by
sustaining oneself on milk for the next 3 days, on ghee for further 3
days, etc. Those who are weak are permitted to eat ginger seeds;
otherwise what is prescribed is water in which is soaked either Aswatha
or Banyan leaves or Lotus flowers or Dharbha grass etc. The Chandrayana
Vrata is like this: Beginning with fast on new moon day and taking one
morsel of food the next day and increasing one by one morsel of food
every day afterwards; from full moon day onwards again decreasing one by
one morsel of food everyday and with total fast again on the new moon
day.

Through Gayatri Homa and Veda Parayana also, as much merit is earned as
by doing these Vratas.

With stay at Kashi for a month, all sins are absolved. A bath at
Setu-Bandha absolves sin of causing death of a Brahmin and the like.
Sustaining oneself with one single and limited meal a day and reciting
of Narayanopanishad etc. will absolve one of all the sins committed in
countless of former lives.

Before starting to do the Prayashchita, one should begin by sipping
Panchagavya, after fasting on the previous night. Panchagavya is a
mixture of cow’s milk, urine, dung, ghee, curds, in which added also is
water in which is dipped the Kusha grass and which has been then
sanctified by the chant of the mantras and preferably also blessed by
the Guru.

All the above rites are very potent means by which one can absolve his
sins dome knowingly or in ignorance.

Once Lord Shiva and Parvati went to the Mandara Mountain. All the Gods,
Rishis, Apsaras, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Kinnaras, Rudgraganas, Shivadutas,
all came and assembled over there. Lord Shiva was seated on His Throne.
By his side was seated Mother Parvati. Golden in complexion, and
bedecked in richest jewellery and adorned with beautiful flowers, she
was radiating all splendor. All were absorbed in the ecstasy of the
Darshan of the Divine couple, the Mother and Father of the Universe.

Sanatkumara Rishi prayed to Lord Shiva to teach them the one Dharma
Vidhi, which will be simple to be observed by all yet will confer all
the four Purusharthas – four chief Aims of Life, Dharma, Artha, Kama and
Moksha and which will destroy all the sins, endow bodily and mental
purity and also intellectual illumination.

Lord Shiva said there is one Dharma Vidhi which is simple and can be
followed by each and everyone and which will confer all good and save
men from all ills of the world. This Vidhi is called ‘The Tripundra
Bhasma Dharana Vidhi’. The Bhasma is symbolic of the ultimate truth, the
ultimate truth of all matter. It has a spiritual significance in that it
is changeless, immutable like Godhead. It is colorless or white, so to
say, indicating purity. In Jabalopanishad, Bhasma Vidhi is described in
great detail.

Agni is the presiding deity for Bhasma. The ash from the sacrificial
fire is most sacred. In the absence of it, ash prepared from cow dung is
to be used. A little ash is to be taken, reciting the ‘Sadyojata’
mantra. A little water is to be added and mixed in it with the aid of
thumb, while reciting the ‘Manastoka’ mantra. Then chanting the
‘Trayambakam Yajamahe’ mantra, it has to be taken near the forehead.
Then reciting the ‘Trayayusham Jamadagne’ mantra, the tripundra dharana,
i.e. applying it in three lines – is to be done. First, with the aid of
the middle and ring fingers two lines are to be applied, the top one and
the bottom are from left to right, then with the aid of the thumb, the
middle line is to be applied, drawing it from right to the left. The
marks are not to extend beyond the sides of the eyebrows. With devotion,
these marks are to be always worn on the forehead.

The first line mark is Brahma Devata and is symbolic of Rigveda. It
means (A) syllable of Pranava Mantra (AUM). It endows ‘Kriya Shakti’.
The second line is Vishnu Devata, and is symbolic of Yajur Veda. It
means (U), syllable. It endows ‘Icha Shakti’. The third line is
Maheshwara Himself and is symbolic of Sama Veda. It means (M) syllable.
It endows ‘Jnana Shakti’.

Bhasma Dharana can be done by one and all, and during all the stages of
Life. It will cure all the ills of the body, mind and spirit. It ensures
mental purity, intellectual illumination and spiritual enlightenment in
their life beyond it opens the gates of Kailasa for him, which is the
Eternal Abode of Supreme peace and beatitude. For destroying one’s sins,
there is nothing comparable to doing Bhasma Dharana, but it should be
done with full faith and devotion. For one who applies ashes on his
forehead and wears Rudraksha Mala on his neck, there will be nothing
wanting for him either in this life or in the beyond. Wearing of
Rudraksha and applying Vibhuti (Bhasma) on the forehead confer great
sanctity to the wearer. They are most purifying and will ward off all
evil. None can harm the wearer and even the Lord of Death would keep
away from him. They confer happiness in this life and ensure happiness
in the life beyond.

Lord Shiva is all powerful; it was Lord Shiva who caused the Vedas to
manifest and gifted them to Brahmadeva to serve as guidance to the
latter in his functioning as the Creator of the world of matter and the
Universe of beings. Along with the Vedas, He also gifted to him the
Brahmopanishad, in which there is one chapter entitled Rudradhyaya and
describing the Rudrabhisheka Mahima. Brahmadeva narrated the
Rudrabhisheka Mahim to the Rishis once, as described in the Rudradhyaya
of the Brahmopanishad. His narration goes as under:

The study of Rudradhyaya and performance of Rudrabhisheka would expiate
one of all his sins and would endow also liberation on him from the
cycle of birth and death. He said that Rudrabhisheka was the panacea for
all the ills of the mundane life. All the Rishis, thereafter, as advised
by Brahmadeva, took to Rudrabhisheka. From the Rishis, it spread among
all the people, and everywhere the echo of Rudra Japa and Rudradhyaya
could be heard. Whenever and wherever Yama Dharma Raja’s Dutas
(servants/guards) visited, they were repelled by the seething heat
generated by the spiritual vibrations emanating from Rudra Japa. The
Yama Dutas narrated their plight to Yama Raja. The latter rushed to
Brahmadeva and told him about the matter. Brahmadeva told Yama Raja that
he should instruct his Dutas that they should never approach anywhere
near where Rudradhyaya and Purusha Sukta chanting would be going on and
they could move feely only where such chanting is not there.

There are also many disciplines regarding acceptance of food. One can
take food in Guru’s house without any hesitation, so also in the
maternal uncle’s house, in the father-in-law’s house, in the houses of
brothers, and in the houses of pious people. If there was no Brahmin
priest available at the time of Shraddha ceremony, one can attend and
take food, but on the next day, he should do Gayatri Japa. Anyway, food
is most holy. It should be taken in the houses of the pious and Satwic
people, and taking God’s name.

Homes of evil minded people are to be avoided. Food is not to be
accepted from:

i\) Greedy people;

ii\) People who are not doing their duty to their family;

iii\) People who are proud and egoistic;

iv\) People who indulge in always self-praise and taking ill of others;

v\) People who are ill tempered;

vi\) People of immoral conduct;

vii\) People who are addicted to drinking wine and other intoxicating
drinks;

viii\) People who delight in harming others; If we accept food from such
people, their sins will affect us.  
The food should be taken only from the hands and homes of people of
Satwic and devout temperament. Through the food we take, the Gunas flow
into us. The food should promote Satwa Guna, i.e., pure, cool and
enlightened temperament in us.

Parasara Smriti lays down in great detail under Achara-Samhita the code
of conduct for the Brahmins, who are spiritual custodians of the
community and the society. The Achara Samhita is something like Bhagwad
Gita, for the Brahmins. It is, so to say, like a Fifth Veda. It lays
down daily disciplines to be strictly observed by a Brahmin from dawn to
dusk. The disciplines laid down are as under and whoever meticulously
observes them will attain everything and will never suffer from any
want, nor will be ever subject to grief.

The Brahmin should rise in the early hours of the morning, which is
called the Brahma Muhurta (between 3.30 and 5.00 AM), during which time,
the Satwa quality will be prevalent in the atmosphere.

As soon as one rises form bed, he should remember his Guru first and
offer mentally his obeisance to him; he should then offer his obeisance
to God and the deities (Trimurtis, Sun God, the Navagrahas, etc), then
to the sages, the Pitru Devatas and to the parents. He should not let
the mind wander away. He will have to let it dwell on Guru-God thoughts
only, for sometime at least. He is advised to have first the Darshan of
Cow (Gomata) before he does anything else.

After offering obeisance to the cow, he should (gargle his mouth and
then) do Achmana, by sipping a little water. This Achmana is a constant
practice, many times during the day, prescribed for Brahmin. If there is
no water available for the Achmana, if he just touches his right ear,
that is said to be sufficient. The right ear is said to be the seat of
Agni (Fire God), Varuna (God of the seas and air), Surya, Chandra and
other Deities. Achamana is to be done taking the Guru’s God’s name and
chanting the appropriate Mantras. Till sunrise and before he goes out
for his morning ablutions, he will have to devote either to chanting of
prayers, recital of Vedic Mantras or Meditation. After dawn one should
attend to the calls of nature. At that time he should keep silent. He
should then clean his mouth and teeth (to get rid of the foul odor, as
well as for the mouth hygiene). The twigs of trees which are to be used
for cleaning the teeth are listed. After this one should take his bath.
It cleanses and refreshes the body and drives away laziness. It endows
strength, longevity, intellectual brilliance, etc. It cleanses away the
effect of bad dreams and also drives away poverty and all ills.

Brahmacharis (celibates) are to bath in the mornings and all
house-holders in the morning and in the afternoons as well as in the
evenings i.e., all three times during the day. Whatever water one should
be using for bath, he should deem it as waters of the Holy Ganges
flowing down from the feet of Hari, and which endows both bodily purity
as well as purity of the mind and spirit. When water is not available or
when one is sick, one should recite the ‘Apohista’ Mantra, and do
Marjana three times. This is called ‘mantra Snana’. Doing Vishnu Nama
Sankirtana is called ‘Manasika Snana’. Taking Darshan of the Guru, or
sprinkling the water after washing the feet of the parents is called
‘Teertha Snana’.

On the days of Vratas, Sraddhas or after birth ceremonies or death
ceremonies in the family – on the tenth day of the pollution period, hot
water bath is prohibited. In flowing water of a river, one should face
opposite the current, and in tanks etc, one should face towards the east
and then take the bath.

If one takes oil-bath on Sundays, it could lead to disease, on Mondays
it should lead to draining of energy, on Tuesdays it could lead to
death, on Wednesdays it endows wealth (Lakshmiprapti), on Thursdays and
Fridays, it could cause the impairment and danger to the health of
children (Santhana Nastham) and on Saturdays it brings in all
auspiciousness, health and wealth. Housewives are not to take hair bath
daily.

On the days when one has taken oil bath, he is not to apply Bhasma. On
all other days and at all times, he should necessarily apply Bhasma on
his forehead.

For Deva Puja, the shrine room should be kept clean, Rangoli should be
done and the place should be decorated with flowers. The atmosphere
should be filled with the fragrance of incense sticks, sandalwood or
other perfume materials. The place should be specially congenial and
soothing to the minds. It should make an instant appeal to the minds and
bring it into devout and worshipful mood. The atmosphere should be such
that the senses get sublimated, mind gets collected and calmed and the
spirit gets uplifted and elevated.

Seated on a clean, comfortable seat, one should take to the Puja
(worship). The worship has to be done three times a day – morning,
afternoon and evening. If the full and elaborate worship is not possible
for want of time or any other reasons, one should at least do the
Shodasopachara Puja (worship constituting the sixteen types of services)
in the morning, Panchopachara Puja (worship constituting of five types
of services) in the forenoon, and offering of the camphor light
(Niranjana) in the evening, and perform the worship this way. Having
been born as a Brahmin if he does not do the worship daily, he will be
subject to hell life after death.

There are six types of Puja. These are:-

i\) Udaka Narayana Puja i.e. worshipping of God in Water

ii\) Agni Puja i.e. worshipping God in Fire

iii\) Aditya Puja .i.e. worshipping God in the Sun

iv\) Manasika Puja i.e. worshipping God in the Shrine of one’s heart.
(offering of worship mentally)

v\) Pratima Puja i.e. worshipping God in the Icons (idols)

vi\) Yajna Puja i.e. worshipping God through performance of Yajna

The Manasika Puja is the highest form of worship. Idol worship is a
relatively lower type or form of worship compared to Manasika Puja, but
it also has its place in the spiritual journey. Worship of cow and a
Brahmin, visualizing them as God, is also an accepted form of Puja.
Worship of Guru pleases all the Trimurtis. In the Kali age, as men are
not capable of cultivating and cherishing such exalted form of adoration
towards the Guru and of identifying the Guru with God, God has assumed
the forms of Saligrama stones and of Linga form stones, which are found
on the banks and the river beds of the Narmada and the Gangaki rivers.
Worship of the Saligrama of the Linga absolves man from all his sins.

With Guru’s Upadesha and worshipping the idol as per his instructions,
God will respond fully in stone and wood idols even and will fulfill all
the desires of the worshipper.

Regarding the worship to the idol, firstly one should seat himself
before the shrine, should do Sankalpa and then Pranayama (regulation of
breath). Pranayama helps to quieten the mind and centralizes the
consciousness for concentration. Water has to be sprinkled over the
materials for worship. The idol has to be then installed in the
Simhasana (throne or seat for the Lord). On the left side of the idol
should be placed the bell. The flowers and other materials of worship of
the previous day are to be removed. The lamp has to be lighted. Then
worship has to be first offered to Lord Ganapati. Then the Guru has to
be remembered. The worship to the shrine has to be done. The tutelary
deity has to be visualized in the shrine of one’s own heart, and the
same visualized form has to be then invoked and enshrined in or to be
identified with the idol placed for worship. This is Prana-Pratishtha,
imparting living reality to (or instilling life into) the idol. One
should visualize that God himself has come and is standing in front of
him. Bhavana, with true faith, is the very essence of the idol worship.
Then to the visualized form of God, identified with the idol, Padya,
Arghya, Aachamana, Madhuparka, Snana – all these Upacharas (services)
are to be done. Then chanting the prescribed Mantras, Abhishekas etc.
have to performed with milk Panchagavya, etc.

The idol has to be dried with a clean cloth and placed back on the
Shrine. Then Vastra (cloth/clothes), Gandha (sandal-paste), Yajnopavita
(sacred thread), are to be offered and thereafter Puja has to be done
with flowers, with materials and articles of fragrance, and with
Akshatas (rice mixed with Turmeric paste), etc. While white flowers are
ideal for worship, colored flowers are not so sacred for worship.
Lotuses, Jasmines and some other such flowers are good; Ganapati is not
to be worshipped with Tulasi and Devi is not to be worshiped with
Garika. Maredu (Bilwa) is dear Shiva and Tulasi for Vishnu. After the
offerings of flowers, Dhoopa has to be offered. During the Puja,
appropriate Mantras and prayers are to be recited with full devotion.

After the Puja, Naivedya (food) will have to be offered to the Lord.
Visualizing God to have eaten the food offering, His hands are to be
cleaned with water. Then Tambula (Betel leaves) have to be offered. The
Puja will have to be concluded with Arati and offering Mantra Pushpa at
His feet and doing the Pradakshana and finally doing the Sashtanga
Namaskara.

The Puja Teertha has to be sprinkled on one’s forehead, to be smeared on
the eyes and should be sipped by the mouth. The Puja-Teertha is most
purifying; it purifies the body, mind and the spirit.

After the Deva Puja and before taking food, we have to offer oblations,
the Pancha Yagnas, viz., Deva Yagnya, Rishi Yagnya, Pitru Yagnya, Bhuta
Yagnya, and Athiti Yagnya. These Yagnya’s absolve man of the sins which
everyone invariably commits while doing the daily chores. The Pancha
Yagnya’s are done through Vysvadeva from the food cooked, a little
portion will have to be first offered to the Gods, Pitrus, ancestors,
Bhutas, Rishis and Athitis, and then only one will have to take his
food, considering it as Yagnya-Sesha (the remnant portions of Yagna).

If a guest happens to arrive, he should be welcomed and fed. Athiti is
to be deemed as God himself come in human form. After the guest is fed
only the Grihastha (the house holder) has to take his food. When an
Athiti or Brahmachari comes for Bhiksha, he should be offered Bhiksa,
instantly even if Vaisvadeva and Naivedya have not been performed yet.

If Athiti is pleased, all Gods, all Pitrudevatas will be pleased. One
morsel of food given to them brings mountain sized merit and one tumbler
of water offered to them brings an ocean-size merit. One who does not
offer food to Athiti and eats by himself, will be born as a dog or
donkey in his next life.

Strict silence is enjoyed while taking food. Actually before taking
food, there are other oblations to be done and observed. A circle with
four cones (mandala) should be drawn with flour and plate of food should
be kept on the mandala. A little food has to be kept aside on the right
side on the floor as ‘Bali’, in the name of Chitragupta, and thereafter
only we should et the food. One should visualise that God only, seated
inside him, is eating the food and that the food is also Brahman himself
(Brahmarpanam, Brahma HaviH Brahmagnau brahmanahutam. Brahmaiva tena
gantavyam, Brahma Karma Samadhina).

‘Pranabhuti’ and ‘Ausposana’ Mantras are to be recited at the beginning
and after the completion of taking the food. At night when taking food,
there should be lighted lamp and one should not eat the food in the
dark. Moderation is very much necessary in food. How many mouthfuls one
should take as per day of the fortnight, i.e. Chandrayan Vrata is
described in the Shastras. The types of utensils and plates to be used
for taking food, the metals out of which thy are made, their shapes –
these are also described in some detail in the Shastras.

Food without a daily oblation, food made with too much salt, garlic,
etc, are prohibitive. On particular days, some types of food and certain
types of vegetables and fruits are to be avoided, like Padwal on Padyami
day, bel phal on Friday, Shaniphal on Tuesday, etc. A Brahmin should
never take nishiddha food or food touched by a cat, rat, crow, dog, etc.
He should not eat food that is stale, i.e., leftovers from previous.
These impair the Satwic states and promote rajasic and tamasic
tendencies in him. A Brahmin should nurture and guard his Satwic gunas
which are necessary and essential for his functioning as the community
and the society as a whole.

In the evening the Brahmin should perform Sayam Sandhya, i.e., chanting
Gayatri Mantra with three oblations of water and uttering Gotra, Pravara
and with Auposan. Thereafter only he should take his night meals. Before
retiring to bed, one should read some sacred books, and then after
offering his whole day’s work as worship done to the lord, he should go
to sleep.

Sayana Vidhana (sleeping) is also described, i.e., regulations, relating
to the cot used for sleeping by a Brahmin, etc. The cot should be clean.
It should not have been made of jambul wood or tusks of a dead elephant.
Days for weaving cots are also specified – they are Sunday, Tuesday or
Thursday. When weaving, certain Deities are to be remembered. One should
sleep with head towards east or south.

The places prohibited for sleep for a Brahmin are also mentioned. Old
temples, cremation grounds, at the foot of a tree, near anthill, near
tanks, on food grains and dilapidated house are prohibited places for
sleeping. A Brahmin should not go to bed with wet clothes. He should not
go to sleep without a garment. He should not sleep under the bare sky.

A Brahmin should not indulge with his wife when she is in her monthly
period or when she is wearing blue colored sari. There are injunctions
on the wife as to how to conduct herself during her monthly periods and
the things and disciplines she should observe. All these are necessary
for bodily health as well as for moral and spiritual health, not only
for the couple but also for the well being and welfare of the progeny.
All these have been codified by Prasara Rishi in Parasara Smriti.

