+++
title = "What Counts as a"
full_title = "What Counts as a Tradition in Indian Philosophy? The Case of Skepticism"
date = "2017-05-19"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/05/19/what-counts-as-a-tradition-in-indian-philosophy-the-case-of-skepticism/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/05/19/what-counts-as-a-tradition-in-indian-philosophy-the-case-of-skepticism/).

What Counts as a Tradition in Indian Philosophy?:  The Case of Skepticism

Scholars of all types of philosophy are fond of referring to
philosophical traditions. But what does this mean? What counts as a
tradition?

In the Indian context one way to discuss a tradition is with the
word*darśana*, which literally means view or viewpoint from the root
“*dṛś*” – “to see.” It can also be translated as “school.” This is how
we at the blog translate it in our scheme for categorizing posts.

We might also look to the etymology of the English word “tradition,”
which derives from the Latin “*traditio*” (a handing down, delivery).
Must a tradition be handed down through interpersonal transmission from
teacher to student in the traditional Indian model? Or could it be a
matter of later philosophers being inspired by reading particular texts,
or perhaps some combination of interpersonal transmission and textual
inspiration?

Let’s look at this issue with a topic near and dear to my heart (or, in
any case, to my current research agenda): skepticism in Indian
philosophy.

While I think there may be something like skepticism about the external
world or about other minds in Indian philosophy, here I’m talking about
a kind of skepticism about philosophy itself, an attitude I see most
explicitly present in Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi, and Śrī Harṣa. (If you don’t
accept my somewhat controversial premise, that’s fine; I hope my
discussion of the concept of a tradition will still be interesting).

Lately I’ve been reading early Indian philosophy: the*Ṛg Veda*,
some*Upaniṣads*, and some early Buddhist texts. I’ve noticed ways in
which these texts contain the roots of the types of skepticism about
philosophy later exemplified by Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi, and Śrī Harṣa
(although I should note that I am in no way claiming that the early
texts are essentially skeptical texts — they’re all far too complicated
to be reduced to any one of their elements). These later philosophers
were making novel contributions, but they were starting with previously
existing material. Does this mean there was a tradition of skepticism
about philosophy in classical India?

There can’t be a skeptical tradition in the sense of a*darśana*. One
might suggest that the Cārvāka*darśana*is a tradition of skepticism.
While all Cārvākas doubt many of the knowledge-claims of their religious
counterparts, most Cārvākas seem to have accepted a kind of commonsense,
everyday knowledge as philosophically established. While Jayarāśi should
be seen as cultivating seeds of Cārvāka skepticism that were planted
earlier in the Indian tradition, these and other skeptical seeds were
also cultivated outside the grounds of the Cārvāka darśana.

Furthermore, the etymology of*darśana*implies a specific, articulated
set of views about philosophical matters. Skepticism about philosophy is
not a particular view about philosophical matters, but rather an
attitude about engaging in such philosophical pursuits. If anything,
skepticism about philosophy is an “anti-*darśana*” rather than
a*darśana*itself.

Nonetheless, skepticism about philosophy seems to have been handed down
from the earliest beginnings of Indian philosophy. The seeds of
skepticism were planted in the*Ṛg Veda*,*Upaniṣads*, and early
Buddhist texts. These seeds were later cultivated by philosophers in at
least three different eras coming out of what are usually considered to
be three different traditions: Jayarāśi from Cārvāka, Nāgārjuna from
Buddhism, and Śrī Harṣa from Advaita Vedānta.

This represents an alternative way of conceptualizing traditions in
Indian philosophy. Traditions within Indian philosophy might be
distinguished by methods and goals rather than explicitly articulated
beliefs, religious affiliation, or placement within traditional
doxographies.

There are three elements in particular that formed the key methods of
skepticism about philosophy:*vitaṇḍā, prasaṅga*,
and*prasajya*.*Vitaṇḍā*is discussed in the Nyāya Sūtra as a type of
debate in which one seeks to destroy an opponent’s view without putting
forward a view of one’s own.*Prasaṅga*is a form of argument in which
several possible interpretations of an opponent’s philosophical thesis
are put forward, each being rejected in turn as either internally
inconsistent or as incompatible with the opponent’s other commitments.
This was the standard form of argument for Nāgārjuna and
Jayarāśi.*Prasajya*negation is a “commitmentless denial” (as B. K.
Matilal called it) that allows skeptics to deny their opponents’ theses
without thereby committing themselves to any alternative philosophical
thesis.

Nāgārjuna, Jayarāśi, and Śrī Harṣa employed these methods toward similar
– albeit not identical – goals. They all sought to destroy the bases of
philosophical conceptualization, Nāgārjuna for the Buddhist quietist
goal of relinquishing all views, Jayarāśi for the Cārvāka purpose of
enjoying life more fully, and Śrī Harṣa in line with Advaita goal of
becoming open to experience of non-dual*brahman*.

Does it make sense to identify a skeptical tradition (or cluster of
traditions) within Indian philosophy even if doing so cuts across the
usual ways of identifying Indian philosophical traditions? Might we
likewise identify other traditions in Indian philosophy:*pramāṇavāda*,
realism, idealism,*rasa*,*alaṅkāra*, etc.? While I’m not denying that
the*darśana*model has its uses, might it be helpful to think of other
ways of carving up Indian philosophical traditions?

*Cross-posted to [my personal
blog](http://examinedworlds.blogspot.com/2017/05/what-counts-as-tradition-in-indian.html).*
