+++
title = "Incompleteness in"
full_title = "Incompleteness in knowledge and existence"
date = "2017-05-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/05/28/incompleteness-in-knowledge-and-existence/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/05/28/incompleteness-in-knowledge-and-existence/).

Incompleteness in knowledge and existence

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/05/incompleteness-in-knowledge-and-existence)

A friend read [the previous post on ibn Sīnā and
Śāntideva](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/05/ibn-sina-and-santideva-on-the-incompleteness-of-the-world/)
and asked (on Google+) what exactly I meant by “incompleteness”. It was
a great question and made me realize there was a bit of confusion in my
own thinking.

The point of connection I saw between the two different thinkers was
above all at the level of *understanding* the world. The idea is that
both thinkers would say we can’t understand the world just in terms of
the set of entities that normally appears to us (like people and trees).
Unless we either add God to the picture (ibn Sīnā) or remove the self
from it (Śāntideva), we misinterpret everything else. That’s the thrust
of the MacIntyre quote that [the
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/05/ibn-sina-and-santideva-on-the-incompleteness-of-the-world/)
had centred around: adding God to the world is not just a +1 to the set
of entities, and removing the self is not just a -1. The presence or
absence of God or self changes the nature of everything else.

That is to say that the “incompleteness” that the Muslim and the
Buddhist can agree on is an *epistemological* incompleteness.
MacIntyre’s original quote noted: “theists believe that nature presents
itself as radically incomplete, as requiring a ground beyond itself, *if
it is to be intelligible*…” (emphasis added this time) A world without
God, for ibn Sīnā, cannot be adequately *understood*; it is incomplete
in the sense that our *knowledge* of the entities in the world has a
fatal gap, until we add God to make sense of them. Śāntideva – and other
Buddhists including Aśvaghoṣa and Dharmakīrti – would say the same about
a world with selves. Our knowledge of the world has a fatal gap until we
remove the confusion that is the self. It is not just that by positing
selves in the world we add one illusory kind of thing that isn’t there
(as if we had posited unicorns). It is that by positing those selves we
misunderstand the nature of everything *else*, as ibn Sīnā would say we
do if we don’t allow God as an explanation.

But there is also a big difference between the two, one which I wasn’t
seeing last time because of the ambiguity in the word “incompleteness”.
Śāntideva and ibn Sīnā would *not* agree on *ontological* incompleteness
– that is, the idea that things themselves, and not merely our knowledge
of them, actually *are* incomplete. For I say that for Buddhists “all of
those things \[in the world\] are indeed taken to be radically
incomplete, lacking.” And that is a point on which ibn Sīnā would
*disagree* and disagree strongly. The things of the world *would be*
lacking, radically incomplete, if there were no God. Such a world, I
believe, is described well by the existentialists. But of course as far
as ibn Sīnā is concerned there *is* a God, and for that reason the
things of the world are *not actually* lacking or radically incomplete
at all. It is only our understanding of them that is incomplete, insofar
as we miss the presence of God.

Buddhist views are very different. For Buddhists, unlike for Muslims (or
other monotheists), there is a fundamental lack in all the things of the
world. They are impermanent, essenceless (which is to say not-self) and
unsatisfactory, *anitya, anātman, duḥkha*. To the extent that there is a
lack in the things for ibn Sīnā, it is that they are incomplete *without
God*; they require God to be complete. But – this is the key point I
missed – they *have* God! God *exists*, for ibn Sīnā, and therefore we
can see that things actually *are* complete if we understand them
correctly – they all point beyond themselves to the ultimate truth that
is God.

Buddhists, like existentialists, have no God – early and Madhyamaka
Buddhists, at any rate. They do often tend to relate to godlike beings,
[such as the bodhisattva
Mañjuśrī](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/03/praying-to-something-you-dont-believe-in/),
but in monotheistic terms these beings are more like angels or even
saints than gods; they did not create the world, they do not underlie
it. The world *itself* has no omnibenevolent creator making it, no
fundamental goodness and order underlying it. There is karma, but while
karma *responds* to goodness and badness, it is not *itself* good or
bad, it is simply there, as gravity is there. (That is referring to
gravity as an atheist would understand it; for ibn Sīnā gravity would
need to *be* fundamentally good, because God created it.) On an early
Buddhist understanding, karma is *itself* something we’re trying to get
out of; an arhat, a perfected person, is no longer subject to it.

In short, for Śāntideva, the world *actually is* incomplete and lacking,
and we misunderstand it if we don’t see this lack – a lack at least
partially expressed in the notion of non-self. For ibn Sīnā it’s just
that the world *would be* incomplete without God. But since he takes God
to exist, for him the world is complete; it is as it should be. The
similarity between the two is that we don’t adequately *understand* the
world, it is incomplete in *intelligibility*, without the key idea of
God or non-self.
