+++
title = "Book Review of The"
full_title = "Book Review of The Gathering of Intentions A History of a Tibetan Tantra by Jacob P Dalton (Reviewed by Swami Narasimhananda)"
date = "2017-05-10"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/05/10/book-review-of-the-gathering-of-intentions-a-history-of-tibetan-tantra-by-jacob-p-dalton-reviewed-by-swami-narasimhananda/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2017/05/10/book-review-of-the-gathering-of-intentions-a-history-of-tibetan-tantra-by-jacob-p-dalton-reviewed-by-swami-narasimhananda/).

Book Review of The Gathering of Intentions: A History of a Tibetan Tantra by Jacob P. Dalton (Reviewed by Swami Narasimhananda)

**Jacob P. Dalton. *The Gathering of Intentions: A History of A Tibetan
Tantra*. xxvi + 246 pp.. New York: Columbia University Press. $ 60.00
(Hardcover).**

This book could be seen as a novel method of tracing the history of a
scripture. Jacob P. Dalton does this by “tracing the vicissitudes of a
single ritual system—that of the *Gathering of Intentions Sutra*
(*Dgongs pa ’dus pa’i mdo*)—from its ninth-century origins to the
present day” (xv). This tantra is referred to as the “root tantra” and
is vital for understanding the history of Tibetan Buddhism, particularly
the Nyingma school. This book is divided into seven chapters focusing on
the various forms of the traditions surrounding this text.

Dalton gives an interesting account of his first encounter with the text
by recounting his experiences in the Preface. He tells us in captivating
language that while staying at Namdröling monastery in south India, he
“began to work” his “way through the *Gathering of Intentions*” (vii).
He explains how he had to request repeatedly Penor Rinpoche for being
initiated into the “nine vehicles of the Nyingma School’s teachings”
(ix), albeit only after being reprimanded for having attempted a
translation of the text without having been initiated into its practice.
The initiation took place at Namdröling monastery for three days amidst
“hard rain.”

The beginning sets the tone for the rest of this book. Dalton’s book is
proof that analytical discussions on the history of a religious text
need not be dull and boring. He deftly weaves the web of various
narratives and myths associated with the text and in the process creates
a powerful narrative of his own. Throughout the book Dalton emphasises
the uniqueness of the text. About its special language, he says: “Almost
all Tibetan canonical works—sutras and tantras—are supposed to have been
translated from Sanskritic originals. The *Gathering of Intentions*
represents a rare exception, for it purports to have been translated
into Tibetan from Burshaski (Tib. *Bru sha skad*), a linguistically
exotic language spoken today in just one remote valley in Kashmir”
(xviii).

This book is not just the history of a Tibetan Buddhist text, but also a
rare and fairly detailed account of the growth of the Nyingma School of
Tibetan Buddhism. This book could also be easily used as a manual for
analysing the linguistic nuances of a religious text and its
translations. Such analyses by Dalton make him effortlessly arrive at
conclusions like this: “All this suggests that most of the *Gathering of
Intentions* was composed directly in Tibetan, though around an original
core of the narrative sections of the Rudra myth that were translated
from Burushaski” (7).

Dalton is sure that the “*Gathering of Intentions’* authors and Nupchen
following them, saw their composition as a work of ‘Secret Mantra,’ by
which they meant the three classes of ‘inner tantras,’ Mahāyoga,
Anuyoga, and Atiyoga. Nonetheless, beginning around the eleventh or
twelfth century, followers of the Nyingma school classified the
*Gathering of Intentions* as a work of Anuyoga alone” (36). The
“diffuse” role of this tantra is evident by its “rarely apparent”
influence (132). Dalton discusses the “Four Root Tantras of Anuyoga” in
an appendix to this book (133–48).

While analysing a religious text, its oral traditions are often
overlooked. Dalton is quite careful to avoid this mistake and apart from
devoting an entire chapter to “The Spoken Teachings,” dedicates another
chapter to “The Mindröling Tradition” that has a large corpus of spoken
teachings.

A glossary of technical terms complements the sixty-two pages of notes.
The bibliography is quite useful. Throughout this book, Dalton quotes
from the text of the tantra and its commentaries and thus gives the
reader a first-hand experience of the text. Dalton’s work brings back
the emphasis on the ritual tradition of a religious text. All scholars
of religion would do themselves great help by reading this book and
trying to apply these techniques to their own research.

*Reviewed by Swami Narasimhananda, Editor,* Prabuddha Bharata
