+++
title = "Defending the removal of"
full_title = "Defending the removal of suffering"
date = "2021-01-31"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/01/31/defending-the-removal-of-suffering/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2021/01/31/defending-the-removal-of-suffering/).

Defending the removal of suffering

It is typically the case that more can be said in disagreement than
agreement. In the case of [Martin Hägglund’s *This
Life*](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/01/this-life-the-work-of-a-lover-of-wisdom),
I think paying attention to those realms of disagreement is particularly
helpful, because our deepest disagreements highlight the ways in which I
am a Buddhist and he is not, even though there are core elements to his
critique of Buddhism that [I absolutely
share](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/).

As is the case in many extended disagreements, it can be helpful to
[start with a disagreement over
terminology](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/07/karma-eschatology-theodicy-or-eudaimonism/)
in order to make sure that what follows is clear. In Hägglund’s case, he
frames his argument as one for a “secular” view over a “religious” one.
I have
[said](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/10/why-the-study-of-religion-shouldnt-be-about-studying-religion/)
[a](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/on-the-grounds-of-religion-or-belief/)
[great](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/08/across-traditions-or-within-them/)
[deal](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/01/on-body-ritual-among-the-nacirema/)
over the years about why I think the concept of “religion” generally
obscures more than it clarifies, and there’s no need to repeat those
general points here; in the present context, the important thing is that
Hägglund falls victim to the same problems others do. In Hägglund’s
telling, Martha Nussbaum can count as entirely “secular” despite her
self-identification as Jewish, while Spinoza, the Stoics and the
Epicureans all count as “religious” – even though many Epicureans
explicitly rejected the gods. Such a framing, it seems to me, can only
end up as the vast majority of other attempts to demarcate the
“religious” from the “non-religious” do: in confusion.

However, though the terms “religious” and “secular” are poorly chosen,
the conceptual distinction that Hägglund uses those terms to portray is
quite a helpful one. He uses them to mean respectively what I have
called [ascent and
descent](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2014/04/defining-ascent-and-descent/),
and indeed occasionally uses those words himself (p101, for example).
What Hägglund is doing is to advocate descent against ascent, and I
think the way in which he does so is helpful.

I find it helpful because in many respects my own project is to develop
a synthesis *between* ascent and descent, between what Hägglund would
call the religious and secular. I [agree with Hägglund’s
critique](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/grappling-with-impermanence/)
of some core traditional Buddhist doctrines: especially, I agree with
him that to sever *all* attachments would come far too close to death
itself as we normally conceive it. The Nyāya and Vaiśeṣika schools are
explicit about claiming that [liberation is the absence of
consciousness](https://www.oxfordhandbooks.com/view/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195328998.001.0001/oxfordhb-9780195328998-e-12);
scarcely better is the kind of Buddhism whose only justification for
avoiding suicide (or murder, in Mahāyāna) is the [fear of a worse
rebirth](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/09/in-defence-of-buddhism-without-rebirth/).
[To fully free yourself from sorrow is also to “free” yourself from
joy](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/09/why-im-getting-married/);
“as long as you are attached to someone or something that you can lose,
you are susceptible to suffering.” (Hägglund 44) I stand with Hägglund’s
descent on all of this, and I recognize that Śāntideva or Buddhaghosa
would very much look askance at me for all of that.

*But*. That is not the whole story, and cannot be. For the first twenty
years of my life, before I [found
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2009/07/my-story-finding-buddhism/),
I lived completely in such a life of descent, at least as hostile to
“religion” as Hägglund ever was. And it was *agony.* Without the sense
of perspective that my encounters with Buddhism would later bring me, I
moved from one disappointment to another, filled with impotent rage at
the political world, despondent at my lack of romantic prospects,
frustrated over trifles. If my only choice was between the life of a
monk and *that* life, I would likely pick the monkhood. A Buddhist
monk’s pure ascent is significantly *better* than a pure descent that
embraces our existing cravings without attention to the ways these trap
us in suffering.

*Dukkhanirodha*, the removal of suffering, is of course a core Buddhist
idea: the Third Noble Truth. I have [previously
expressed](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/10/the-buddhist-problem-of-value/)
my objection to Śāntideva’s view that suffering should be prevented
because “no one disputes that!” As with John Stuart Mill on why
happiness is desirable, the argument does nothing to establish that
happiness or the removal of suffering is the only thing properly
desirable. We have goals [beyond the removal of
suffering](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/beyond-the-removal-of-suffering/)
and we are right to do so.

None of that is to say, however, that the prevention of suffering is
*not* a human goal, or should not be one. Yet the concern to prevent
suffering is one Hägglund seems to dismiss. He affirms that human cares
and aims constitutively require the possibility of suffering, and says
nothing at all that I can discern about wanting to *minimize* that
suffering. He says little if anything about our drives to be happy,
joyous, or contented, to reduce the pain and anguish and frustration
that most of us experience on a daily basis. In his view they do not
seem to matter.

But they *do* matter. Here it is possible to make a retort to Hägglund
on the grounds of Martha Nussbaum, a thinker with whom he has [great
sympathies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/01/this-life-the-work-of-a-lover-of-wisdom).
That is: Nussbaum’s Aristotelian grounds for criticizing [revisionist
views](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/01/aristotelian-vs-buddhist-eudaimonia/)
like Śāntideva’s have to do with our *phainomena* or *endoxa*, our
“prevalent ordinary beliefs”. Aristotle uses language like “we think”,
“we praise”, “nobody would choose” in order to refer us back to the
beliefs with which we begin our inquiry. Such claims, Nussbaum says,
remind an opponent of the “depth and power” of the beliefs he wants us
to shed; “it thus places on him the burden of showing why and for the
sake of what these beliefs are to be given up.” ([*Fragility of
Goodness*](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/fragility-of-goodness/B212012979833A828690B9CA907A87BF)
365-6) And surely, indeed, *nobody would choose* a life with more
suffering over one with less, except in *certain* cases where some other
care or aim happens to outweigh it. Such cases are real – but, it seems
to me, they are the exception. We *do* all have a deep and powerful aim
to reduce our suffering. That aim can conflict with our other aims, but
those other aims shouldn’t automatically get priority, any more than the
aim to reduce suffering itself does.

And it is from that need to reduce suffering that ascent (“religious”)
views get a great deal of their power. While it is *true* that “as long
as you are attached to someone or something that you can lose, you are
susceptible to suffering”, just saying that is not enough. That
suffering is not worth it in *every* case. *Dukkhanirodha* remains a
cherished goal alongside the others, and it is that for a reason. And
so, as the “religious” Stoics would say, we *do* have reason to keep
some distance between ourselves and the external goods we cannot
control, to not let ourselves get shaken by the vagaries of fortune.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2021/01/defending-the-removal-of-suffering)
