+++
title = "Tales from a Taxi Ride,"
full_title = "Tales from a Taxi Ride, Tamil Class and Talking one’s Thoughts"
date = "2014-11-20"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/20/tales-about-taxi-tamil-class-and-talking-ones-thoughts/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/20/tales-about-taxi-tamil-class-and-talking-ones-thoughts/).


					Tales from a Taxi Ride, Tamil Class and Talking one’s Thoughts				



[ November 20, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/20/tales-about-taxi-tamil-class-and-talking-ones-thoughts/ "Permalink to Tales from a Taxi Ride, Tamil Class and Talking one’sThoughts")

-   in [Personal](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/personal/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/20/tales-about-taxi-tamil-class-and-talking-ones-thoughts/#respond)

# Tales from a Taxi Ride, Tamil Class and Talking one’sThoughts

Usually, I would prefer to write long, subject-oriented articles, but
given the workload, shorter, personal reflections might be a better
option. Yesterday, when I was on the way back home in a taxicab, after a
long day of revision that ended at 10PM, I struck up a conversation with
the driver of Cīna descent, who having noticed the fact that I am
Indian, greeted me in Tamil (since a majority of the Indians in
Siṁhapurī speak Tamil, though the demographics are changing rapidly,
with immigration of Indians who speak other languages).

I was not too surprised that a Cīna knew some Tamil because in the
pre-independence period in Siṁhapurī, people of different ethnic groups
used to live in a rural setting, a grāma of sorts. Of course, in later
times, the pragmatic and highly perceptive rājya, to maintain communal
harmony in the tiny dvīpa, implemented an education policy which allowed
each major ethnic group to learn its respective mother-tongue. (One may
note the unfortunate events that transpired in Siṁhala-dvīpa, the causes
of which included the imposition of the dominant majority’s language on
others) I was born in Bhārata but was in Siṁhapurī when I was a year
old. There was no dearth of Hindu temples here and since Tamil, the
spoken language at home, was one of the official languages here, it made
it much easier for me to feel at home here.

Coming back to the driver, the conversation started rather innocuously,
hovering around the theme of language; but quickly escalated to the
topic of caste. The Cīna, being a Bauddha, presented the all-too-common
narrative of Gautama Siddhārtha being frustrated with caste, who
therefore founded a new path. Although the driver was intelligent in
comparison to the average Cīna Bauddha in Siṁhapurī, who was satisfied
with keeping fruit offerings for the statue of the Pāṣaṇḍin while
chanting “Om Mani Peme Hum” (Peme being a Cīna distortion of Padme), and
actually knew that the Buddha belonged to the śākya clan, he had his
limits.

Therefore, I was in no mood to impress upon him the references in the
[Lalitavistara
sūtra](https://aryanthought.files.wordpress.com/2014/05/lalitavistara-sutra.pdf)(Click
to read the Lalitavistara
s[ū](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/downloads/ "Downloads")tra. See
the third chapter)which stated the supposedly egalitarian Buddha’s
preference for pre-natal accommodation exclusively in the wombs of
Brāhmaṇa and Kṣatriya mothers, or the [Ambattha
Sutta](http://www.sacred-texts.com/bud/dob/dob-03tx.htm)’s account where
the Gautama is fiercely competitive in proving the superiority of the
Kṣatriya bloodline, śākya specific, vis-à-vis that of the Brāhmaṇa. But
I briefly hinted at it before getting down at my destination.

Sometimes, in our extreme eagerness to share our knowledge or insights,
we might overestimate the capacity of the vessel that receives our
perspectives. Not to say that the bearer of that intellect-vessel is
necessarily unintelligent; but their background and experience might
have limited their opportunities to develop a more nuanced view. In this
context and in light of the above reference to Tamil in Siṁhapurī, I can
recollect another instance where I felt the disparity in understanding.
A disparity in my favour; but nevertheless never came to fruition
because of another disparity-That of authority and status. I was in
Primary Six (Or what they would call in Bhārata, “sixth standard” or in
USA, “sixth grade”) and would have turned 12 in a matter of weeks.
During one particular Tamil class, my teacher was instructing us, in
preparation for the final exam before going to a secondary school, as to
what strategies we can employ in multiple-choice questions.

Her focus for that class was the strategy of elimination. It was a “fill
in the blanks” question, the details of which I forgot, with four
options, which I can recollect. The four options were:

அருவம்/Aruvam: From Skt. Arūpa, meaning “formless”

உருவம்/Uruvam: From Skt. Rūpa, meaning, “With form”

அருஉருவம்/Aru-Uruvam: Meaning, formless-form

உருஅருவம்/Uru-Aruvam: Meaning, form-formless

The teacher began her explanation by stating that we could
unhesitatingly eliminate the latter two options as they are nonsensical
and only have to consider the former two and see which makes more sense.
I had been reading Thirumanthiram of Thirumūlar (In the original, with
commentary) since I was about 10. I knew for a fact that “அருஉருவம்” or
the concept of formless-form was used in Śaiva Siddhānta to describe the
Sadāśiva aspect of Iśvara, that is, the Liṅga while the Maheśvara aspect
corresponded to proper anthropomorphic representations (“உருவம்” or
“With form”) and the grammatically neutered noun (or adjective in
certain cases), Śivam that is used to refer to the unfathomable
formlessness, “அருவம்”.

When I gave this explanation, I received a blank stare and was dismissed
cursorily, to the amusement of other students who had no idea what in
the world I was speaking of. Perhaps this incident impelled me to be
more discriminating and guarded in my approach towards sharing ideas. It
is already difficult being different and not having anyone to share
one’s unique ideas with. It is even more difficult when you are aware of
your distinct personality and outlandish interests from a young age and
the possible challenges it might bring in social settings with other
people. The privilege of “knowing what others do not” soon becomes a
pain in the gluteus maximus, especially in conversations on religion and
history, where you feel the dire need to correct the other’s
misapprehension but realize the futility of that enterprise, as those
who have not bothered to expose themselves to a broader body of
knowledge, are more likely to have an iron conviction in their
understanding of things.

Tags: [buddha](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/buddha/),
[buddhism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/buddhism/),
[cab](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/cab/),
[caste](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/caste/),
[frank](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/frank/),
[frankness](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/frankness/),
[language](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/language/),
[tamil](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/tamil/),
[taxi](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/taxi/),
[teachers](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/teachers/)

