+++
title = "Sweet Sleep"
full_title = "Sweet Sleep"
date = "2014-11-18"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/18/sweet-sleep/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/18/sweet-sleep/).


					Sweet Sleep				



[ November 18, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/18/sweet-sleep/ "Permalink to Sweet Sleep")

-   in [Personal](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/personal/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/11/18/sweet-sleep/#respond)

# Sweet Sleep

I have always had difficulties in obtaining a satisfactory amount of
sleep and as a consequence, I have only seldom obtained the experience
of feeling well-rested. With 7 exams over the next two weeks, I have
been losing more sleep than ever and my plans to write more articles
were naturally frustrated. It is one of the defining characteristics of
life here in Siṁhapurī where people are forced by the powerful adṛṣṭa
hasta (As first envisioned by Adam Smith) to labour for five (Six or
even seven for some) days a week. And no one wants to come home to sleep
right away or that would be a day where nothing was done for one’s own
sake. Many of my colleagues in my university circles, of Cīna ethnic
origin, would take great pleasure in watching soccer on TV or better
still, videos of beautiful, Korean Yuvatayaḥ singing and dancing or
“reality” TV or game shows, till the brain is utterly exhausted and one
is compelled to fall into the lap of Nidrā Devī (or what I would call “a
temporary relief after a day of urban neurosis so as to recuperate for
another day of the same” 🙂



For me, from time to time, I too have my fair share of cheap delights in
the baser and more mundane sources of entertainment, for everyone has
their poison. But for the most part, I love reading the subjects this
blog is concerned with (Vedic religion, Indo-European Culture,
Philosophical texts, Textual and Historical, criticism); and if
possible, read texts in the original, which is a great privilege given
the dearth of access to original texts in Siṁhapurī.



Nevertheless, despite this tiresome existence brought upon by an
engineering education in one of the-***proudly, of course***-most
stressful cities in the world, I thought I should endeavour to keep this
cherished intellectual space of mine as alive as possible. Hence, a
brief article about sleep itself. One might remember our discussion of
the political arrangement by Rāma Dāśarathi, in [our previous
article](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/09/28/the-political-genius-of-rama-dasarathi/ "The Political Genius of Rāma Dāśarathi").
In the course of writing that article, to check certain references, I
stumbled upon this gem of a verse by Kālidāsa in his peerless
Raghuvamśa.



atithin nāma kākutsthātputran prāpa kumudvatī \|  
paścimādyāminīyāmātprasādamiva cetanā Raghuvamśa, 17:1. Or
read
[here](http://www.sanskritdocuments.org/sites/giirvaani/giirvaani/rv/sargas/17_rv.htm).

**atithin nāma kākutsthātputran——A son, of Kākutstha, named Atithi**
(Rāghava, Kākutstha are titles given to the descendants of these kings
from the Ikśvākava dynasty. In this context, Kākutstha refers to Kuśa,
the son of Rāma Dāśarathi)

**prāpa kumudvatī——Kumudvatī obtained** (Kumudvatī was the wife of Kuśa.
The first line thus effectively means:

“Kumudvatī obtained a son named Atithi from Kuśa, the descendant of
Kakutstha”

**paścimād yāminī yāmāt——From the last quarter of night**

**prasādamiva cetanā——Like the intellect receives clearness** (The
second line effectively means, “Like the intellect acquires clarity from
the last quarter of the night)

The meaning of the whole verse is: **“Kumudvatī received a son by the
name of Atithi fromKuśa, theKākutstha, as the intellect obtains
clearness from the last quarter of the night.”**



I was struck by the papers I had read before; that argued about the
empirical correlation between REM sleep in the last quarter of the night
and cognitive ability to perform certain tasks. Interested readers may
want to read these papers from the [American Physiological
Society](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3768102/) as well
as the [American Psychological
Association](http://www.apa.org/monitor/jan06/onit.aspx).

Given the current workload, I am yet to do a thorough review of the
extent to which the Hindus might have been aware of the psychological
and physiological benefits of sleep. Sure, there is discussion of
Svapna, Suṣupti and Turiya in the Upaniṣat texts. But that again, is
another topic for another day. But this beauty from the master of
metaphors (Or simile, in this specific instance) might be an interesting
starting point to ponder about the Hindu understanding of sleep or for
me personally, a reminder to manage my time better.

Tags: [dream](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/dream/),
[kalidasa](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/kalidasa/),
[NREM](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/nrem/),
[poetry](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/poetry/),
[raghuvamsa](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/raghuvamsa/),
[REM](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rem/),
[sanskrit](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sanskrit/),
[Sleep](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sleep/),
[sushupti](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sushupti/),
[susupti](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/susupti/),
[svapna](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/svapna/),
[swapna](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/swapna/),
[SWS](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sws/),
[turiya](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/turiya/)

