+++
title = "Sons of the Indus The"
full_title = "Sons of the Indus The Indians"
date = "2021-09-26"
upstream_url = "https://indianhistory.substack.com/p/sons-of-the-indus-the-indians"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianhistory.substack.com/p/sons-of-the-indus-the-indians).

Sons of the Indus: The Indians



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F5c387dd8-23ea-448a-8d63-1b30a583aee9_900x1200.jpeg)

The past decade has seen a revolution in archaeogenetics. Access to
autosomal DNA from our pre-historic hominid forefathers has served as
the final piece of the puzzle in many a questions about our own
ethno-cultural genesis. This is partly due to [how much cheaper it has
become](https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/fact-sheets/Sequencing-Human-Genome-cost)
to sequence a genome due to advances in technology from the initial days
of the HGP (from $100 million / per genome in 2001 to just under $1000
in 2016\~) and partly due to [improvements in gathering
aDNA](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/17/magazine/ancient-dna-paleogenomics.html)
(ancient DNA) from samples. The literature on this has piled up since
2015- and is now vast. We must make use of it and understand the origins
of the Indian people. This post will just serve to tabulate the recent
discoveries and collate them. The title will be self-justified once the
post is read in full.

It’s beyond the scope of this post to explain all of human prehistory
here but we can note one pattern. The agricultural revolution (neolithic
revolution) 11,000 ybp\~ (years before 1950CE\~) launched a wave of
intrusion of migrants {who had developed farming, domesticated animals &
started producing sedentary societies} into previously purely nomadic
aboriginal hunter-gatherer (HG) societies who were descendants of the
paleolithic homo sapiens of the region. This led to farmers eventually
replacing the HGs or mixing with them to spread agriculture, techology
language, culture and religion as part of the “[Neolithic
Package](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/286776240_The_concept_of_'Neolithic_package'_Considering_its_meaning_and_applicability)”
– we see this happen in Europe with farmers from Asia Minor replacing
the aboriginal HGs starting \~7000BCE & we see this all over Asia
(Yellow River farmers expanding into Tibet or Yangtze River farmers
expanding into SE-Asia, carrying the Austroasiatic languages to the
region or even Japan with a three way admixture of Yayoi & Kofun period
farmers with Jomon-like HGs).

India was no exception here. The aboriginal[1](#footnote-1) HGs of the
country are now termed as the “AASI” (Ancient Ancestral South Indian)
and are presumedly the descendants of paleolithic homo sapiens of the
region. Their lineage is deeply diverged from other Eurasian lineages
and is very closely related to the HG populations of SE-Asia (Hoabinhian
HG - Vietnam), the aboriginals of Australia and the group that gave rise
to the indigenous populations of the Andaman Islands (Onge, Jarawa).
It’s important to note AASI is a “ghost population” in the sense its
ancestry & cladal position is inferred and reconstructed but we don’t
actually have any AASI whole genome sequences currently. As a result of
this, the [Onge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onge_people) are often
used as proxy for Indian HGs or sometimes even the
[Paniya](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paniya) might fit better (A south
indian tribal group with virtually no west eurasian ancestry) [as this
paper suggests](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6657728/).
Keep in mind, Indian HGs are not the same group that spawned the Onge or
even SEA HGs but are closely related to them. So at best, we have
imperfect proxies or reconstructions of supposed AASI ancestry. This
will do for now. The harsh climate of India that degrades aDNA & poor
archaeology makes it much harder. Combine this with crematory practices
and you can begin seeing why this is a big problem for us. AASI ancestry
is found in most Indian groups across a North-South cline and a
caste-based cline that transcends and even breaks regional boundaries.
So we have horizontal differentiation as well as vertical. Later on, we
will see the same pattern when it comes to Steppe Pastoralist ancestry
in India.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fb9b3f326-55d7-43ab-9bd5-a6aba23b9dd6_1024x683.jpeg "Paniyas | Paniyan tribes are basically of labourer group and… | Flickr")

*Fig 2. A Paniya laborer from Kerala. The Paniya are considered to be
the best proxy of the Indian Hunter Gatherers. They speak a South
Dravidian language. Indians belonging to the Dalit/Tribal caste groups
get anywhere from 45-65% of their ancestry from Paniya-like people.*

We now come to the second population of the pie. The farmers. Who were
the carriers of the “Neolithic Package” to India? The earliest neolithic
sites in the Indian subcontinent are in Mehrgarh (7000 BCE). It has for
long been thought that Neolithic migrants from Iran brought winter
rainfall crop farming (wheat, barley) to India and adapted it to the
monsoon season locally before it spread across the country. This notion
however has been refuted [in recent genetic
research](https://www.cell.com/cell/pdf/S0092-8674(19)30967-5.pdf) that
sequenced a female genome from Rakhigarhi (I6113) in India belonging to
the mature Indus Valley Civilization (IVC) and found that it completely
lacked any Iranian Zagros farmer ancestry. This means the Iran-HG like
component of the IVC lineage diverged more than 10,000 ybp from
Iranian-HGs and comes from a presently unsampled population who might
have always been indigenous to the region. ***It also means farming was
likely developed independently in India.***

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fbee2cb4c-b8f4-41a9-abba-f51ab9060f73_1304x1106.png)

*Fig 3. Chronological representation of Iran-like ancestry and its
relation to the Indus-Valley Cline.*

These early farmers in the NW of the subcontinent would mix with the
AHGs (AASI) and form the cline along which the Harappan population was
set. (70-90% Iran like HG + 10-30% AHG). This would have been our
ancestry in the mature IVC period (2600-2000 BCE).

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F5693e2bb-2eac-4834-abf2-23ebadb7023d_1199x693.jpeg "Image")

*Fig 4. A reconstruction of a Harappan woman from the mature Indus
Valley Civilization site at Rakhigarhi, Haryana.* *(4500 YBP). Most
Indians receive nearly 45-55% of their ancestry from the Indus Valley
people.*

We now come to the third (but not the final) piece of the pie. The
Steppe Pastoralist Ancestry. This ancestry is also pretty ubiquitious in
all Indians but varies from as low as 3% to as high as 45% of total
admixture in different groups. This ancestry likely entered the
subcontinent around 2000-1800 BCE in the Middle-Late Bronze Age (MLBA)
from the inner mountain corridor from Central Asia leading to multiple
admixture events that culminated in the Steppe migrants mixing with the
IVC locals to form the modern Indian cline (1200-1300 BCE). Steppe is a
vague description, so we must be specific. The Central_Steppe_MLBA
ancestry has a few components. The chief component is Yamnaya_EMBA
(Early bronze age) ancestry at around 65-70%. The second major component
is European_EarlyFarmer (25-30%) which is further broken down into
Eastern HG (Baltic) and Anatolian farmer ancestry . The final component
is West Siberian Hunter Gatherer ancestry (WSHG) at around 5-8%. Let us
pause and be very clear here. The Steppe component actually introduces
***4 different basal lineages into the Indian subcontinent***. This can
be rationalized as the fact that a group of [Yamnaya steppe
herders](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yamnaya_culture) entered Europe,
mixed with the European aboriginals (European_EarlyFarmer) and [then
moved to Central Asia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sintashta_culture).
While on their way to India, they mixed more with Siberian HGs probably
in the Pamir corridor to take on an additional lineage.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fb96caa0b-19cc-49c6-bdb3-006fa5ce20cc_2904x966.png)

*Fig. 5. A reconstruction of a Yamnaya man from Ishkinovka in the
Southern Urals. (5300-4700 BP). Most upper-caste Indians get anywhere
from 10-30% of their ancestry from the Yamnaya people.*

***All credit must go to [this group](https://ancestralwhispers.org/)
for the reconstructions posted here. On twitter, they can be followed
[here](https://twitter.com/Sulkalmakh).***[2](#footnote-2)

When they came to India, they mixed with the Harappans to give us a
total of 6 different lineages that formed the post-Harappan population.

Is this all? Not so. We must look at two additional lineages that are
present in many Indians today. The first one is chiefly found in some
Northern (and NE) Indians. This is ***Tibetan Neolithic ancestry
(Chokhopani late neolithic, 2700 YBP)*** that likely derives from
archaic admixture with the
[Kirāṭa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirata)-like Sino-Tibetan
tribesmen of Ladakh & Nepal. The second one is Austroasiatic ancestry
that is only found in tribal groups such as the Munda and Ho in eastern
India. This is because these groups are descendants of Austroasiatic
migrants to India from around 3000-3500 YBP.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F86ec2f1c-4c19-4652-affd-a3df2906c9e2_2447x1815.jpeg "Tibetan people - Wikipedia")

*Fig 6. A picture of Tibetan people. They speak Sino-Tibetan languages
and most Northern/Eastern Indians get anywhere from 3-10% of their
ancestry from Neolithic Tibet.*

We now have a good picture of the ancestral lineages that make up the
Indian subcontinent. What are the proportions of these lineages in
modern Indians like? Let’s look at the data provided by Dr. Vagheesh
Narasimhan [in his most recent breakthrough
paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6822619/) which you
can view here.

**`1) North West India + Pakistan`**

This data is directly from Dr. Narasimhan’s paper. It gives us a k = 3
admixture chart. As we can see, the Northernmost populations have around
***55-65% Indus_Valley ancestry, 22-30% Western_Steppe_Herder ancestry,
10-20% AASI ancestry.*** The generic Punjabi sample has around ***33%
AASI ancestry*** and has been collected from non-Jatt, non-Khatri
migrants in the UK. This might be reflective of the backward caste
admixture of Punjab. (It actually matches perfectly the Punjabi_Lahore
samples). Amongst the NW Indian groups, the ***Khatri have the highest
Steppe admixture at around 27% and the lowest AASI admixture at
13.8%***. ***  
***

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F40f97c6c-f430-4160-8b0f-f51044c05dbf_1360x702.png)

This model however does not look at the Tibetan ancestry which I thought
important to check in the Northern populations. Dr. Narasimhan’s model
also misses out on some groups such as the Ror of Harayana, the
Kohistani, Kamboj and the Tibetans of Leh-Ladakh. Hence, we will look at
a different G25 model (my own) this time and see the difference.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F7b3ded0c-8ccf-48d2-9854-f1e0ff29622a_1402x1088.png)

With this we see the Northernmost populations have around ***55-60% IVC
ancestry, 22-28% Sintashta ancestry, 10-15% AASI ancestry and 3-6%
Tibetan ancestry on average***. Notable exceptions are the Balti people
of Gilgit-Balitstan and Ladakh who have 26% Tibetan ancestry, the Rors
of Haryana who have around 36.5% Sintashta ancestry + 2.3% WSHG ancestry
for a total of around 40% Steppe ancestry and the average ***Punjabi
from Lahore who have nearly 40% AASI (Andamanese-like) ancestry***. Note
also how Kashmiri Pandits and Kohistanis have pretty high Tibetan
ancestry at 6%+ which makes sense considering their proximate location
to Sino-Tibetan tribals.

The Baltis are a Tibetan group, this explains their elevated Tibetan
ancestry. The Ror likely are descendants from a Kushan-like group mixing
with local Indo-Aryans & the Punjabi from Lahore likely represent the
average admixture of the lower castes (non Jat, non Ashraf) of the
region.

I am also of the opinion both the Pashtuns and the Kalash can be better
modelled after taking excess Anatolian Farmer, Tibetan & some CHG
ancestry into account. Testing this hypothesis, we got a satisfactory
model which showed both Pashtun groups have a ***solid 7% excess
Anatolian Farmer ancestry & excess 1-3% Iran_Neolithic ancestry***. Bear
in mind that the Central_Steppe_MLBA includes the West_SiberianHG
component but is shown here as separate since we used Sintashta as our
source. Even then, Steppe ancestry here is slightly underestimated, so
is Paniya (AASI).

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fdad6bdb6-792a-4d48-9252-b47cf879e713_1500x678.png)

  
**`2) Northern India + Central India + West India`**

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F45d65e9e-6f76-44f6-9b7b-ad2e7fbf90ae_1360x702.png)

While there are too many populations from this region to get into it,
hopefully this provides a good overview of the bulk of Indo-Aryan
speaking ethnic groups of India. One can notice how *savarṇa* castes
(first 4 castes) generally have much lower AASI ancestry than the
scheduled castes (dalits) of the region. The ***Lohana (an upper caste
community) have the lowest AASI in the region at 8.9%*** and a solid 25%
Steppe_Herder ancestry. Gujarati Brahmins are similar to the Lohana in
this regard. ***The Bhumihar Brahmins of Bihar have the highest steppe
ancestry in the region at 28.3%.***

**`3) Southern India + Deccan`**

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F9e652604-e5f0-4f98-a8ac-3dcef8c7c30d_1360x702.png)

In Southern India, we start noticing that Steppe ancestry collapses
dramatically across every caste group and at the same time AASI rises up
fast, reaching as high as 65% in the Palliyar of Tamil Nadu. The
Brahmins of South India are left with similar but slightly lower levels
of Steppe ancestry than North Indian Brahmins but they remain the only
group in the region with 15-20% of Steppe ancestry. ***One notable
exception are the [Coorghi or the
Kodavas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kodava_people), who have
relatively low AASI ancestry at 25.8% coupled with shockingly high IVC
ancestry at 64.4%.*** The Kodavas have been speculated to be “Scythians”
in the colonial era due to their robust Caucasoid phenotype and martial
tradition in the Kannada country. However, the likely answer is the
Kodava must be direct descendants of the late Indus_Valley migrants from
Gujarat who immigrated into the Deccan & Karnataka.

I took the liberty to model the Iyer Brahmins of Tamil Nadu as Prof
Narasimhan’s paper did not deal with them. These are the results I got.

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fd1328b78-513f-4567-b97e-506865657905_1114x364.png)

The highest of the Iyer samples seemed to have around 15% Sintashta
ancestry while the lowest had 7% Sintashta ancestry. Overall, a fairly
high percentage of AASI-like ancestry at around 40-43%.

**`4) Eastern India + Nepal`**

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F4ab95344-a48a-469c-b43c-b73856cf554c_1426x822.png)

Contrary to popular stereotypes –– ***Nepalese Brahmins generally have
fairly high Steppe_Herder ancestry (22-26%) and pretty low Tibetan
ancestry (6-8%)***. Bengali Brahmins have slightly lower Steppe+Herder
ancestry but much higher AASI ancestry with a slight 2% Tibetan
component (as expected). Bangladeshi Bengalis have very high AASI
ancestry at nearly 60% and a higher 6% Tibetan component. The Brahmins
and non-Brahmin Bengalis are very far apart. Unfortunately, no Kayastha
or Vaidya samples are available to us yet so we cannot test for
Bhadralok distance.

***Manipuri Brahmins are big outliers with 43% Tibetan and 11% South
Chinese Farmer ancestry.*** Juang, Asur, Bhumji are Austroasiatic
speaking tribal groups. Hence the South Chinese Neolithic & heavy Paniya
ancestry (must’ve made first contact with unmixed AASI in eastern
india). The Gond are Dravidian speakers but it’s been long suspected
they switched to the language family afterwards and have Austroasiatic
origins, which shows in the DNA.

I feel we have now achieved our purpose and understood the origins of
Indian ancestral lineages as well as their relative proportions in
different ethnocultural groups across the country. The title of the post
should make a lot of sense now. I***ndus_Valley ancestry is by far the
most prevalent ancestry in the entire Indian subcontinent and generally
makes up anywhere from 1/3 to 2/3 of our genome.*** It is normal for
some Indian groups to have as much as 65% Indus ancestry and even at the
lowest we have at least 35% Indus ancestry everywhere except the
extremes of Sino-Tibetan India or in the Austroasiatic tribal lineages.
Keeping this in mind, the name of our Republic is pretty apt.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A final note must be made. While I have indeed studied Human Genetics in
college, I am no expert at it and certainly not a professional. I enjoy
the field as a dilettante and have been interested in it since I was
pretty young! If you are a professional and find some mistakes, feel
free to comment. If you are not a professional and find some mistakes,
feel free to comment as well :)

[1](#footnote-anchor-1)

Note that aboriginal does not refer to Australian Aboriginals or any
other specific group here. It only refers to the local hunter-gatherers
of the region. There can be European aboriginals, Indian aboriginals or
Chinese aboriginals.

[2](#footnote-anchor-2)

If you run this account or group and are not okay with me reproducing
your reconstructions here, please DM me or leave a comment.

