+++
title = "Han Imperialism and"
full_title = "Han Imperialism and Hindu response"
date = "2013-11-10"
upstream_url = "https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/11/10/han-imperialism-and-hindu-response/"

+++
Source: [here](https://vajrin.wordpress.com/2013/11/10/han-imperialism-and-hindu-response/).

Han Imperialism and Hindu response

Hindus seem to have lost their ability to do a strategic analysis of the
global scenario and position themselves accordingly. Or rather, the
Hindu masses are selecting such ‘leaders’ who certainly do not have any
ability to do some critical thinking. It has become a vicious cycle –
the masses select dumb, self serving ‘leaders’ who in turn ensure to
keep the masses in their pockets by using various ‘schemes’ which are
not about strengthening the nation but retaining the vote banks.

Such a democracy is keeping us weak and a large pumpkin ready to be
divided by our neighbors. Independence in 1947 was the best opportunity
for us to regain our pre-eminent position in the world. When the Mauryan
empire was established, it was the largest empire of its times – both in
terms of population and economy. It was spread over a landmass much
larger than current day India. The aim of any defeated community must be
to regain their past glory or better yet, even surpass it. Rather, our
leaders from the time of Nehru have been involved in keeping us
downtrodden, with no visions/dreams of grandeur.

The current geo-political scenario seems to be a treacherous sea which
India is trying to sail across without a proper ship, compass or
sailors. We wonder if the only reason the country is still holding
together is due to some divine solace (despite our conviction that Gods
should not be expected to intervene on our behalf).

The Hindu land is surrounded by adversaries. Islamic threat in the west
and east – exacerbated by the presence of a sympathetic minority within
the country, especially near the borders. Hans are in the north –
supported by the Communists and Maoists within India. The Theravadins in
Lanka have anti-Hindu strain – as established by their anti-vaidika
activities during the invasions of Tamil land. There is a
Han-Islam-Theravadin circle around the Hindu land. Our leaders have lost
hold over Lanka which has now moved closer to the Hans. Our defense
industries have failed to attain self-sufficiency in conventional
weapons. Be it a battle tank or a fighter aircraft, we are still
dependant on foreign supply – which is both costly as well as dangerous.
To rely on foreign supplies during wartime is a nightmare. Any war will
be fought in localized manner – use of excessive fire power with
conventional weapons at the border and in strategic military locations
to destroy the enemy forces. The presence of nuclear weapons and
international pressure will provide deterrence against a complete
conquer. But the presence of men who are sympathetic to the enemies
could be leveraged to divide the nation using some local revolts by
these communities – in localities where they are in majority. West
Bengal and north-east will be easily lost as we have a huge population
of Muslims and Communists in those regions. When Bangla Muslims revolt,
our connection with Sikkim, Darjeeling and North-East will be severed.
West Bengal and North East can be divided among themselves by China and
Bangladesh.

In the north, Ladakh and other Himalayan regions will be conquered by
China. When the Muslims in Kashmir and Western UP revolt, it will make
Pakistan’s thrust in the West easier. As catering to the minorities has
become the norm in UP, the administration will not be in a position to
quell any such traitorous revolt. Such a triangular war will be the
death knell for Indian Union.

While the situation indeed appears dire, there are ways to overcome this
tumultuous period. While China has allied with our enemies and is
creating a ring of fire around us, the Hans have enemies on her borders.
The Han view is expressed by the article which makes plans for six wars
in the next few decades – in order to consolidate all the territories
claimed by the Hans as theirs. Thus, Hans have enemy states on their
borders. The Indian answer must be to create a counter ring of fire
around China.

South Korea seems to be moving close towards her historical suzerain,
China. We cannot expect any help from the Koreans. Japanese are waking
up to the Chinese threat and are appearing to be re-arming themselves.
Japan, Vietnam and Philippines are our natural allies against China.
Taiwan, though anti-Communist, cannot be trusted as the Hans in Taiwan
also have imperialistic notions of a greater China. China has trouble in
its western borders as well. While the Chinese are suffering from Uighur
unrest in Xinjiang, they have territorial claim in Central Asia, eastern
Siberia, Mongolia, a few Japanese islands apart from India. Japan and
Russia do not enjoy good relations. But India is in a unique position to
be the go-between state for these two powers. India has no enemies in
the Far East except China. We could leverage this position to forge an
alliance with a majority of states in the ASEAN and Far East. The Mekong
basin countries are afraid of Chinese attempts to divert waters from
Mekong leading to drought and famine in Indo-China. They have a common
cause against Chinese impunity which is a result of renewed Han
imperialism. Mongolia fears Han expansion – a valid fear given that
inner Mongolia has been swamped by Hans and has been made into a
province of Han China.

India could play the role of a mediator/middle man. Cambodia and
Thailand have border disputes. But both the countries have good
relations with India. The fear of a rising China which has imperialist
notions based on its historical view of ‘Middle Kingdom’ is spreading
among the neighbors of China. An anti-China alliance is the need of the
day. We cannot rely on the USA much. US is on a retreat mood now. They
seem to be planning to withdraw from Far East. Americans cannot be
expected to contain China singlehandedly anymore. With nearly 2.5
million strong military and another 2.5 million in reserves, China can
field a force so large that Americans might back out due to sheer fear
about casualties. Any anti-China alliance must be formed by the Asian
neighbors of China.

But such an alliance is not enough. DRDO must be strengthened in India.
The string of failures must be corrected. LCA, Arjun Tank, Trishul etc
point to a systemic failure. The corrupt leadership seems to see gains
in importing military assets. Thus, strengthening of our R&D efforts at
DRDO has not been given due importance. Any country needs strong
domestic military industry complex in order to fight wars. We cannot
survive wars based on ammunition imported from Israel or Russia.

The Orthodox Russia has a negative relationship with West. Russia and
China come together while facing the West. But Russians understand the
Chinese threat in Eastern Siberia. Thus, they have begun to conduct war
games in Siberia. The West has traditionally sided with even Muslims
against the Orthodox (e.g. Crimean war). Even in Kosovo, we saw the NATO
siding with Muslims against the Orthodox Serbs. In the case of China,
the West fears China but they may still not be motivated to join any
alliance against China – their traditional hatred for Russia holding
them back.

We must start engaging the ASEAN Buddhist nations more vigorously and
conduct joint military exercises with them. Malaysia and Indonesia may
also join hands with us – but their distance from China (in the case of
Indonesia) and a large Chinese minority (in the case of Malaysia) may
keep them aloof. We must also try to get a greater foothold in Africa
and Central Asia. While we may not be able to counter China’s economy
singlehandedly, we can form joint ventures with other countries to take
over the African assets that Chinese are interested in. To hold a strong
grip over Chinese energy supply must be a primary aim of Hans’
adversaries.

The primary circle against China shall be the border states of China
apart from those of the Mekong basin. The secondary line shall involve
Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia. The third line shall include the NATO
and its allies.

An excessive crackdown on Uighurs can also be used to bring Islamic
nations against Chinese. While Islam is our other major enemy (for the
West and Russia as well), we can still work together to defang the
Chinese giant.

Huntington rightly noted that India/Hindu civilization plays the role of
a mere swing state in the current circumstance. Destruction / even a
strong containment of Han imperialism will open the doors for a more
prominent India much more easily as well. Containment of Hans must be a
primary motive of the Hindus apart from defending against Islamic
aggression. But will the Hindus ever wake up to this reality?

