+++
title = "Hyman’s analysis of"
full_title = "Hyman’s analysis of atheism and some interesting Indian parallels"
date = "2018-11-27"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/11/27/hymans-analysis-of-atheism-and-some-interesting-indian-parallels/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2018/11/27/hymans-analysis-of-atheism-and-some-interesting-indian-parallels/).

Hyman’s analysis of atheism and some interesting Indian parallels

Gavin Hyman explains in his 2007 contribution to Martin’s *Cambdride
Companion to Atheism* as well as in his 2010 *A Short History of
Atheism* that atheism is always the refusal of *a given* form of theism.
In particular, in European history, atheism is the refusal of theism as
conceived in modern times, with God as one “thing” among others. This
claim might raise the eyebrows of readers of Julian Baggini, who in his
2003 *Atheism. A very short introduction* maintained that atheism is
independent of theism, since it is tantamount to naturalism. The two
claims are, however, less far than it might look like.

Modern atheism as naturalism refutes God because it considers him as a
natural cause and shows (or believes to show) that there is no need to
accept his existence, since the other natural causes are more than
enough to explain the world.

By contrast, Hyman explains that the transcendental God of negative
theology or of analogical theology\* could not be attacked by
atheism-as-naturalism. In short, Richard Swinburne’s God can be attacked
by atheism-as-naturalism, whereas this would have much less to say
against the God of Meister Eckhart (the example is mine).

The other important move of Hyman is that he discusses the origins of
the concept of God which could be attacked by atheism. The shift from
analogical theology to God as a thing among many is not the result of
the external pressure of secularism. Rather, it is due to a development
internal to theology. Hyman especially discusses in this connection the
role of Duns Scotus and his attribution of “being” to God in the same
sense in which it is attributed to the world.

Now, for scholars of Indian philosophy the parallels with the Indian
scenario are hard to avoid. First of all, atheism in India is mostly
targeted at two concepts of god, on the one hand the gods (*devatā*) of
mythology and on the other the Lord (*īśvara*) of rational theology. The
first kind of refusal is historically the most ancient one, but it is
the second one that comes conceptually closer to European atheism. This
second atheism would not be conceivable without the prior elaboration of
rational theology, mostly within the Nyāya school, thus indirectly
confirming Hyman’s hypothesis.  
Later, Indian theology of the second millennium sees the arisal of a
post-atheism theism. Authors like Veṅkaṭanātha (13–14th c.) developed a
form of theism after the attacks of atheism. They did it by means of two
kinds of arguments. On the one hand, they embedded the Lord of rational
theology, but “blew him up” in the direction of pantheism, in a way
which might remind one of Thomas More’s approach as described by Hyman.
On the other, they incorporated the mysticism of the Āḻvārs and moved in
the direction of a personal relation to God, thus moving away from an
understanding of God as a “thing” towards a God as “Thou”.

\*I am using the abbreviated formulation “analogical theology” to refer
to the Aquinas’ insistence that all theological understanding is
necessarily only analogical.

(cross-posted, with minor variations, on my personal blog,
[here](http://elisafreschi.com/2018/11/28/atheism-in-europe-blame-it-on-theism/)).

For my summary on the various concepts of God in India, see
[this](http://elisafreschi.com/2017/03/31/god-and-realism/) post and,
for more details, my contribution in Bertini, Migliorini (eds.),
[*Relations*,](https://www.amazon.com/Relations-Ontology-Philosophy-Daniele-Bertini/dp/8869771261)
2018.
