+++
title = "Bruce Lahn moving on to"
full_title = "Bruce Lahn moving on to nonIQ projects?"
date = "2006-06-16"
upstream_url = "https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/06/16/bruce-lahn-moving-on-to-non-iq-projects/"

+++
Source: [here](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/06/16/bruce-lahn-moving-on-to-non-iq-projects/).

Bruce Lahn moving on to non-IQ projects?

We’ll have to wait and see, but it seems his interest in intelligence is wavering at present, so suggests a recent [WSJ profile](http://online.wsj.com/public/article/SB115040765329081636-T5DQ4jvnwqOdVvsP_XSVG_lvgik_20060628.html?mod=blogs) of his situation post-[ASPM-MCPH1](https://www.gnxp.com/blog/2005/09/this-is-bruce-lahns-brain-on-aspm-and.php) (available below the fold).

> Head Examined: Scientist’s Study Of Brain Genes Sparks a Backlash  
> Dr. Lahn Connects Evolution In Some Groups to IQ Debate on Race and > DNA ‘Speculating Is Dangerous’  
> Antonio Regalado.  
> Wall Street Journal. (Eastern edition).  
> New York, N.Y.  
> Jun 16, 2006. pg. A.1 >
> CHICAGO — Last September, Bruce Lahn, a professor of human genetics at > the University of Chicago, stood before a packed lecture hall and > reported the results of a new DNA analysis: He had found signs of > recent evolution in the brains of some people, but not of others. >
> It was a triumphant moment for the young scientist. He was up for > tenure and his research was being featured in back-to-back articles in > the country’s most prestigious science journal. Yet today, Dr. Lahn > says he is moving away from the research. “It’s getting too > controversial,” he says. >
> Dr. Lahn had touched a raw nerve in science: race and intelligence. >
> What Dr. Lahn told his audience was that genetic changes over the past > several thousand years might be linked to brain size and intelligence. > He flashed maps that showed the changes had taken hold and spread > widely in Europe, Asia and the Americas, but weren’t common in > sub-Saharan Africa. >
> Web sites and magazines promoting white “racialism” quickly seized on > Dr. Lahn’s suggestive scientific snapshot. One magazine that blames > black and Hispanic people for social ills hailed his discovery as “the > moment the antiracists and egalitarians have dreaded.” >
> Dr. Lahn has drawn sharp fire from other leading genetics researchers. > They say the genetic differences he found may not signify any recent > evolution — and even if they do, it is too big a leap to suggest any > link to intelligence. “This is not the place you want to report a weak > association that might or might not stand up,” says Francis Collins, > director of the genome program at the National Institutes of Health. >
> Several scientific groups have set out to disprove or challenge Dr. > Lahn’s discoveries. His own university now says it is abandoning a > patent application it filed to cover a DNA-based intelligence test > that drew on his work. >
> As scientific tools for probing genes become increasingly powerful, > research into human differences has exploded. Most of the time, > scientists are looking for clues about the causes of disease. But some > research is raising tensions as scientists such as Dr. Lahn venture > into studies of genetic differences in behavior or intelligence. >
> Pilar Ossorio, a professor of law and medical ethics at the University > of Wisconsin, criticizes Dr. Lahn for implying a conclusion similar to > “The Bell Curve,” a controversial 1994 bestseller by Richard J. > Herrnstein and Charles Murray. The book argued that the lower average > performance by African-Americans on IQ tests had a genetic component > and wasn’t solely the result of social factors. Referring to Dr. Lahn > and his co-authors, Prof. Ossorio says: “It’s exactly what they were > getting at. There was a lot of hallway talk. People said he’s doing > damage to the whole field of genetics.” >
> The 37-year-old Dr. Lahn says his research papers, published in > Science last September, offered no view on race and intelligence. He > personally believes it is possible that some populations will have > more advantageous intelligence genes than others. And he thinks that > “society will have to grapple with some very difficult facts” as > scientific data accumulate. Yet Dr. Lahn, who left China after > participating in prodemocracy protests, says intellectual “police” in > the U.S. make such questions difficult to pursue. >
> Scientists believe that a small group of anatomically modern humans > struck out from Africa probably less than 100,000 years ago. After > arriving on the Eurasian land mass, they continued to split up and > eventually humans populated nearly every corner of the globe. One use > of genetic research is to probe how each group evolved differently > after becoming isolated from the others. Recently created genetic maps > of people of African, Asian and European ancestry make that research > easier. >
> For instance, researchers have found that most Europeans have a > genetic variant that lets them fully digest milk as adults. The > variant is much less common in Africa and Asia, where lactose  
> intolerance is widespread. Scientists theorize that it spread quickly > among Europeans because drinking milk from domesticated dairy animals > conferred a nutritional advantage. Similar evolutionary reasoning may > explain why many people in malaria-prone parts of Africa carry gene > variants linked to malaria resistance. >
> Other research is starting to explain variations in human skin color > and hair texture. But scientists tense up when it comes to doing the > same sort of research on the brain. Sociologist Troy Duster, who > studies the use of racial categories by geneticists, worries that > scientists will interpret data in ways that fit their prejudices. He > cites the sorry history of phrenology, a study of skull shapes popular > in the 19th century, and other pseudoscientific techniques used to  
> categorize people as inferior. “Science doesn’t transcend the social > milieu,” says Dr. Duster, of New York University. >
> Dr. Lahn traces his interest in human differences back to his youth in > China. Foreigners there used to have a special currency that they > could use at stores closed to ordinary Chinese. “I wondered why people > were different, and why Chinese were at the bottom,” he says. >
> By the time violence struck Tiananmen Square in 1989, Dr. Lahn, the > son of two physicists, was an undergraduate at Harvard University. He > channeled his curiosity into genetics and built his reputation with a > groundbreaking study of the Y chromosome. After taking a post at the > University of Chicago in 2000, Dr. Lahn won a prestigious fellowship > from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. >
> The fellowship pays most of his research bills and has allowed him to > pursue creative projects, often on attention-grabbing subjects. One > study looked at how promiscuity among female chimpanzees, gorillas and > humans affected the evolution of a gene that makes sperm sticky. > “Bruce is in a hurry to be famous,” says Martin Kreitman, a Chicago > colleague who is friendly with him. >
> Henry Harpending, a University of Utah anthropology professor who > recently published a theory for why Ashkenazi Jews tend to have high > IQ’s, says Dr. Lahn once suggested they co-author an article for > Scientific American about the genetics of behavior, in which they > could explain why “Chinese are boring.” >
> “I think that Bruce doesn’t understand political correctness,” Dr. > Harpending says. Dr. Lahn says he only vaguely recalls the > conversation but confirms that he wonders whether during China’s > imperial times there was “some selection” against rebellious > individuals. >
> In recent years, Dr. Lahn has become interested in why the human brain > is so large and complex. Although humans and chimpanzees share about > 96% of their DNA, human brains are about four times larger. Even > today, researchers can find a correlation, on average, between  
> people’s brain size and their IQ. >
> Dr. Lahn’s group zeroed in on the role of two genes, called ASPM and > microcephalin, that are known to have a role in brain size. Humans > with defective copies of either gene are born with brains only about > one-third the normal size. >
> Studying DNA from several species, the Chicago team found that, over > millions of years, the genes had undergone more rapid ch  
> ange in monkeys, apes and humans than in other animals. Their next > step was to determine if evolution had continued in modern humans. Dr. > Lahn’s graduate students began decoding DNA from 1,184 people > belonging to 59 groups from around the world, including Bedouins, Pima > Indians and French-speaking Basques. >
> The data showed that evolution had continued in recent millennia. A > statistical analysis of DNA patterns suggested that new mutations in > each of the two brain-related genes had spread quickly through some > human populations. Evidently, these mutations were advantageous > among  
> those populations — just as the genetic variant promoting milk > digestion was advantageous to early Europeans. Dr. Lahn and his team > further observed that the new mutations are found most frequently > outside of Africa. >
> What the data didn’t say was how the mutations were advantageous. > Perhaps the genes play a role outside of the brain or affect a brain > function that has nothing to do with intelligence. >
> While acknowledging that the evidence doesn’t permit a firm > conclusion, Dr. Lahn favors the idea that the advantage conferred by > the mutations was a bigger and smarter brain. He found ways to suggest > that in his papers. One mutation, which according to his estimates > arose some 40,000 years ago, coincided with the first art found in > caves, the paper observed. The other mutation, present mostly in > people from the Middle East and Europe, and estimated to be 5,800 > years old, coincided with the “development of cities and written > language.” >
> That suggested brain evolution might have occurred in tandem with > important cultural changes. Yet because neither variant is common in > sub-Saharan Africa, there was another potential implication: Some > groups had been left out. >
> The dean of the University of Chicago’s medical school, James L. > Madara, says he approached Dr. Lahn before the papers were published. > They discussed whether the report could be taken out of context. “Let > the chips lie where they may,” Dr. Madara says he told Dr. Lahn. As > long as  
> the ideas and data are clear, “don’t worry about the implications,” > the dean said. >
> John Easton, head of media relations at the medical school, says his > office was worried the work could be misinterpreted and abused by > racist groups. Mr. Easton borrowed a copy of “The Mismeasure of Man,” > the famous attack on IQ tests and brain-volume measurements by the > late paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould. Mr. Easton helped Dr. Lahn with > talking points about his research. “We said, ‘Don’t be shy about > telling people what it doesn’t mean,’ ” Mr. Easton recalls. >
> Mr. Easton says Dr. Lahn “makes us nervous” but “with Bruce we know > it’s not driven by personal bias.” That is because Asians “don’t score > at the top” in the frequency of the brain-gene mutations, Mr. Easton > says. >
> Dr. Lahn’s paper and talk at his university — in which he also claimed > the gene variants were probably linked to higher IQ — provoked a > strong reaction both on and off campus. Dr. Collins, head of the > federal genome program, obtained advance copies of the papers and > circulated them to top population geneticists. He wasn’t persuaded by > the statistical evidence for evolution and criticized Dr. Lahn’s work > in media interviews. >
> The papers won wide attention among researchers, and several responded > by setting out to test Dr. Lahn’s findings. Scientists at the Broad > Institute, a top genetics center in Cambridge, Mass., have been > reanalyzing some of the data and say they may challenge Dr. Lahn’s > finding that evolution acted on ASPM, one of the genes. Broad’s > influential chief, Eric Lander, says scientists probing recent > evolution run the risk of “seeing a difference, and saying there is a > story to fit  
> it.” >
> A team at the University of California, Los Angeles, recently tested > whether the gene variants actually affect brain size. They studied DNA > from 120 people whose brain volumes they had already measured using > magnetic-resonance imaging. They didn’t find any difference. “It  
> certainly makes you want to look at other explanations” of what the > variations mean, says Roger P. Woods, a UCLA brain-mapping expert who > reported the results in May. >
> Some of Dr. Lahn’s co-authors are also uncomfortable with the work. > Sarah Tishkoff, a geneticist at the University of Maryland who > provided DNA from remote African groups, says she is bothered how one > paper drew a link between the genetic changes and the rise of > civilization. She  
> thinks it is too early to reach any conclusions about why the changes > spread and says it is “very simplistic” to imagine that a single gene > could have a major effect on complex cultural traits. >
> Several groups of scientists have sent letters to Science criticizing > the papers. Dr. Lahn prepared responses, sending one earlier this > month, but Dr. Tishkoff wasn’t willing to add her name to them. >
> “You have to follow the data wherever it leads, but speculating in > this field is dangerous,” says Spencer Wells, head of the National > Geographic Society’s Genographic Project, a five-year, \$40 million > effort to collect DNA samples from 100,000 indigenous people. Dr. > Wells says the project team might try to find evolutionary reasons for > physical differences such as why Danes are taller than pygmies. But > Dr. Wells says National Geographic won’t study the brain. “I think > there is very little evidence of IQ differences between races,” he > says. >
> The accuracy of Dr. Lahn’s work and his views on race came up in his > tenure review last fall, says a person familiar with it. After debate, > his department voted unanimously in his favor, according to another > faculty member. A more senior committee agreed and awarded Dr. Lahn > the post of full professor, although it wasn’t unanimous, this person > says. >
> Dr. Lahn stands by his work but says that because of the controversy > he is moving into other projects. Earlier this year, Mr. Easton of the > university’s media department forwarded Dr. Lahn a paper by two > economists looking at the IQ of infants of different races. Dr. Lahn > wasn’t interested. “I’m surprised anyone studies this,” he replied in > an email. >
> Dr. Lahn says he isn’t as eager as he once was to continue studying > brain differences. P. Thomas Schoenemann, a professor of anthropology > at the University of Michigan-Dearborn, says that at Dr. Lahn’s > request he collected DNA from 25 people whose brain sizes he had > studied previously. But the two scientists haven’t been in touch > recently. >
> The university’s patent office is also having second thoughts. Its > director, Alan Thomas, says his office is dropping a patent > application filed last year that would cover using Dr. Lahn’s work as > a DNA-based intelligence test. “We really don’t want to end up on the > front page . . . for doing eugenics,” Mr. Thomas says. >
> More recently, Dr. Lahn says he was moved when a student asked him > whether some knowledge might not be worth having. It is a notion to > which he has been warming. Dr. Lahn says he once tried testing himself > for which version of the brain genes he has. The experiment’s outcome > was blurry “but it wasn’t looking good,” he says. He hasn’t tried > testing himself again.

### Related Posts:

- [Bruce Lahn - single
  guy](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/06/15/bruce-lahn-single-guy/) - [Bruce Lahn, gene thug strikes
  again](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/12/22/bruce-lahn-gene-thug-strikes-again/) - [Bruce Lahn profile in
  Science](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/12/21/bruce-lahn-profile-in-science/) - [Thug
  geneticist?](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/08/02/thug-geneticist/) - [ASPM and
  flagella](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/12/26/aspm-and-flagella/) - [Brain size &
  genes](https://www.gnxp.com/WordPress/2006/08/02/brain-size-genes/)

### *Related*

[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gnxp.com%2FWordPress%2F2006%2F06%2F16%2Fbruce-lahn-moving-on-to-non-iq-projects%2F&linkname=Bruce%20Lahn%20moving%20on%20to%20non-IQ%20projects%3F "Facebook")[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gnxp.com%2FWordPress%2F2006%2F06%2F16%2Fbruce-lahn-moving-on-to-non-iq-projects%2F&linkname=Bruce%20Lahn%20moving%20on%20to%20non-IQ%20projects%3F "Twitter")[](https://www.addtoany.com/add_to/email?linkurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gnxp.com%2FWordPress%2F2006%2F06%2F16%2Fbruce-lahn-moving-on-to-non-iq-projects%2F&linkname=Bruce%20Lahn%20moving%20on%20to%20non-IQ%20projects%3F "Email")[](https://www.addtoany.com/share)
