+++
title = "Sex and the Brain"
full_title = "Sex and the Brain"
date = "2015-12-01"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/12/01/sex-and-the-brain/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/12/01/sex-and-the-brain/).

Sex and the Brain

I just noticed an new article in PNAS – research by Daphna Joel a
behavioral neuroscientist at Tel Aviv University. Using MRI, she
concludes that the brains of men and women aren’t really different. She
suggests that the notion that men and women behave differently may be a
myth.

She is, of course, utterly full of shit. It’s fountaining out of every
pore: her hair will never go gray. We know of many sex differences in
the brain – not just volume, not just the fraction of gray matter vs
white matter, not just big differences in the incidences of
neuropsychiatric disorders like autism and anorexia nervosa. In a few
cases (like CAH, or androgen sensitivity, or maybe Turner’s syndrome) we
know something about the developmental mechanisms involved. We see
analogous differences in animal models: and no, it’s not culture.

If you want to determine a brain’s sex from MRI data (without cheating
by looking at the Y chromosome) you build a statistical discriminator –
you don’t create a continuum of “femaleness” to “maleness,” for the
entire brain and score every individual region-by-region to find out
where they fall on that male-to-female continuum.

Moreover, similarity in gross anatomy does not ensure similar behavioral
tendencies. If I compared the brain of a pit bull with that of a
similar-sized border collie, I doubt if I could see the behavioral
differences in the size of the amygdala or whatever. Those behavioral
differences exist, they’re innate, they have a physical/genetic basis –
but at the moment I couldn’t tell you what brain differences to look
for. Could be differences in the distribution of neurotransmitter
receptors, or differences in axon length, or dendrite connectivity –
lots of things, including many that wouldn’t show up on MRI. Many
couldn’t be seen by Ramón y Cajal.

As for her expertise on behavioral differences between men and women –
she’s a maroon. Reminds me of John Money, and his crap about how you
have to learn to be a boy or a girl. Which he knew was false (David
Reimer). She probably thinks Mattel has brainwashed male rhesus monkeys
into liking toy trucks.

