+++
title = "Eskimo Evolution"
full_title = "Eskimo Evolution"
date = "2015-12-11"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/12/11/eskimo-evolution/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/12/11/eskimo-evolution/).

Eskimo Evolution

There’s
[another](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/10/26/ketosis-as-a-way-of-lfie/)
[report](http://biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2015/12/08/033928.full.pdf)
out on selection in the Greenland Inuit. They found clear signs of
positive selection in FADS, the fatty acid desaturase gene cluster. More
interesting was the discovery of strong selection on a region containing
WARS2 and TBX15, located on chromosome 1. WARS2 encodes the
mitochondrial tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, and TBX15 is a transcription
factor from the T-box family that does all kinds of things – some of
which (like skeletal development) can be inferred from the symptoms of
people with Cousin syndrome, caused by beat-up versions of TBX15.  
Probably the selected haplotype results in more brown fat, along with
changes in waist-hip ratio and fat distribution. This haplotype is oddly
differently from the standard human one, mostly because we picked it up
from a population similar to Denisovans. It’s moderately common in
Eurasia, very rare in Africa (prolly back-migration) and fixed in the
inuit. It’s had hundreds of thousands of years to diverge from the
standard AMH haplotype, possibly longer.

These adaptive changes picked up from archaic humans can be different
(more complicated) from mutations like sickle-cell, because they can
(sometimes)consist of several different linked adaptive substitutions
that accumulated over a long, long time. Sickle-cell is recent, and just
one nucleotide has changed. More than that, in at least some cases, such
as EPAS1 (a Denisovan-origin altitude adaptation allele in Tibetans) the
adaptation has progressed: it’s something a bit more sophisticated,not
the first solution that came down the pike. The Tibetan adaptation is
similar to that seen in mammals that have lived at high altitude for
millions of years – while the altiplano adaptation is more like an
exaggerated version of individual acclimatization.

Archaic humans had lived in and around the Tibetan plateau for a long
time, perhaps as much as two million years. They were the go-to guys for
classy altitude adaptations. In much the same way, archaic humans had
lived in Eurasia during the Ice Age, freezing their nuts off, for up to
two million years. They probably weren’t as good at making warm clothing
as anatomically modern humans (Sharp Dressed Man), since they did not
make needles. They should have had relatively sophisticated metabolic
changes that adapted them to living in an icebox, adaptations worth
stealing. There may be other cases like WARS2/TBX15 in the Inuit – and
there may be other evolutionarily significant environmental factors
(like changes in length of day) that existed in Eurasia and were largely
absent from Africa.

