+++
title = "Internal Contradictions"
full_title = "Internal Contradictions"
date = "2015-12-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/12/12/internal-contradictions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/12/12/internal-contradictions/).

Internal Contradictions

I noticed a confused (naturally) but halfway interesting piece in SLATE,
about some whacko that has concluded that men who have had their dick
chopped off are not really women. Well duh. Of course, he was educated
into this conclusion by talking to TERFS (trans exclusionary radical
feminists). Progressives mostly think that “that gender is a matter of
identity, not biology, and that refusing to recognize a person’s gender
identity is an outrageous offense.” While Terfs believe that “women are
are a subordinate social class, oppressed due to their biology, and that
there’s nothing innate about femininity. They think you can’t have a
woman’s brain in a man’s body because there’s no such thing as a
“woman’s brain. As the British feminist writer Julie Bindel—a bete noire
of many trans activists—put it, “Feminists want to rid the world of
gender rules and regulations, so how is it possible to support a theory
which has at its centre the notion that there is something essential and
biological about the way boys and girls behave?”

Well, obviously it’s difficult for some ex-Navy Seal to have ‘always
felt like a girl inside’ if there is no difference between male and
female brains. So, will smoke now start coming out of progressive ears,
as they endlessly say “does not compute”?

I doubt it. They’re perfectly capable of believing in incompatible
theories – there’s no logical contradiction if you never logic in the
first place. But if by some chance it does bother someone, here is the
resolution:

Progressives and Terfs are both wrong: sex differences in behavior have
biological roots – men and female brains are different. I mean, if male
rhesus monkeys like toy trucks and females rhesus monkeys don’t, as they
do, it’s hard to attribute to social pressure. Boys are much more likely
to like rough-and-tumble play, blah blah blah. The stereotypes are true.
Trans men aren’t little girls inside, anymore than someone with a
Napoleonic complex is ‘really’ Corsican. They’re just crazy. Now that
craziness probably has some biological origin, but we don’t understand
it. Even if it does, it is likely that the form of that craziness is
shaped by social influences, just as Malays run amok with a bloody kris
rather than going postal with a Glock.

It is possible to support a theory with implications you don’t like **if
it happens to be true**. Although maybe that’s a guy thing.

If you want to make your stupid dream real, you need to have a realistic
picture of the world. If you want a society in which men and women have
the same brain, or one in which feminism actually works, you would have
to **make it so**, with advanced biological engineering. John Varley
writes fiction: so did Joanna Russ.

