+++
title = "Data? We Don’t Need No"
full_title = "Data? We Don’t Need No Data"
date = "2012-08-03"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/03/data-we-dont-need-no-data/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/08/03/data-we-dont-need-no-data/).

Data?  We Don’t Need No Data

In the July 18 issue of *[The American
Conservative](http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/race-iq-and-wealth/)*
Ron Unz, its publisher, wrote a thoughtful article reanalyzing Richard
Lynn’s
[collection](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IQ_and_the_Wealth_of_Nations)
of IQ test data from around the world. His conclusion was that IQ test
scores in eastern and southern Europe had increased dramatically along
with improving socioeconomic conditions in recent decades and that this
response to environmental improvement was also happening in the US
Hispanic population. He also pointed out that in East Asian populations
IQ scores had remained static and that there and uniquely there no
apparent response to environmental improvement occurred.

His article was remarkable for its gracious and even tone with extensive
citation to data, not only from Lynn but from “quant bloggers” who
follow the literature on ethnicity and cognitive testing. A flurry of
responses and critiques soon appeared, and these are detailed and linked
in Unz’s followup
[article](http://www.theamericanconservative.com/unz-on-raceiq-incorporating-the-racialist-perspective/).
He points out that serious and useful criticisms come almost entirely
from “racialist” bloggers while none come from what he might call
“anti-racialist” bloggers. There are several interesting aspects of this
debate that encourage us to hope for higher grade public awareness and
discussion of ethnicity and IQ.

First, the debate is civil and scholarly and polite. Unz feels that Lynn
should have noticed what he (Unz) did in Lynn’s data while he
acknowledges Lynn’s important contributions to the literature. Second,
there is so far no useful analysis from the “liberals” at all. (I use
the L word following convention but I don’t think it is right: I am a
liberal and most of them are not.) This confirms my long-held impression
that diversity deniers are not very numerate and that down deep their
assertions are shallow.

The same collegiality is apparent in
[responses](http://www.amren.com/author/richardlynn/) to Unz by Lynn
himself and by Helmuth Nyborg at the *[American
Renaissance](www.amren.com)* website. There is a real prospect of useful
understanding of the issue to emerge from all of this.

Third, Unz refers unselfconsciously to “racialist” blogs, often called
“HBD” blogs, without loading his term with any value. Again, exactly the
right touch.

There is plenty of talk about race, ethnicity, and IQ available on the
web but it is dominated by sites with lowbrow commentariats that are not
very helpful, for example at one extreme sites like
[this](http://www.stormfront.org/forum/) and at the other occasional
bouts at sites like [this](http://scienceblogs.com/pharyngula/) or
[this](http://scienceblogs.com/gregladen/). There is hope for us after
all.

Unz’s political take in his article is that there are no grounds for
concern about low IQ illegal Mexican immigration into the US because
within a decade or two the IQ of that population will pop right up to
Irish or Dutch levels. I personally favor mass deportation, not on IQ or
social capital grounds, but tree hugger that a I am, on the need for us
to get our population down and preserve things like wilderness and
farmlands. It might not be so difficult: there must be a large number of
FEMA trailers that could be used to stock processing centers and in
Utah, the site of several WWII Japanese internment camps, plans and
blueprints must exist to reconstruct those camps.

