+++
title = "Disengaged Buddhism"
full_title = "Disengaged Buddhism article is published"
date = "2019-11-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/11/18/disengaged-buddhism-article-is-published/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/11/18/disengaged-buddhism-article-is-published/).

Disengaged Buddhism article is published

It’s been a [long time in the
making](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/04/disengaged-buddhism-in-the-era-of-trump/),
but my article on disengaged Buddhism is finally published. It’s at the
free online Journal of Buddhist Ethics, so you can [go read it for
yourself](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/).

I’ll say a bit here about what you can expect to find. Some of [the
article](https://blogs.dickinson.edu/buddhistethics/2019/11/17/disengaged-buddhism/)
goes over territory I’ve already covered on Love of All Wisdom and the
IPB: I discuss [Aśvaghoṣa’s worries about
severity](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/10/the-political-path-vs-the-buddhist-path/),
[Śāntideva’s rejection of external
goods](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/on-santidevas-anti-politics/),
[the Cakkavatti Sīhanāda Sutta’s detached attitude to
time](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/).
The article does this in more detail than the blogs have, and I also
show similar ideas in other suttas and jātakas and from Candrakīrti.

The article also responds more directly to existing engaged Buddhist
scholarship. Engaged Buddhist scholars have, so far, been the people
actually *doing* constructive Buddhist ethics. They are not merely
describing what Buddhists happen to believe but prescribing a Buddhist
way of life, and that much is something I think we need more of. What I
don’t think they do nearly enough is think about or respond to the
points made by the likes of Śāntideva and Aśvaghoṣa. The article
explains why they should.

So the article isn’t itself a work of constructive Buddhist ethics; I’m
not taking a position on engagement or disengagement there. What I am
doing is reminding other people doing constructive Buddhist ethics about
a large body of ideas that [they ignore or
silence](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/07/listening-to-contemporary-disengaged-voices/),
and urging them to take those ideas more seriously. My own constructive
position on these questions is complicated. I’ve started to take some of
it up on the blog –for example, I think there is some [empirical
confirmation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2018/08/the-psychological-case-for-disengaged-buddhism/)
for the Disengaged Buddhists’ psychological claims. That isn’t the whole
story, though, and you can expect to hear more about my constructive
views in the years to come. I am proud of the article as a starting
point.

[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/11/disengaged-buddhism-article-is-published)
