+++
title = "The role of the"
full_title = "The role of the prescription to learn the Veda"
date = "2019-11-22"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/11/22/the-role-of-the-prescription-to-learn-the-veda/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2019/11/22/the-role-of-the-prescription-to-learn-the-veda/).

The role of the prescription to learn the Veda

Why should one study Mīmāṃsā? In order to understand the meaning of the
Veda, say Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā authors. But why should one learn the Veda?
According to Bhāṭṭa Mīmāṃsā, because a Vedic prescription itself tells
you to do so. The prescription at stake is *svādhyāyo ‘dhyetavyaḥ* “One
should study one’s portion of the Veda”, called *adhyayanavidhi*. This,
however, leads to several problems.

-   1\. Each prescription needs an independently desirable purpose and
    it is not clear what could be the purpose here (I discussed this
    topic in a previous post,
    [here](http://elisafreschi.com/2019/11/07/does-a-prescription-with-two-results-become-meaningless/))
-   2\. Did you understand the *adhyayanavidhi* while reading it? If
    not, you really need to study Mīmāṃsā, but you will not get there,
    since you will not even start learning by heart the Vedas, given
    that you never came to know that you should have learnt them. Did
    you understand the *adhyayanavidhi*? Great! But this means that you
    don’t need to study Mīmāṃsā, since you already understand the
    meaning of Vedic prescriptions, isn’t it?

Prābhākara Mīmāṃsā authors can solve the problem by saying that one does
not have an independent duty to learn the Veda, but one does it
nonetheless because teachers have the duty to teach and there cannot be
teaching without learning. In other words, they can in this way make
sense of the fact that at the time you undertake the learning, you are
not mature enough to decide rationally on the basis of a means-goals
calculation.

Rāmānuja and Veṅkaṭanātha are overtly against Prabhākara for other
reasons. Hence, they need to offer a different solution. Accordingly,
Rāmānuja suggests that the prescription to learn does indeed reach until
the meaning, but that the meaning it reaches is not a fully satisfactory
one. It leads one to an āpātapratīti of it. Veṅkaṭanātha elaborates
further the implications of this assumption: Through the prescription to
learn, one is led up to a first impression of the meaning of the Veda.
Then, out of interest, one continues studying Mīmāṃsā in order to solve
one’s doubts and achieve proficiency in the Vedic texts.

(cross-posted on my personal blog,
[elisafreschi.com](http://elisafreschi.com))
