+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-04-13"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/13/prashnottara-with-durga-saptashati/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/13/prashnottara-with-durga-saptashati/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## prashnottara with durgAsaptashatI

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/04/image-1.png?w=515)

A brief procedure which is based on the durgA saptashatI for divination
is noted below. This is from a text published on the durgA saptashatI.

One invites a kumAri endowed with good laxaNa-s and performs pUja to her
in the usual procedure. Then one draws an aShTa dala kamala and places
the durgA saptashatI pustaka in the kamala. The mantrin is to offer a
mudrikA to the kumAri along with a golden shalAka (ruler). The scale can
be made of ivory/elephant’s tusk also. Select a span of 12 inches on the
ruler(from one of the sides presumably) and make 12 lines. Now place 12
inches length of the shalAka onto any page of the pustaka. See the line
of the saptashati which appears near the ruler towards the first line
(of the 12). Based on the content of the shloka the mantrin is to
interpret and answer the particular query posed by the client.

Likewise [a learned daivaGYa](https://twitter.com/kalajnani) informs us
that there are other ways of divining including the use of the famed
rAmacharita-mAnasa of tulasI dAsa. An advanced yogin or a yoginI might
directly go into a dhyAna like state and find answers though that is a
rare gift. Alternately, one employs any of the various karNa vidya-s or
svapna vidya-s to find answers. Other procedures involve a mix of these
above mentioned vidya-s along with a knowledge of jyotiSha.

This entry was posted on April 13, 2021 at 8:35 am and is filed under
[Divination](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/divination/),
[durgA -
daurgAgama](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/durga-daurgagama/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/13/prashnottara-with-durga-saptashati/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/13/prashnottara-with-durga-saptashati/trackback/)
from your own site.

