+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-04-14"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/14/siddha-s-across-the-varna-s-beyond/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/14/siddha-s-across-the-varna-s-beyond/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## siddha-s across the traditions, varNa-s &beyond

The following is from a private conversation with the [AchArya of
MT](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/) about a decade ago. The
context was the role and background of siddha-s in mantra shAstra across
various traditions.

AchArya of MT:

“Many influential tAntrika traditions are deeply connected to siddha-s
so some explanation is in order in this regard:

1\) The parishiShTha and early tAntrika mantra-shAstra and their
evolutes among the shrauta-smArta-s (e.g. lakShmaNa deshikendra or
prapa\~nchasara), as also the early kaumAra system,are traditions
largely independent of siddha-s.

2\) In the shaiva system the saiddhAntika and bhUta srotas there is no
significant place for siddha-s though certain deshika-s are highly
regarded in the former (starting with sadyojyotis and bR^ihaspati). In
the old garuDa srotas there were some ancient siddha-like teachers but
they are largely forgotten.

3\) In the vaiShNava system the mainstream pA\~ncharAtrika-s do not have
a significant place for siddha-s.\*\* However, the pre-tAntrika
ati-mArga pa\~ncharAtra recognizes some largely forgotten
parama-bhAgavata-s. The more atypically pA\~ncharAtrika-s like those of
the hayashIrSha and mahAkAla system have some siddha-s who have now been
largely forgotten.

4)The evolutes of the bhairava (and the vAma to some extant) srotas —
i.e. the kaula system are primarily based on siddha-s. The reason for
this is that the idea of siddha-s emerges from the ancient system of
yoga — already in the yoga of the mahAbhArata we have descriptions of
the proto-siddha. This tradition is retained by pata\~njali, although he
emphasizes other aspects based on what was later defined as nirvikalpa
samAdhi.

The great matsyendra, an archetypal siddha, successfully synthesized
yoga with the “new” mantra-shAstra or that of the bhairava srotas and to
a degree the vAma srotas. This synthesis is the kaula system. Where
matsyendra differed from the run of the mill siddha was that he and his
wife/kulA\~NganA systematized his new insights in the form of an
original shAstra — the kaula j\~nAnanirNaya and transmitted them to his
sons and students. Thus, his insights were not limited to a small circle
but could be systematically taken up.

  
matsyendra was an avarNa but he was systematic in developing an
insightful text using the register of the saMskR^ita that he knew.
Likewise in the kubjikAmata, the shUdra siddha-s systematized their
insights into the shAstra-s of that stream. Now the bhairava tantra-s
coming from the efforts of these siddha-s were often written in poorer
language, but that did not negate their insights — there were certainly
problems but because they presented their insights as systematic
shAstra-s later more formally educated successors could improve on the
language and any defects that might have arisen as a result of that in
subsequent works. This corrective mechanism renders the works and the
insights of these siddha-s usable by a larger audience. That is why
these systems e.g. shrIkula or kubjikA or trika and certain other shAkta
systems emphasize the lineage of transmission through whom their texts
passed. However, the run of the mill siddha-s fail to be systematic in
shAstra production– hence, their insights and mantra-s emerging there
from can always have issues, some times serious outside of their own
circle. Again as they do not have a system they become the center of
narastuti and cultic practices of little value. This was particular
extreme among the nAstika-s as they felt that the bad grammar was there
on purpose as corrective against brahminical arrogance. With such
attitudes their siddha-s like tilopA and virUpa were ultimately
roadblocks for the mantrashAstra. The nAstika-s seemed to have tacitly
realized this around the time of the composition of their kAlachakra
tantra.

  
Indeed in the tAntrika world the component of the siddha means that
insight might emerge anywhere — so there are avarNa-s with considerable
capabilities and I am aware of more than one such in the southern
states. Some of them even have a fairly developed repertoire of mantra
practice.“

\*\* In the jayAkhya and the laxmI tantra we have only a cursory and
generic mention of siddha-s in the appendix of their published versions.
In both cases a generic mantra invoking earlier siddha-s is mentioned
which is clubbed along with the guru, paramaguru, parameShThi guru and
pitR^i (pA\~ncharAtrika) mantra-s and is termed as the Adisiddha mantra.

This entry was posted on April 14, 2021 at 8:36 am and is filed under
[mantra
shAstra](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/),
[siddha](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/mantra-shastra/siddha/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/14/siddha-s-across-the-varna-s-beyond/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/04/14/siddha-s-across-the-varna-s-beyond/trackback/)
from your own site.

