+++
title = "The Crimean War of 1853-56 C.E. and the telegraph"
date = "2020-04-03"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/04/03/the-crimean-war-of-1853-56-c-e-and-the-telegraph/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/04/03/the-crimean-war-of-1853-56-c-e-and-the-telegraph/).

Technology has always played a significant role in the business of war.
Either the primitive bow and arrows or the average catapults or what the
Ajatashatru’s military had used, the innovative weapons called the
rathamusala (a chariot with a mace attached, causing much mayhem) and
the mahashilakantaga (a siege engine resembling a huge catapult) or the
Greek Phalanx (a body of troops standing or moving in close formation),
the effective use of gunpowder, the mathlocks, the flintlocks, the
rifles, the list is endless.

But, the Industrial Revolution in Britain in the nineteenth century and
the various scientific and technological inventions of that period
brought a change. When one looks at some of these inventions, war
doesn’t come to one’s mind. But, when used in the Crimean war, they had
far reaching consequences. India was going through something complete
different at this time. It was being ruthlessly colonised by the East
India Company but that is a discussion for another day. Today we are
discussing the important role that one such technology of the telegraph
played in the Crimean war.

Firstly, what was the Crimean war? Well it was a military conflict
fought between the Russian Empire on one side and the alliance of the
Ottoman Empire, Britain and France on the other in the years 1853-1856
C.E. One of its most important battle – battle of Sevastopol was fought
in the Crimean Peninsula in the Black sea. Though the Russian Empire was
defeated in the conflict, the war is famous for the allied deficiencies
in more ways than one. Historians criticise the incompetence of the
politicians, military and logistical mistakes, the maladministration and
the malnutrition of the troops.

![**Painting by H. Varnet: The taking of the Malakoff Redoubt by the
French General during the Crimean War. (From Wikipedia)  
**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/394px-vernet_-_la_prise_de_malakoff.jpg?w=394)

But, history tell us another very fascinating aspect of this war. It was
effectively one of the first modern wars, “a theatre of exuberant
technological enterprise….. The railway, steamships, telegraphy,
photography and sanitary hospitals, for example, went on public display
to prove their military worth.” This article is going to explore the
fascinating role that the telegraph played in the Crimean war.

Journalist though still very much dependent on the mechanical way of
reporting, also inducted the telegraph in the arsenal of their war
reporting. It is said that the war journalists like the Times
correspondent William Russell, used it for their immediate reports,
though there is no actual proof of it. Probably some part of news were
transmitted but usually the older system was still in vogue. But, it was
the military strategists and the government that used it effectively.
The generals and the commanders could send their instant orders on the
battlefield.

The militaries of the belligerent nations established military field
telegraphs and used two types of telegraphic systems. One was optical
and the other was electrical. Optical is the older one: a line of
towers, for the purpose of conveying textual information by means of
visual signals. The most common example of it was the semaphore system
invented by a French named Claude Chappe which used pivoted indicator
arms and conveys information according to the direction the indicators
point. Second was the electric telegraph, which was a point to point
text messaging that used coded pulses of electric current through wires
to transmit information. The French preferred the semaphore system as it
was more reliable, it was easy to set up and provided a lot more
security but they changed to the electric system after few years.
Britain on the other hand was using the electrical telegraph. So,
various kinds of telegraph systems were used by different nations.

The Russians were not far behind. They already had a good working
semaphore telegraphic system and were not very keen on using the
electric but then the empire was connected with the European electric
telegraph network at St. Petersburg via a line from Warsaw. France built
125 mile long overland line between Varna and Bucharest, connecting
Varna with telegraphic system in London and Paris. A cable line for
telegrphs was laid between Varna and Crimea which was longest at 340
miles and was an engineering feat of its time.

![**  
A French mobile semaphore telegraph station in the Crimea.
([Link](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5554787/figure/RSNR20160007F8/))  
**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rsnr20160007-g8.jpg?w=750)

The system had some downsides as well. The governments complained that
the fast reporting in the newspapers also meant that the enemy also got
the reports fairly quickly and revealed too much. “The generals began to
receive their orders from their faraway governments and lost their
independence of action. As a result, their status and power underwent a
transformation. Emperor Napoleon III of France and Queen Victoria of
Britain demanded daily telegraphic reports from their military
commanders in the Crimea.James Simpson, the British commander-in-chief
(following Lord Raglan), and his French counterpart, Aimable
Jean-Jacques Pélissier, found themselves under increasing pressure to
respond to their governments’ demands.”

The telegraph technology greatly generated interest among the public due
to regular reporting and also increased the criticism of the governments
in the public about the mismanagement of the war effort. The criticism
resulted in the falling of the then British government of Lord Aberdeen
in 1855.

The English also used the system in India during the first war of Indian
Independence in 1857-58 where Lord Clyde’s (commander-in-chief of the
British Indian Army) advanced posts were enabled to communicate with
government headquarters in Calcutta. The performance of the telegraph in
the Crimean War and the war of Indian Independence also influenced
Germany’s military officials to use it in their war efforts and they in
1855 became “first in times of peace to introduce it as permanent part
of their army organisation and their first employment was in 1864, in
war with Denmark.”

It is true that the technology was nowhere close to being perfect during
the Crimean War and quite a lot of developments had to be made later on
but, this was definitely the first time that various emerging
technologies including the telegraph was used to this extent in a war
effort and that’s why the Crimean war stands out in history.

**References:**

1.  [The Crimean War as a Technological Enterprise by
    Bektas Y.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5554787/#s4title)
2.  [The Military Telegraph During the Civil War in the United States …,
    Vol 1 by William Rattle
    Plum.](https://books.google.co.in/books?id=O4-AZcRCpn0C&pg=PA26&dq=the+telegraph+and+the+crimean+war&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj28bLRwcnoAhW2wTgGHSwOA24Q6AEIYjAH#v=onepage&q=the%20telegraph%20and%20the%20crimean%20war&f=false)

