+++
title = "Biology and Human"
full_title = "Biology and Human Capital"
date = "2014-07-31"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/07/31/biology-and-human-capital/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/07/31/biology-and-human-capital/).

Biology and Human Capital

I don’t pretend to be an economist. If I had been, I’m sure that I too
would have been unable to see the big real-estate bubble back in 2008,
even though crazed Californians were flipping houses all around my
neighborhood.

Nevertheless, I am trying to think useful thoughts about the biological
aspects of human capital. Wiki says that human capital is ” the stock of
competencies,
[knowledge](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge "Knowledge"), habits,
social and personality attributes, including
[creativity](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Creativity "Creativity"),
cognitive abilities, embodied in the ability to perform
[labor](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_%28economics%29 "Labour (economics)")
so as to produce [economic
value](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_value "Economic value"). ”
I’m down with that, although I’d choose to to take a separate look at
creativity.

That stuff is all learned – babies don’t know much – but people vary in
how easily they learn things. There are also cognitive ceilings, such
that you can’t really understand a subject beyond a certain complexity.
This can bite pretty hard when you run into it, as Luis Alvarez once
said: ” The world of mathematics and theoretical physics is
hierarchical. That was my first exposure to it. There’s a limit beyond
which one cannot progress. The differences between the limiting
abilities of those on successively higher steps of the pyramid are
enormous. I have not seen described anywhere the shock a talented man
experiences when he finds, late in his academic life, that there are
others enormously more talented than he. I have personally seen more
tears shed by grown men and women over this discovery than I would have
believed possible. Most of those men and women shift to fields where
they can compete on more equal terms. ”

Or perhaps you could understand those things, but it would take more
time than you have (say longer than a human lifetime) or more energy and
dedication than you have. I would guess that there is also a practical
limit on how *many* things you can know – because of time, if nothing
else. That too must vary between individuals. John von Neumann absorbed
info pretty easily – a professor of Byzantine history, at one of his
Princeton parties, was dismayed to find that John knew more about the
subject than he did.

You might compare the human capital situation to soil fertility. Some
people are cheaper to educate than others (Ramanujan!), and the
practical limit of education is not the same for everyone. An
observational fact, not something that absolutely had to be the case, is
that the payoff for educational investment plateaus: we have a lot more
ways of spending on education than we did in 1940, but the grandkids of
people who took the Iowa Basic Tests in 1940 score about the same as the
oldsters did. Spending on education is like pushing a rope: past a
fairly low point, nobody knows how to further improve things by spending
more money. Although, to be fair, the universe of proposed improvement
methods is a narrow one. I’ve never even heard an educationist suggest
caffeinating the hell out of students – certainly worth trying.

At the upper end of the IQ distribution, people can learn things
rapidly. High-school freshmen in in the Study of Mathematically
Precocious Youth (SMPY), who had tested in the top one-hundredth of one
percent, managed to get a median score of 727 out of 800 on an AP
Biology exam (95th percentile) after an intensive three-week course.
Of course, to be fair, they averaged 52nd percentile before they even
took it, even though they had not previously studied biology.

That’s an extreme example, of course, but it shows how far up is in this
business.

On the other end of the spectrum, there seem to be plenty of kids who
just don’t get algebra II.  By which I mean that they *can’t* get
algebra II: many suggest getting rid of the NEA, or supplying them
with sufficiently magical teachers, or some other currently fashionable
education nostrum, just has to work.

It doesn’t have to work.

Even if you came up with a scheme that worked – which nobody has – it
would have to be practical, affordable, and nontoxic, which rules out
many possibilities.

Moreover, the fraction of kids that don’t get algebra II varies a lot
between populations. Generally, such racial /ethnic ‘gaps’ seem to
bother people a lot more than randomly-distributed incompetence, of
which we also have plenty. Note: that SMPY sample was about *half*
Ashkenazi Jewish, although for some reason they never seem to have
published anything about that.

If economists absorbed the results of psychometrics and genetics, they
would have a reasonable start on the biological influences on human
capital. I say this realizing that other personality factors matter,
not just intelligence – but A. we don’t have good measures and B.
intelligence is genuinely important. If Brad Delong did this, he would
not find low per-capita GDP in Kenya such a mystery, or economic success
in South Korea. But he won’t, of course. There are more important
things than figuring stuff out.

If economists took those results into account, they’d be mighty
skeptical of the current enthusiasm for Pre-K.

In thinking of the long-run, they’d have to think about heritability and
natural selection, which they sure don’t now. Considering those issues,
it’s pretty obvious that what we now consider an efficient way of
running an economy has disastrous long-term consequences for human
capital formation.



















