+++
title = "Greg is back home"
full_title = "Greg is back home"
date = "2015-09-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/09/04/greg-is-back-home/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/09/04/greg-is-back-home/).

Greg is back home

Ruth writes that Greg is home from the hospital. He is still quite
uncomfortable I gather but progressing rapidly. He will soon be berating
all of us again.

Toddy Cat asked me for a post in Gregâ€™s absence. I will try to bang one
out tomorrow, part II of my fantasy about a knowledge-based public
welfare system.

I have to apologize for my recent absence of posts here. I have had my
own struggle with health this past year, which I find mildly
interesting. Because of recurrent atrial fibrillation I was given a new
anticoagulant. As an apparent outcome I had a brain bleed while in
Germany. I was completely unaware of it at the time since the only
symptom I experience was an inability to read. The bleed was in my left
temporal lobe right at an area of the brain that is dedicated to reading
in humans. Why on earth we have a dedicated reading area is a mystery to
me.

I arrived in Germany, got some sleep, then went walking for hours around
Munich: I always do this to nudge my circadian rhythms after
international flight. With no knowledge of the German language, I walked
for hours completely unaware that I could not parse written words. Then
I gave a talk for an hour and half at the University with no discernible
impairment, neither to anyone in the audience nor to myself. After
dinner I found that I could see the letters in my email but could make
no sense at all of them. Interestingly I had had no trouble reading my
own slides during the talk.

I seem to have mostly recovered but I make a lot of typing errors and my
prose is still full of bad spelling and typos. My balance also seems
slight affected but at my age that is perhaps no surprise.

So I will write something tomorrow but you all will have to agree not to
laugh at my spelling errors and errors of grammar.

