+++
title = "So you’re thinking of"
full_title = "So you’re thinking of being a traitor"
date = "2015-03-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/03/26/so-youre-thinking-of-being-a-traitor/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2015/03/26/so-youre-thinking-of-being-a-traitor/).

So you’re thinking of being a traitor

I was just reading something by Freeman Dyson, a review of a biography
of Bruno Pontecorvo. He explains that technical spies, like Pontecorvo
or Klaus Fuchs or Ted Hall, are unimportant because the Soviet Union had
plenty of first-rate scientists already, people like Yuri Khariton and
Zeldovich and Sakharov, and would have eventually gotten to the same
place anyhow. He thinks that people like Hall only accelerated the
Soviet bomb program by two or three years. But tactical spies, people
like Aldrich Ames or Kim Philby , who burned fellow agents and got them
killed – they’re quite naughty.

So I guess being a atomic spy in the service of the Soviet Union was
almost a peccadillo. Right-thinking people certainly want to think
that, since so many of them were sympathetic to Uncle Joe (‘ he rolls
the executions on his tongue like berries’ ) and his antics. Of course,
right-thinking people are *always wrong*.

Gee, what happened in those two or three years? Anything bad? Anything
that wouldn’t have happened if Stalin was Bombless? The Korean War,
certainly. Heard of it? Moreover, those technical spies saved the
Soviets money as well as time – we explored all the possible approaches
to manufacturing fissionables in the Manhattan Project, most of which
were expensive failures, but the Soviets didn’t have to. Their
resources were limited: this helped. Their first bomb was made from Los
Alamos engineering blueprints (thanks, Ted Hall !)

Usually, you have to be careful not to be too hard on public
intellectuals, since they’re not very smart and don’t know jack about
anything. You really can’t expect anything from them. Dyson, however,
is smart – very smart – actually knows some things, and has
accomplished a lot. But he’s still utterly full of shit, when it comes
to making excuses for ‘his kind of people’.

Let me make a few suggestions for the next crop of foolish scientists
considering aiding the next noxious ism. I think there’s a ‘due
diligence’ principle – maybe, just maybe, before changing sides, you
really need to check if the guys you’re aiding are tyrants and mass
murderers, And if they are, that’s a bad thing, not a proof of how
serious they are. Check before you defect. Pontecorvo didn’t check: I
think he was a a damn fool, worse than stupid. He came to agree: “The
simple explanation is this: I was a cretin,’ he said. ‘The fact that I
could be so stupid, and many people close to me should have been quite
so stupid . . .’ The sentence was left unfinished. Communism, he went
on, was ‘like a religion, a revealed religion . . . with myths or rites
to explain it. It was the absolute absence of logic.’ ”

I know that means reading something other than Nature or Phys Rev. It
might even mean listening to the Lithuanians in the neighborhood bar as
they complain about their cousins being shot – but I don’t think that’s
asking too much. Parenthetically, why is it that intellectuals feel
attracted to monsters like Stalin or Lenin, but hardly ever become
agents/disciples of Switzerland or Canada or Uruguay? Nice countries
finish last?

Perhaps nothing can really be done: it may be that a high fraction of
the psychological types that produce scientific advances are just silly
people, without a bit of common sense. Born that way. Maybe we could
work hard at making executions more certain, frequent and terrifying:
in a better world, Ted Hall would have shit in his pants at the mere
*thought* of committing treason.

