+++
title = "Back to the trees"
full_title = "Back to the trees"
date = "2011-11-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/11/04/back-to-the-trees/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/11/04/back-to-the-trees/).

Back to the trees

There is still doubt, but there seems to be a good chance that the
Flores Hobbit was a member of a distinct hominid species, rather than
some homo sap with a nasty case of microcephalic dwarfism. If this is
the case, the Hobbits are likely descended from a small,
Australopithecus-like population that managed to move from Africa to
Indonesia without leaving any fossils in between, or from some ancient
hominid (perhaps *homo erectus*) that managed to strand themselves on
Flores and then shrank, as many large animals do when isolated on
islands.

Island dwarfing of a *homo erectus* population is the dominant idea
right now. However, many proponents are really bothered by how small
the Hobbit’s brain was. At 400 cc, it was downright teeny, about the
size of a chimpanzee’s brain. Most researchers seem to think that
hominid brains naturally increase in size with time. They also suspect
that anyone with a brain this small couldn’t be called sentient – and
the idea of natural selection driving a population from sentience to
nonsentience bothers them.

They should get over it. Hominid brain volume has increased pretty
rapidly over the past few million years, but the increase hasn’t been
monotonic. It’s decreased about 10% over the past 25,000 years.
Moreover, we know of examples where natural selection has caused drastic
decreases in organismal complexity – for example, canine venereal
sarcoma, which today is an infectious cancer, but was once a dog.

There is a mechanism that might explain what happened on Flores –
partial mutational meltdown. Classic mutational meltdown occurs when a
population is too small for too long. Selection is inefficient in such a
small population: alleles that decrease fitness by less than 1/N drift
fairly freely, and can go to fixation. At the same time, favorable
mutations, which are very rare, almost never occur. In such a
situation, mutational load accumulates – likely further reducing
population size – and the population spirals down into extinction. Since
small population size and high genetic load increase vulnerability to
disaster, some kind of environmental catastrophe usually nails such
doomed, shrinking populations before they manage to die off from purely
genetic causes.

In principle, if the population is the right size and one adaptive
function is considerably more complicated than others, presenting a
bigger mutational target, you might see a population suffer a drastic
decline in that function while continuing to exist. There is reason to
think that intelligence is the most complex adaptation in hominids. More
than half of all genes are expressed in the brain, and it seems that a
given degree of inbreeding depression – say cousin marriage –
depressesIQ more than other traits.

Flores is not that big an island and the population density of
homo-erectus type hunter-gatherers must have been low – certainly lower
than that of contemporary hunter-gatherers, who have much more
sophisticated tools. Thus the hobbit population was likely small. It
may not have been possible to sustain a high-performing brain over the
long haul in that situation. Given that their brains performed poorly –
while the metabolic costs were as high as ever – selection would have
shrunk their brains. Over hundreds of thousands of years, this could
well have generated the chimp-sized brain we see in the LB1 skeleton.

Of course, this could only have happened if there was an available
ecological niche that did not require human-level intelligence. And
there was such an opening: Flores had no monkeys.

