+++
title = "FirstMover Advantage"
full_title = "FirstMover Advantage"
date = "2011-11-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/11/25/first-mover-advantage/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2011/11/25/first-mover-advantage/).

First-Mover Advantage

Increasingly, it looks as if the hunter-gatherers who lived in Europe at
the end of the ice age have been largely replaced. Judging from all
those U5 mtdna results from ancient skeletons, I’d say that the hunters
don’t account for more than 10% of the ancestry of modern Europeans. It
looks as if something similar happened in the Bantu expansion: modern
Africans are mostly not descended from the hunter-gatherers who lived in
those same places a few thousand years ago. The same could be said for
south-east Asia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. Farmers spread, more
than knowledge of farming.

In part, this may be explained by a kind of first-mover advantage. If a
population has already farmed for a couple of thousand years, they
should already be more adapted to that ecological niche: in terms of
metabolism, immune system, and psychology. So if a few boatloads of
Anatolian farmers land in a hunter-gatherer Italy, they will be better
at farming than the locals \_can\_ be. They will be less prone to
alcoholism, will have more resistance to crowd diseases, will be better
at living a relatively boring way of life. Their population will grow
faster than that of the local hunters, even if the hunters are trying
agriculture. Extrapolate that trend for a few centuries and they
dominate.





