+++
title = "Lynn Margulis"
full_title = "Lynn Margulis"
date = "2017-11-25"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/11/25/lynn-margulis/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/11/25/lynn-margulis/).

Lynn Margulis

Lynn Margulis was a strong supporter of endosymbiotic theory, the
\[correct !\] notion that mitochondria and chloroplasts originated as
independent prokaryotes, first put forth by Konstanin Mereschkowski in
the early 1900s. Andreas Schimper had a similar notion as early as 1883.

Margulis went on to theorize that symbiotic relationships between
organisms are the dominant driving force of evolution. There certainly
are important examples of this: as far as I know, every complex organism
that digests cellulose manages it thru a symbiosis with various
prokaryotes. Many organisms with a restricted diet have symbiotic
bacteria that provide essential nutrients – aphids, for example. Tall
fescue, a popular turf grass on golf courses, carries an endosymbiotic
fungus. And so on, and on on.

She went on to oppose neodarwinism, particularly rejecting
inter-organismal competition (and population genetics itself). From
Wiki: \[ She also believed that proponents of the standard theory
“wallow in their zoological, capitalistic, competitive, cost-benefit
interpretation of Darwin – having mistaken him… Neo-Darwinism, which
insists on \[the slow accrual of mutations by gene-level natural
selection\], is in a complete funk.”\[8\] ‘

Symbiotic relationships are important, but they don’t explain nervous
systems, or complex methods of reproduction, or livers, or wings. In
other words, they certainly are not the dominant driving force of
evolution. Mitochondria are important, no doubt about it – but they were
incorporated into eukaryotes over a billion years ago. What has
endosymbiosis done for us *lately*?

Margulis was interested in many biological questions , but as far I can
see, except for her work on endosymbiosis, she was always wrong. She was
wrong in her dabblings with the Gaia hypothesis, wrong in rejecting Carl
Woese’s [three-domain
system,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-domain_system) wrong in
what she had to say about AIDS research. And, just in case someone
somewhere hadn’t noticed that she was a complete nut, she was a 9-11
truther: there was “overwhelming evidence that the three buildings \[of
the World Trade Center\] collapsed by controlled demolition.”\[5\]

You might think that Lynn Margulis is an example of someone that could
think outside the box because she’d never even been able to find it in
the first place – but that’s more true of autistic types \[like Dirac or
Turing\], which I doubt she was in any way. I’d say that some
traditional prejudices \[dislike of capitalism and individual
competition\], combined with the sort of general looniness that leaves
one open to unconventional ideas, drove her in a direction that bore
fruit, more or less by coincidence. A successful creative scientist does
not have to be right about everything, or indeed about much of anything:
they need to contribute at least one new, true, and interesting thing.

