+++
title = "Skoptsys"
full_title = "Skoptsys"
date = "2017-11-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/11/07/skoptsys/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/11/07/skoptsys/).

Skoptsys

The recent popularity of men choosing to be castrated and wear a dress (
a ‘sex-change’) has some similarities to certain past practices. The
people involved had very different things to say about their reasons,
but it’s sometimes better to consider actions, rather than words.

The [Skoptys](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skoptsy) were a secret sect
in Tsarist Russia, known for castration of men and mastectomy of women.

Nobles, military officers, priests and merchants joined its ranks – not
just peasants. In the late 19th century, there were scandals when some
high-ups in the Orthodox church were found to be Skoptys. Pull down
their pants: surprise! Cf The Kreutzer Sonata.

There may have been as many as 100,000 Skoptys by the early 20th
century. The Commies seem to have wiped them out, confirming that
there’s a little bit of good in the worst of us.

[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/castration_clamps.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/castration_clamps.jpg)

The Galli, the eunuch priests of Cybele \[ Magna Mater\], are another
example. “The Galli castrated themselves during an ecstatic celebration
called the Dies sanguinis, or “Day of Blood”, which took place on March
24.\[4\] At the same time they put on women’s costume, mostly yellow in
colour, and a sort of turban, together with pendants and ear-rings. They
also wore their hair long, and bleached, and wore heavy make-up. They
wandered around with followers, begging for charity, in return for which
they were prepared to tell fortunes. On the day of mourning for Attis
they ran around wildly and disheveled. They performed dances to the
music of pipes and tambourines, and, in an ecstasy, flogged themselves
until they bled.\[3\] ”

Self-castration was un-Roman and forbidden to citizens, except for the
period between Claudius and Domitian. So the Galli were generally
foreigners.

Rome officially adopted this cult at a low point in the 2nd Punic war.
It lasted for a quite a while: St. Augustine complained about them.

