+++
title = "The Index"
full_title = "The Index"
date = "2017-11-23"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/11/23/the-index-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/11/23/the-index-2/).

The Index

I heard an interesting true story: a CIA analyst, around the time the
Iraq war started, said that anyone that didn’t believe in an Iraqi
nuclear program was a racist.

The Baathists were broke & under sanctions. More than half the
population was either in open revolt (Kurds) or still seething after
revolt (Shi’ites). We were watching – spy satellites, recon planes,
other ‘national technical means’ – and had seen nothing. There are five
(now six) ways of preparing fissionable materials – and all are
difficult, especially if they must also be invisible.

Iraqis were/are poorly educated and unskilled. Not much of an industrial
economy – just oil.

And they’re dumb. Of course they didn’t have a nuclear program.

Personally, I keep (in my head) a rough index of national technical
capability: what could country X do, what could they not do? Could
Brazil build a fission bomb? Sure. Could they build LIGO, or the Large
Hadron Colider? Probably not. Might we see important new mathematics
come out of Nigeria – or any other new and important ideas? ? Nope.
Holland? Quite possibly. For every country on Earth: the CIA does not do
this, and is apparently unable to do so. Not just because they don’t
know much – although they don’t – but because figuring it out would be
racist.

An expanded version of that would rank corporations and other entities
according their technical capabilities. What could GE do, what is Los
Alamos capable of? Etc.

