+++
title = "musingsofhh"
full_title = "musingsofhh"
date = "2011-05-12"
upstream_url = "https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/3-types-of-western-scholarship/"

+++
Source: [here](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/3-types-of-western-scholarship/).


musingsofhh


### [3 types of Westernscholarship](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/3-types-of-western-scholarship/)

May 12, 2011

A proper classification and analysis of Western Scholarship on the  
dharma of the Hindus is necessary in order to encourage some of its  
branches and smash the rest.  
1) The first kind of Western scholar is one who has made positive  
contributions to the Hindus with respect to the understanding and  
progress of their religion. To name a few in this class we have people  
like Edwin Bryant, Timothy Lubin, Fritz Staal and perhaps George Hart.  
We need to see more of this kind and ther presence in academia is  
generally a good sign.

However the Hindus must keep an eye on them to make sure that they are  
up to no mischief.

2\) The second variety is the scholar with some positive contributions  
but several misleading and negative contributions. The colonial and  
old fashioned scholars like Max Mueller, Keith and Oldenburg are the  
early representatives of this category. The modern representatives of  
this group include Richard Goldman, van Buitenen and Michael Witzel.  
These guys must be carefully monitored for their output and dealt with  
on a case by case basis. They may be admonished privately, engaged in  
scholarly debate and defeated or simply uprooted and flushed out  
depending on their response. If they show signs of correction they  
must be channelized towards being better scholars.

3\) Sadly the most common form of scholarship is the gutter scholarship  
category. nArashamsis of the Indologist may well occupy a whole book  
worth of material. They go hand in hand with the dharma drohi- Indian  
gutter progressives. Examples include Wendy Doniger, Jeff Kripal,  
Sarah Caldwell and Victor Mair. The aim is to destroy their ilk  
systematically and never let them rise again. This must be undertaken  
by persistant exposure of their activities to the Hindus followed by  
the countering. They have rich patrons who must be as far as posible  
squelched and their funds cut off. Wide spread lobbying against and  
public denouncement of these scholars with the fear of the  
consequecnes of Hindu defamation should be put into them.

Why are there so many Indian studies departments in the Western world  
and why are there hardly any traditional Hindus in these departments.  
The aim should be to destroy the gutter scholars and replace them with  
real Hindus. May be we should prepare a short list of these Western  
scholars and classify them according to their orientation and start  
targeting them systematically.

Staal’s statement on the vedic mantras should be viewed in light of  
his general hypothesis of the musical effect. I am not trying to  
defend this hypothesis but his sin is of much lower magnitude and  
generally counter-balanced by the detailed documentation of the vedic  
ritual. Thus he can remain in the class 1 of professional Western  
Scholars.

JAB van Buitenen’s contributions to understanding the evolution of  
Krishnaism is very significant. But his partisan stance in the issue  
of the brahmin- bhagavata debate cannot be denied. In this way he has  
presented to Indians and others not familiar with matter at hand only  
on side of the debate. Please read the 18th chapter of the Garuda  
purANa, brahma kANDa and form ones own opinion. van Buitenen’s  
pauranic reader does worse than the illustrated comics that where once  
available in India: the Amar Chitra katha. Finally his study of the  
Mahabharata shows his inner disdain for the Hindu culture. Thus van  
Buitenen despite his great contributions falls in class 2 though lying  
above Witzel and Parpola in that class.

Certain rotten rascals in this list would do better by studying the  
Hindu texts more seriously rather than compose poems contrasting the  
greatness of the Western Indologists with ignorance of the Indian  
scholars.

\> statement “anarthakAh vai mantrAh” “Verily, mantrasare meaningless”.  
\> This was said by Kautsa, a regular topknot, kuDumi, bodhiwala, juTTu  
\> etc of ancient times and a redoubtable pUrvapakSin to more orthodox  
\> vaidikas of his time.

While Mr LS is normally worthy of a response soaked in acerbity, this  
point about the Angirasa’s statement raises an important one that I  
have always conceded: There have always been both historical and  
theoretical misunderstandings of the saMhita mantra pAThas even amidst  
traditional students. The traditional theories suggesting the  
meaningless-ness and purely musical value of the mantras have  
approximated what Staal has said to varying degrees. This may stem  
from the historical misunderstanding of the saMhita mantras right from  
the brAhmaNa period. For example the famous tale in the JaiminIya  
brAhmaNa of the kutsa-Indra encounter or the uma-haimavati saMvAda of  
the kena are clear examples of this lack of understanding of the  
mantras by the circum-vedic authors. This misunderstanding essential  
suggests a fragmentation of tradition between the Samhita period and  
its successors and may present a major problem for historical  
reconstructions that seek to avoid invasion (migration) of IE speakers  
into India.

\> So where does Kautsa rank in your list?

The Western scholars with an impact on the politico-social interests  
of the modern Hindu and not the predecessors of the modern Hindu are  
under scrutiny.

**Category:**

[Heathen Thought](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/category/heathen-thought/), [Indology](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/category/indology/)

[Leave a comment](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/3-types-of-western-scholarship/#respond)

**Tagged with:**

-   [bhagavat](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/bhagavat/) -   [brahmana](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/brahmana/) -   [edwin bryant](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/edwin-bryant/) -   [fritz staal](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/fritz-staal/) -   [george hart](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/george-hart/) -   [gonda](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/gonda/) -   [indologists](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/indologists/) -   [mahabharata](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/) -   [parpola](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/parpola/) -   [van Buitenen](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/van-buitenen/) -   [witzel](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/witzel/)

**[The pravargya ritual](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/the-pravargya-ritual/)**

**[bAvari in the land of theassakas](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/15/bavari-in-the-land-of-the-assakas/)**
