+++
title = "musingsofhh"
full_title = "musingsofhh"
date = "2011-05-12"
upstream_url = "https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/danava-and-other-issues-with-oit/"

+++
Source: [here](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/danava-and-other-issues-with-oit/).


musingsofhh


### [Danava and other issues withOIT](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/danava-and-other-issues-with-oit/)

May 12, 2011

\>7. The main and older Rig Vedic struggle, however, was the rth-south  
\>conflict, the Turvashas and Yadus (the people of interior India the  
\>south) with the Vedic Purus of the Sarasvati River to the north. It  
\>continued long after the period of the Rig Veda as Puranic stories of  
\>Purus or Ikshvakus struggles the Yadus reveal. The Turvashas and  
\>Yadus were also called Rakshasas and Yakshas.

Shri Vamadeva Shastri: a very interesting essay expounding views  
Talagerian genre. I will try to address all your points in detail as a  
when time permits. But first this point: How did you infer that the  
major and older R^igvedic struggle was between the pUrus/ikshvAkus and  
the turvashas and the yadus. I noticed that in your earlier work you  
even went as far as claiming that rAvaNa was yadu. Do you still stick  
to this claim. On what basis do you make this claim? when it is not  
really supported by any of the traditional genealogies. There is  
paurANic evidence for the struggle between the bhR^igus and their  
cousins the yadus in the so called haihaya period culminating in  
hostilities under rAmo bhArgava. But the vedic evidence does not (at  
least to me) really present a prolonged struggle between the bhArata  
center and the yadu/turvasha periphery. There was possibly one major  
episode during the sudAsa expansion but beyond that there are even  
references to the yadus and turvashas coming from far to aid the  
pUrus. Also note the reference them in the long gayatri to Indra:  
nakirindra tvaduttaro na jAyan asti… ityAdi by vAmadeva gautama, a  
pUru priest; it is hardly hostile.

While the druhyus, anus, purus, t and y are often mentioned in one  
breath the ikshvAkus are kept aside on most instances. So they are  
possibly a peripheral people with shorter phases of more widespread  
dominance of the Aryan heart land like during the periods of mandhAtA  
and trasadasyu.

How would you explain this with respect to you geographical model?

\> Afghanistan at an early period. The Europeans called themselves  
‘Danavas’,  
\> the sons of the Goddess Danu. Danava was originally a positive term  
reflected  
\> in the name of the Maruts and other Vedic Gods as Su-Danavas (good  
Danus). It

There are many issues with dAnava first and problems for OIT with it.  
dAnava had already accquired a negative context by the R^ig veda. To  
understand this note the epithet dAnava-han applied to Indra fairly  
early in the Rigveda itself. Indra’s hostilites with the son of dAnu  
are also mentioned on multiple occassions especially in the hymns of  
the mainstream pUru angirasas like hiraNyastupa and shaunahotra.  
SudAnava is traditionally interpreted by teachers of vedic sanskrit as  
good (su) givers (dAnavaH). There is a pauraNic myth that the maruts  
were born of diti through an embryo cut up by mahendra. This myth  
while probably having some Indo-European root is likely not to have  
been an ancient one for it is contradicted in the RV by the tale of  
the maruts being the sons of rudra through pR^ishNi. Thus  
interpretation of sudAnava as connected to danu is less likely than  
the explanation of good givers. Now let us see where the rivers that  
derive their name from dAnu are seen: predominantly in the  
circum-Pontic region: Dnieper, Donets, Don, Dniester and Danube  
(joining Black sea somewhat to the south). There is a sporadic  
presence further west like Don in Scotland and the name in the Tuatha  
de Daanan of the Celts. This is contrasted with a relative paucity of  
the Danu river names to the far east of the Circum-Pontic region. The  
two important lessons that we learn from this are one: the  
Indo-Europeans river names can be mobile so there can be Don in the  
Pontic steppe as well as Scotland: so also for Sarasvati- there could  
have been many sarasvatis and that of bharadvAja need be the same as  
Hakra. Secondly we see no trail of Danu river names from India to the  
Pontic region. So the fundamental split between the danu/dAnava  
worshipping population: what may be termed in Indic vocabulary a  
Druhyu-early- branching-Anu admixture occured in the Pontic region  
rather than in Gandhara. This early danu/dAnvava- split mirrored in  
many respects the later asura split. This taken together with the  
later surviving Indians in the Black sea regions suggests that the  
Indians and the Iranians were most possibly once in this region where  
the basic theological construct of dAnava as demon occurred.

The conclusion OIT is far from explaining all the issues of IE origins  
and migrations.

West East  
Time Danu+dAnava\|Asura/Deva  
\| Split  
\| Danu+dAnava\<———\[BOTH\]—\>Asura/Deva  
\|main river name main river name  
\| {danu} {sarasvati}  
\| Split  
\| Asura \<——- ———–\>Deva  
\| Iranians Indians  
\\ / {middle vedic period}

\> a historic aura, and when the Danu-worshippering people had  
\> subjugated the Old-European natives/Finno-Ugric people and became  
\> masters of the land.

The point is that Danu was an ancient river goddess/Demoness and so  
she was always worshipped by at least a section of the PIE community.  
So you should see her worship associated with this community except  
the portion that stops worshiping her. Thus we explain the observed  
pattern: hence I do not immediately understand why she has to acquire  
a historical aura to be invoked.

\> Shouldn’t we also see a plethora of Sarasvati-derived names in the  
\> the Proto-Indo-Iranian homeland in the Pontic region ifIranian-Indo-  
\> Aryan split occured there?

On etymological grounds I postulate that the name Sarasvati was  
applied to the trans-functional IE goddess only after the  
Indo-Iranians had split from the Europeans. After this occured after  
the former had started drifting from the Pontic region and invented  
sarasvati in this period. One of the Pontic rivers Bug may be derived  
from the god bhaga suggesting there were some alternative river names.  
This god was common in the slavic branch where many of the gods are  
called ‘bogs’.

\> The Vendidad does talk about the Vanguhi Daitya river in Eranvej or  
\> Airyana Vaeja (modern Oxus?), where Daitya=’one who has received the  
\> Law’. The Avestan corpus should provide with many interesting  
threads.

Correct, but this is to do with the much later split of asura and deva  
worshippers: Note dAnu and diti are essentially different, though  
later they may have been synonymized unifying asura and dAnava. In the  
RV dAnava is always negative and asura is still positive. So I was  
expressing doubt regarding vAmadeva shAstri’s theory.

**Category:**

[Hindu History](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/category/hindu-history/)

[Leave a comment](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/danava-and-other-issues-with-oit/#respond)

**Tagged with:**

-   [arya](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/arya/) -   [danava](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/danava/) -   [druhyu](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/druhyu/) -   [origins](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/origins/) -   [puru](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/puru/) -   [saraswati](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/saraswati/) -   [vedas](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/tag/vedas/)

**[taittiriya samhita and horseanatomy](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/taittiriya-samhita-and-horse-anatomy/)**

**[The pravargya ritual](https://musingsofhh.wordpress.com/2011/05/12/the-pravargya-ritual/)**
