+++
title = "Healthcare and"
full_title = "Healthcare and Hypochondria"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2023/06/24/healthcare-and-hypochondria/"
date = "2023-06-24"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2023/06/24/healthcare-and-hypochondria/).

Healthcare and Hypochondria

In our three and a half years here, the only time we’ve had a real need to see a doctor was last week when a tick bite and fever put me on the red alert list for Lyme disease.  Which is lucky, because while the NHS does indeed offer high quality healthcare for free, trying to actually consult someone or get the tests, procedures or medication you need is not for easy.

Healthcare on the subcontinent is by and large private. As long as you can pay for it, you can access whatever you want whenever you want. Everything is relatively cheap for the middle class, with a good doctor charging no more than Rs 500 or £5 for a consultation. And with no shortage of health professionals, you can almost always find a doctor to see you the same day, if not the same hour. Procedures, tests and operations can be booked in as per your diary and there are no waiting lists; you just need to produce your credit card. Pharmacies can be found in every residential locality – often several on the same street – and some are open 24 hours.

The NHS by contrast is a study in unavailability. To see a doctor at our local NHS surgery, you either take an appointment for a week’s time, or you really work hard to convince the reception staff that yours is an urgent case and you need to see a doctor pronto, in which case you will be offered a call back by the doctor and only if he or she feels it’s necessary for you to come in will you then be given an appointment – and no you don’t get to choose the time. Should you have a couple of hundred pounds spare you could try to arrange to consult a private GP but the waiting time is likely to be similar.  And all the money in the world can’t buy you a same-day appointment. State-run A&E (Accident and Emergency) departments in each hospital offer immediate aid, but you have to wait several hours to be seen. Medicine is dispensed from your local surgery and each town has a couple of pharmacies, but nothing is open out of hours and for many things you need a prescription from the doctor. There are now companies offering private blood tests and other such services, many of them by post, but you’re looking at a lead time of about a week minimum unless you live in a big city. 

So our trip to India last winter involved some serious medical tourism.
We caught up on all of our dentistry. Getting any of us into an NHS dentist in the UK would have taken a year, and even private dentists have long waiting lists, as well as long bills. So instead for a little over £100 we had between us four check ups, four fillings and one tooth extraction all with a very nice dentist just round the corner from where we were staying in Bangalore. We did ear and eye tests while we were there, and, of course, had a baby. And I was able to stock up on all of the Ayurvedic and homoeopathic medicines that make up my home-treatment arsenal. But it wasn’t all fun and games. As ever in India, the boys had their fair share of high temperatures, ear infections and stomach bugs, and we were as ever grateful, when something proved too persistent or acute for our home remedies and alternative therapies, to be able to call our friendly Bangalore paediatrician up late at night and ask, for instance, how to prevent a severely dehydrated Theos from vomiting up every sip of water we gave him, and then be able to get the medicine suggested sans prescription within a few minutes from a hospital pharmacy. 

Doctors, hospitals and pharmacies are ubiquitous in India, but so are the bugs. In all the time we’ve lived here in the UK neither of the boys has ever had anything approaching the kind of illnesses they get in Bangalore. Disease and death have always been ever present dangers for the vulnerable in India. Health and safety is conspicuous by its absence; a badly built pillar in Bangalore’s under-construction metro railway collapsed a few months ago killing a family of three who were passing beneath it. Someone told me recently about a virus that was wiping out infants in Calcutta; a young mother they knew had just lost her seven month old son. In much of India, babies are kept at home until they’re at least three months old, partly to shield them from disease. Health is a major topic of conversation, and with reason. 

However the combination of readily available healthcare and the spectre of serious illness and death often produces a hypochondria to rival Jerome K Jerome. Indians and especially Indian parents hotfoot it to hospital at the first sniffle. There are too many visits to doctors who are too keen to prescribe unnecessary tests and medication. No one waits it out.

By contrast, the NHS does such an excellent job of preventing access to its doctors to all but the most persistent (who are also hopefully the ones that need it the most) and then offering appointments far in the future that minor ailments clear up on their own. Tests are only prescribed if deemed absolutely necessary, and medication is given sparingly. All this is of course intended to protect the NHS’ bottom line, but inadvertently it makes us all less likely to go to the doctor because it is such a hassle to do so. For the cancer patients waiting years to have an urgent operation that could save their lives, it’s a nightmare. But for the over-anxious parent worried about their baby’s cough, alongside a dependence on strawberry-flavoured calpol it fosters patience and resilience. Something that many Indians could do with a dose of. 

Advertisement
