+++
title = "Stuffed"
full_title = "Stuffed"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2023/06/01/stuffed/"
date = "2023-06-01"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2023/06/01/stuffed/).

Stuffed

When we moved to England in 2020 we brought with us just suitcases.
Friends and family, and many neighbours, generously offered us a plethora of good quality stuff they no longer needed, from bunk beds to books to bicycles. In the three years we have been here the boys have hardly had to buy any new clothes thanks to the upmarket hand-me-downs we are given every few months. And we filled our cottage almost entirely with furniture people gave us, plus a few Facebook marketplace finds. 

Now that we are packing those same suitcases to return to India we find ourselves confronted with a novel problem. Nobody wants all this stuff.
 Nobody wants to buy it. Nobody wants to be given it. We have had to take many things to the local household recycling centre, more popularly known as the dump. (And while some things are recycled there I suspect most of it just goes into landfill.) Two rather nice sofas didn’t have fire regulation labels which meant the local recycling centre couldn’t accept them. So we had to pay 60 quid for them to be taken away and put into landfill.

As it happens I had first put those sofas up for free on Facebook to try and find them a home. We were still in India at the time and Facebook automatically put Bangalore as the location for the ad. Within minutes I was inundated with messages from people wanting the sofas. Once I switched the ad’s location to Dorchester, my phone fell silent.

When we vacated our Bangalore flat in 2020 to move here, everything we had owned found a home quickly and easily, with almost no effort on our part. Nothing, from the bed to the pile of old newspapers, was wasted.
Nothing went to landfill. If someone didn’t need a chair themselves they knew someone who did and took it in order to pass it on. India may have a massive public litter problem but it also has the world’s best recycling system because someone somewhere can use the things you no longer need.

Getting rid of everything here we can’t take with us to India was a month-long headache. We live in a particularly affluent, sparsely populated corner of the country so the problem is magnified to some degree. There might be more takers for freebies in inner-city Glasgow for instance. Still, rich countries like this are at saturation point.
We are stuffed to the gills with stuff. Not that that stops us buying new stuff. And while there is growing awareness of the issues caused by possessions that have become surplus to requirement, of late particularly with clothes, it’s going to be an increasingly huge problem in the future. Although of course we can always crunch it up and ship it to some other country’s landfill.

Advertisement
