+++
title = "Hold on to Your Kids"
full_title = "Hold on to Your Kids"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2023/06/27/hold-on-to-your-kids/"
date = "2023-06-27"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2023/06/27/hold-on-to-your-kids/).

Hold on to Your Kids

*Hold on to Your Kids* challenges many notions that we take for granted. That teenagers will and should rebel against their parents and all that they stand for as they become independent individuals. That children need to be surrounded by other children as they grow up. That each generation creates its own culture and identity. There is a lot to think through here, but first let me try to summarise what authors Dr Gordon Neufeld and Gabor Mate are saying:

Nature has so designed it that from birth children attach physically and mentally to their parents and are thus guided by them to maturity and independence. Attachment and connection are the most crucial needs we human beings have, beyond basic survival. It is only by attaching to a suitable parent that the young human can grow up into a mature, independent adult. This bond of attachment enables us as parents to parent our children easily and intuitively because they are primed to look to us guidance and to align themselves with us. In turn our children, secure in the unconditional love we have for them, can learn and grow unhindered and, in time, become emotionally mature adults fit to parent their own children. Kids can’t mature until they can “depend on the relationship unconditionally”, and thus, say the authors, “we liberate children by not making them work for our love but by letting them rest in it.” 

That was nature’s game plan, but as usual we’ve messed around with it quite a bit. Since the 50s, industrialised Western nations have seen society change at an unprecedented rate. The extended or joint family set up is almost obsolete, and most households now consist of a nuclear family or just a single parent with kids. We no longer live in small, localised neighbourhoods where everyone knows one another. With both parents working, children are put into daycare or some form of school earlier and earlier and for longer and longer hours. All this has created a situation where children grow up in constant contact with a huge group of peers and without meaningful relationships with the adults who earlier would have loved and guided them: parents, relatives, neighbours and teachers. The result is what the authors call “peer orientation”, where children attach to and orient by each other rather than their parents and allo-parents. With parents, teachers and grandparents no longer meeting children’s attachment needs, they have nowhere else to (subconsciously) turn. Thus children latch onto each other as a poor substitute. Poor because friends or peers, instead of being able to offer each other the unconditional love that is so crucial to a child and which a parent naturally and instinctively gives, are themselves emotionally immature, unreliable, impulsive, and at times cruel. This frustrated attachment need, say the authors, leads to many of the problems we see today among children and adolescents: the pseudo-maturity and sophistication, the aggression and bullying, the underachievement and disinterest, and, overarchingly, the numbness.
These peer oriented children and adolescents are cool, defined by the authors as “the complete absence of emotional openness”, because it is too risky to show their feelings – excitement, curiosity, elation, disappointment, sadness, fear. Safer to stay emotionally shut up, to respond to the cruel world of the classroom with “Whatever” and “Don’t care” rather than risk the pain of ridicule, humiliation, exclusion and violence.

Peer orientation not only leads children to react against the parents they so recently loved and looked up to, but it also leads the generation as a whole to reject the customs and culture of its parents and create its own version, “the flatlining of culture” as Neufeld and Mate put it. When you travel beyond the industrialised West (or read about life pre 1900) the teenage rebellion and youth culture that are such an intrinsic part of adolescence here, and which many of us grew up with, are soon seen to be an aberration specific to this time and place only. Harry Enfield’s ‘Kevin’ character, whose trademark “I hate you” to his mother was the stuff of classic 90s comedy, could never be funny in India for instance. The description of hardworking immigrant families, steeped in a culture that has served them for centuries, suddenly finding they’ve lost their children over a few short years is all too true. The Woodstock years and beyond have given us so many wonderful things, but at a cost. How different the world would be if Firdaus Balsara had remained a good Parsi boy.

As parents, our job is either to prevent this peer orientation happening or to reclaim our children if they’ve already replaced us with their peers. For this we need to work on our relationship with our child, just as we might with a partner – but in this case we need to do all of the running. It’s the small daily rituals that keep things alive and warm, what the authors call the “dance of attachment”.  We need to show our children that we love and accept them unconditionally, irrespective of what they do or don’t do, or how they behave. We need to give enough time and not just time but mind space to our children, give them opportunities and create space for them to talk to us, share things with us, confide in us. We need to be their role models and the compass point by which they navigate life. We need to acknowledge and welcome their dependence, to help them mature and become independent in due course but not be in a rush for them to grow up when they’re far from ready. “The story of maturation”, say Neufeld and Mate, “is one of paradox: dependence and attachment foster genuine independence and separation.”

Neufeld and Mate talk about the power to parent, “the spontaneous authority to parent”, a power many of us have lost, or lose as our children grow older and are no longer actively attaching to us. Without this, we are left with nothing but bribery and coercion. In any other relationship, trying to get someone to do something by bribing or forcing them would be seen as manipulation, but somehow it’s accepted that today’s handicapped parents use these methods as a matter of course. 

When as pre-teens we see our children starting to become too cool for school, increasingly street-wise, wanting our help and company less and less, and always busy with friends, we often feel that they have started on the road to independence and maturity, that our job is coming to an end (perhaps sooner than we would have liked but still), that all is as it should be. But instead of becoming independent individuals they are becoming dependent clones, of each other. They are transferring their dependence and attachment from us, their parents, to their peers, and they’re doing it much before they’ve truly ‘grown up’. “The real challenge for parents is to help kids grow up, not simply look like grown ups”, write the authors. And even if we feel jilted by kids who seem to openly hate us and to be completely obsessed with their mates, we can’t give up until our job is done. 

—————

What I find most difficult in all this is the idea that children don’t need other children as much as we think. The authors say that it is peer orientation not peers that are the enemy, but the book in several places questions the real need for friends in a child’s life, and indeed whether children are capable of real friendship. And the “emergent” solitary play the authors prescribe, while incredibly important, should surely be complemented by messing around with other kids.

In our experience, children need both adults and other children; one without the other never works. For us the one redeeming feature of school is that it offers lots of peer interaction, something that we’ve always struggled to provide enough of in a homeschooling situation. I’ve seen that our boys need the rough and tumble that only other children fully engaged in the game can provide, it helps them work out their excess energy and meets a primal mammalian urge to hone the body for life in the wild. And some amount of cut-throat playground time balances out the cotton-wool approach of many adults. Being surrounded by adults who are always understanding, patient and attentive may not bring out the best in a child. And indeed in indigenous communities, it is the older children who tend to carry and look after the infants, and show the younger ones how to use a knife or climb a tree. Adults are often busy with the important business of feeding everyone so the kids spend a lot of time together. The difference I suppose is that in our society we have institutionalised this peer-time with the notion of school and created huge, anonymous groups of same-aged children guided by no older child or adult.

  
And while peers tend to make poor attachment substitutes for our children, there are many parents who don’t measure up too well. Those of us who are ourselves products of a peer-oriented youth culture may never have matured fully emotionally. How are we to bring up our children when we ourselves haven’t grown up? The authors are expecting a lot of the parent, even one who is themselves fully mature and balanced. 

That aside, though, this book looks set to become our bible through the next few years with Uppu. Over the last three years that he has been at school on and off, I’ve seen him grow in many ways but also change. He is no longer the boy who, wide-eyed with wonder, wants to know about everything and who happily and openly talks to everybody, adult or child. Something in him has been deadened. But up until six months ago he was still firmly attached. Recently, as we have been preoccupied with a new baby and moving back to India, I have felt that bond of attachment becoming a little less strong, and the pull of his friends making itself felt. We were welcoming this in many ways: he is becoming much more independent, able to make plans with his friends and see them without us getting involved; and going to school no longer meets with resistance. We even started excusing him from visits to elderly relatives or family friends where there was no one his age on the basis that he had grown out of it. I now think we need to back-track, and re-consider all of this in the light of *Hold on to Your Kids*. He is 10 not 18 and has a long way to go, and we have a long way to go with him. 

Advertisement
