+++
title = "ellAlan of chidambaram,"
full_title = "ellAlan of chidambaram, the silambam master"
date = "2020-02-16"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2020/02/16/ellalan-of-chidambaram-the-silambam-master/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2020/02/16/ellalan-of-chidambaram-the-silambam-master/).

ellAlan of chidambaram, the silambam master

ellAlan of chidambaram is a rare master of the tamil martial art
silambam.
[https://www.facebook.com/ellaalan.chidambaram](https://www.facebook.com/ellaalan.chidambaram?epa=SEARCH_BOX "https://www.facebook.com/ellaalan.chidambaram?epa=SEARCH_BOX")
. Very strong, very skilled, very hard working, dedicated to his art
rather than money, quite clear headed. Capable of some incredible feats.
Look at some pics in that page.

I was under the impression that silambam was some predictably over-hyped
dumeel art, but this person changed my mind. Regularly practiced, it can
make you Bruce Lee with yogi’s health. It works on joints, bones,
muscles, breath and attention.

![चित्र में ये शामिल हो सकता है: 1 व्यक्ति, खड़े रहना, जूते और
बाहर](https://scontent-bom1-2.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/66846564_2429850093909750_6805533688063852544_n.jpg?_nc_cat=100&_nc_oc=AQnjKU9lqcyANJEsg3kuUpRST-deVWQzrwnmn9FFxwACPEi8BqRVjjpUM5cshFNzBA8&_nc_ht=scontent-bom1-2.xx&oh=924240570e9adfff53555ef866c9b291&oe=5EF99B44)![चित्र
में ये शामिल हो सकता है: 9 लोग, मुस्कुराते लोग, लोग खड़े हैं और
बाहर](https://scontent-bom1-2.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-9/81173330_2574339672794124_3996635547610120192_n.jpg?_nc_cat=108&_nc_oc=AQlhyKBOvjRSHI8EVvc6j6r0uW_5LsVp2G8OSEbTrEj0lrYiKdHMWL7c-SAd0IP5MXQ&_nc_ht=scontent-bom1-2.xx&oh=0cc3a91071bb862df9e70cd21864a89a&oe=5EB5FD28)

(Incidentally – That boulder lifting was a tool to test a prospective
groom’s health in old days.)

![चित्र में ये शामिल हो सकता है: एक या अधिक लोग, लोग खड़े हैं और
बाहर](https://scontent-bom1-2.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t1.0-0/s417x417/61333252_2395199724041454_2871309658851639296_n.jpg?_nc_cat=111&_nc_oc=AQkdUByBz3I8WNSMZuD5XSlGFBDz2AZ4Mz46RoPtHsBldrjp3eJYAg-GwyCx3KZN58c&_nc_ht=scontent-bom1-2.xx&_nc_tp=7&oh=dfbc328722cec40725cd2a502509ebd1&oe=5EC81E5A)![फ़ोटो
का कोई वर्णन उपलब्ध नहीं
है.](https://scontent-bom1-1.xx.fbcdn.net/v/t31.0-0/p370x247/17240323_1926564444238320_8080294735159284926_o.jpg?_nc_cat=105&_nc_oc=AQkkr2YkUhW_UeUDCAl49mkINBFU3vphC-VmD8FIOcVNzy7_d_00DipdS27l5KZG8RE&_nc_ht=scontent-bom1-1.xx&_nc_tp=6&oh=e505dd173e55f7484c8134ebea34a991&oe=5ECDEC13)



Knows \~9 marma points (demos were stunning), lots of holds, “animal
walks”, multiple weapons. One of the weapons is the [tamiL
boomerang](https://www.facebook.com/ellaalan.chidambaram/videos/2417764915118268/),
taking one back to old migration route to Australia! Another is the
blowpipe! Whether a simple stick or the flexible sword – the weapons
take MUCH strength AND skill to wield well. If shrI ellAlan is like
this, I wonder what Herakles, Rustam or bhIma would be like.

He traveled to interior a few villages, quarreled with reluctant masters
to get his knowledge. He started at around 14 and is around 37 now. The
art supposedly has \~166 levels, and ellAlan may be \~ level 30
according to one person. Taking great pains to preserve and propagate
the art, he teaches a free class daily at around 7:30. Then teaches a
few people at a local university for a 500 per head fee (\~2019). And
that’s his earnings – sufficient for his simple, happy family life.
Eagerly teaches good marma points and the related quasi martial stick
dance to women for self defence. His son (the elder child), Aran, is
being groomed in the art. He is a very good teacher – socially adept,
capable of being gentle and gracious, or kindly firm as the
circumstances demand. Further, he travels to Australia (where his
brother and SIL teach sadir dance) periodically to teach eager students
(tamiLs and others). The eagerness of students is such that he often
gets messages asking for confirmation and clarification when in India.
Back home, a gentleman leaned just the animal walks (which are quite
impressive and fitness building, BTW) perfectly, paid a decent fee, and
now makes a successful business of teaching in major cities.

Intellectually and spiritually, his makeup is quite interesting. How did
Rajesh Kumar become Ellalan? On one hand, his rationality is admirable!
Not falling into the expected trap as to how silambam is “root of all
martial arts”, he reimagines circumstances when man was hunter gatherer.
His favorite deity is the sun and the 5 bhUta-s (with special liking for
the AkAsha associated with chidambaram). Refers back to the siddha-s and
tiruvaLLuvar. A man of few words, he prefers recourse to action and
practice. Doesn’t carry a smartphone when outside. Has the sense not to
retaliate (would’ve been child’s play) on the occasion when policemen
beat him for some reason.

On the other hand, he fancies that Tamil and Chinese are the world’s
oldest languages. Speaks very good tamiL, but doesn’t have good English
(or other language) ability. A bit of a Tamil chauvinist, he objects to
a kannaDiga person using Hindi on his phone rather than Kannada; and is
pained to see a tamiL’s child unable to speak tamiL. Predictably likes
“the great Cholas”.

Overall, thumbs up to this effective yet grounded master and his
splendid art! If Hindu activists of TN were to learn it, perhaps they
can more effectively counter mohammedan butchers who’ve claimed so many
of their fellows’ lives.

