+++
title = "Degüello"
full_title = "Degüello"
date = "2014-08-28"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/08/28/deguello/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/08/28/deguello/).

Degüello

There’s a new
[paper](//www.sciencemag.org/content/345/6200/1255832.full) out on the
genetic prehistory of the Canadian Arctic. Basically, it says that
existing Eskimos replaced a genetically different population less than
700 years ago, and that those earlier Paleo-Eskimos (Dorset culture)
represent yet another separate migration from Asia (in addition to the
PaleoIndians, the Na-Dene, and the Eskimo). They put this in such a
nice way: “the genetic continuity characterizing the Paleo-Eskimo period
was interrupted by the arrival of a new population.”

Which likely means that the neo-Eskimos killed off the Dorset people.
Obviously they weren’t farmers, the usual suspects in replacement, but
the new guys had a more sophisticated technology ( and probably greater
numbers) , with bows, large skin boats, dog sleds, whale-hunting gear,
etc. The neo-Eskimos have certainly done their share of fighting in
recent historical times – they went at it hammer-and-tongs with various
Amerindian tribes.

This is fairly obvious, so much so that even the New York Times and the
Washington Post mentioned extermination by the newcomers as a possible
explanation. There is no mention of that possibility in the original
research article, but I’m sure that some of the authors were quite aware
of it. What they said is probably influenced by the fear that saying
anything negative, no matter how true, might cause the Eskimos to refuse
cooperation in the future.

This pre-agricultural genocide makes you wonder just how often similar
wipeouts may happened in the past. Maybe the Gravettians and
Aurignacians weren’t the same people.



