+++
title = "At Least Erroneous in"
full_title = "At Least Erroneous in Faith"
date = "2014-08-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/08/09/at-least-erroneous-in-faith/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/08/09/at-least-erroneous-in-faith/).

At Least Erroneous in Faith

A large collection of prominent geneticists has published a group
[letter](http://cehg.stanford.edu/letter-from-population-geneticists/)
to the *New York Times Book Review* endorsing a negative review of
Nicholas Wade’s “A Troublesome Inheritance: Genes, Race, and Human
History.” They speak of “Wade’s misappropriation of research from our
field…” The list of signers includes an impressive group of geneticists
and others, claiming special expertise in their field. This deserves
some thoughtful evaluation.

The last half century of population genetics has been more or less
dominated by neutralism, a model of genetic change that postulated, in
its strong and common form, that population differences are a passive
reflection of histories of gene flow and genetic drift. In human
genetics, especially, selection has been of little interest. The idea of
group differences being products of natural selection is abhorrent to
many. The reaction to recent models of selection in humans recalls a
common quotation whose origin is
[murky](http://quoteinvestigator.com/2011/02/09/darwinism-hope-pray/)
but is often attributed to a Victorian lady, reacting to news of
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection: “My dear, I trust
that it is not true; but if it is, let us pray that it may not become
widely known.”

The authors and signatories of the letter number 144. Surely they must
speak with authority on this matter of Wade’s incorrect thought about
their field? In the last few years evolution by natural selection has
been appearing in the literature in various ways. There is a sea change
coming in evolutionary biology. My immediate associations are with Brian
Charlesworth, Francisco Ayala, Michael Lynch, Russell Lande, Michael
Rose, Steven Frank, H. Allen Orr, Peter Visscher, Nick Barton, and
Bernard Crespi come to mind. I am no expert in this domain, and I mean
no slight to folks who didn’t immediately jump into my head, in
particular the lot who write about evolutionary medicine. Interesting
that none of these are signatories of the letter. H. Allen Orr in
particular is curiously absent since he wrote the only sensible negative
[review](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2014/jun/05/stretch-genes/)
of Wade’s book I have seen.

There may be an interesting background to this inquisition. I suggest
starting with a reread of Geoffrey Miller’s
[editorial](http://www.economist.com/node/14742737) in the *Economist*
in 2009. He discusses the hype and high hopes of medical breakthroughs
from the Human Genome project, the collapse of that hope (continuing
since the 2009 article) and the rich harvest of knowledge of human
history and human evolution that the project has produced. Some of this
harvest is unwelcome, especially because it led to the resurgence of the
study of evolution by natural selection. Does this new direction
threaten the revenue stream from agencies like the Wellcome trust and
NIH? I remember a conversation with a colleague several years ago about
something I had written. “Of course you are right,” he said, “but you
know you are peeing in the swimming pool.”

I am especially curious about how Gregory Clark has managed to escape
the wrath of the righteous guardians of “our field.” His brilliant
economic
[history](http://www.amazon.com/Farewell-Alms-Economic-History-Princeton/dp/0691141282)
of the UK from medieval times up to 1800 is the most inflammatory book I
have read in years. He proposes that Darwinian natural selection
essentially bred a new version of humans, a version adapted to a stable
society with courts and contracts, low time preference, aversion to
violence, and middle class values. I have spent some time around
economists and I hear none of them whining about Clark’s book, calling
him a racist, and all the stuff a geneticist would get. How does he do
it?

