+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-03-24"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/24/dakshina-murti-sharabha/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/24/dakshina-murti-sharabha/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## dakShiNA mUrti &sharabha

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/image-7.png?w=755)

Like the sixteen special forms of dakShiNAmUrti, not much discussion
(other than the elaborate & scholarly treatment in [shrI Sreenivasa
Rao’s blog in case of
dakShiNAmUrti](https://sreenivasaraos.com/category/dakshinamurthy/)) is
visible about the various sharabha mUrti-s. The names do appear in the
context of sharabha digbandhana but it is unclear if each of these
mUrti-s have their own mantra-s or if variations of the popular mUla
mantra are used to invoke these special sharabha mUrti-s.

The sharabha murti-s would be vIra sharabha, agni sharabha, pralaya kAla
sharabha, Ananda sharabha, prachaNDa sharabha, kapAla chAmuNDa sharabha,
Ananda sharabha (uttara), ugra sharabha, kalyANa sharabha, pralaya kAla
mahAtANDava sharabha, dakShAdhvara dhvaMsana sharabha, aghora vIra
sharabha and finally the popular mahAsharabha. There is a certain saumya
(?) sharabha mantra used in the context of nR^isiMha upAsana. This
mantra is not to be found outside this context in most standard texts on
the topic other than the single paurANika reference. One can find a host
of various sharabha mantra-s scattered among various texts and it is
possible some of them have their own names and possibly accompanied by
[special sharabha
vidhi-s.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2017/04/09/sarabha-vidhi/)

The following list of dakShiNAmUrti-s is to be found in the mAlA mantra
sUkta which is a collection of sixteen mAlA mantra-s of the
dakShiNAmUrti-s mentioned below. A dakShiNAmUrti upAsaka initiated in
certain tradition is supposed to perform daily pArAyaNa of this sUkta.
The procedure involves performing standard preparatory ritual actions
till digbandhana and then one performs pArAyaNa of the dakShiNAmUrti
hR^idaya first, followed by the mUla mantra japa with all its a\~Nga-s
i.e. pUrvA\~Nga and uttarA\~Nga mantra-s. Then one performs pArAyaNa of
the mAlA mantra stava consisting the mAlA mantra-s of the following 16
dakShiNAmurti-s. This is followed up by the recital of the mantra varNA
valI stotraM, the jaganmohana kavachaM, the aShTottara and the
sahasranAma stotra-s.

suddha dakShiNAmUrti, medhA dakShiNAmUrti, vidyA dakShiNAmUrti , laxmI
dakShiNAmUrti , vAgIshvarAbhidAna shrI dakShiNAmUrti, vaTamUla
nivAsAbhidAna shrI dakShiNAmUrti , sAMba dakShiNAmUrti , haMsa
dakShiNAmUrti, lakuTa dakShiNAmUrti , chidaMbara dakShiNAmUrti , vIra
dakShiNAmUrti, vIrabhadra dakShiNAmUrti , kIrti dakShiNAmUrti , brahma
dakShiNAmUrti , shakti dakShiNAmUrti , siddha dakShiNAmUrti. Other than
these one comes across mUrti-s like trailokya mohana dakShiNAmurti and
apasmAra nAshaka dakShiNAmUrti (mentioned in the bhuvaneshvarI mantra
kakSha puTi)

guru, gaNapati, durgA (one tradition sees it as vanadurgA), kShetrapAla
& sarasvatI form the pUrvA\~Nga devata-s while bAlA, devI ShaDakSharI,
svarNAkarShana bhairava, mR^ita sa\~njIvinI & mahAmR^ityu\~njaya are
seen as the uttarA\~Nga devata-s of dakShiNAmUrti.

This entry was posted on March 24, 2021 at 2:30 pm and is filed under
[dakShiNAmUrti](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/dakshinamurti/),
[shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/),
[sharabha](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/sharabha/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/24/dakshina-murti-sharabha/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/24/dakshina-murti-sharabha/trackback/)
from your own site.

