+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-03-09"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/09/vatuka-bhairava-katha/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/09/vatuka-bhairava-katha/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## vaTuka bhairava katha

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/image-3.png?w=531)

This note will record two tales of vaTuka. One from the shiva purANa and
another from an unknown source but published from a booklet on [vaTuka
pUja vidhi to be done in kAshmIra desha and himAchal around shiva
rAtri.](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/08/15/the-trayodashi-rite-of-the-katha-dikshita-s/)

Seated in the Anandamudra, shiva mahAdeva surrounded by rudra gaNa-s,
intended to indulge in krIDa/play. Knowing the intent of their master,
the rudra gaNa-s were eager to carry out any command. mahAdeva saw that
his paramAshakti, pArvatI was located in a certain famous upavana/garden
named sundaratAla with many other devI-s and yoginI-s who formed her own
parivAra gaNa and that they are indulged in various preparations. Seeing
this, rudra-mahAdeva appeared in this garden as a terrible five headed,
fifteen eyed and eighteen handed form adorned with a kapAla mAla in the
form of svachChanda bhairava. Beholding this terrifying bhairava, the
yoginI-s out of fear ran hither and tither. The great mahAmAyA pArvatI
was angered at this and focused her attention on a nearby
jalakuMbha/water pot, from which vaTuka bhairava emerged with all his
Ayudha-s. Knowing that vaTuka alone would be unable to resist
svachChanda nAtha, devI now focused on a second jalakuMbha from which
emerged a gaNa by name ramaNa (ramaNa bhairava) endowed with good looks
and weapons. devI then created innumerable gaNa-s like this, all with an
intent to restrain svachChanda nAtha. The gaNa-s then rushed to attack,
but the primal bhairava disappeared by that time. The gaNa-s approached
devI who then said that, that since she created them as vaTu-s
(brahmachArin), the first will be known as vaTuka / vaTuka bhairava. To
another gaNa, mahAdevi uttered that since he was born from her shubha
dR^iShTi, he would be most pleasing to behold and since yogin-s would
sport (ramaNa) in his divya tejas, he would be known as ramaNa bhairava
who will be propitiated after vaTuka. Both were made leaders of their
own gaNa-s and devI granted the vara that they would be propitiated on
the trayodashI before the mahAshivarAtri.

From the shiva purANa: 13 of the koTi rudra saMhita

A great brAhmaNa named dadhIchi who was a great shiva bhakta and well
versed in the shaiva lore, had a son named sudarshana. sudarshana
married a woman who was born in a defiled family , from which he had
four sons. Before a certain shiva rAtri dadhIchi was to travel to a far
away place and before doing so has instructed his son sudarshana to
never stop shiva -rudrArchana. Though sudarshana and his sons continued
rudrArchana as per instructions, on the day of shiva rAtri, he indulged
in maithuna with his wife and performed shivArchana without taking a
bath earning him the displeasure of mahAdeva who then excommunicated and
ordered sudarshana not to touch him (rudra). The elderly brAhmaNa was
horrified to know of what transpired and after much lament, decided to
propitiate pArvatI along with sudarshana. mahAdevI appeared to the duo
as chanDikA after sometime, who then adopted sudarshana as her own son
and placed him in the lap of shiva and implored him to accept him. After
mahAdeva accepts sudarshana and his sons, they are given an upavIta and
gets initiated into the exalted sixteen lettered mantra known as the
shaiva gAyatri. After this he performed the great pUja to mahAdevA with
a variant of the pa\~nchAkSharI where mahAdeva is prefixed with ramA and
pleased rudra. chaNDikA then bestowed many vara-s upon him after which
shiva consecrated the four sons of sudarshana as vaTuka-s. chaNDikA
declared that vaTuka can accept the offerings made to her and calls
vaTuka as chaNDikA putra.

The shakti sa\~ngama tantra gives a similarly brief but a different tale
on the origin of vaTuka bhairava carrying a trishUla the three prongs of
which are presided by kAlI, tArA and chinnamastA.

Both katha-s have some features in common: 1) vaTuka as being associated
with devI primarily or initially. 2) There is an initial mild friction
evident in both stories. Friction between vaTuka and shiva i.e. between
two traditions where each might be a central deity 3) devI granting vara
to vaTuka. Does the second katha gives us the impression of a certain
bhairava tradition in practice or popular among non-brAhmaNa-s
integrating with the shaiva mata (with the mantra mArga/siddhAnta to be
precise)?

Coming to the vaTuka tradition popular in kAshmIra desha, [we gather the
following.](https://www.shehjar.com/blog/Vatak-Pooja-Book-&-audio-CD-launched256)
The vaTuka pUja seems to be an important, a much awaited ritual and
something involving the whole community/family of brAhmaNa-s in kAshmIr.
The festivities or rather the preparation for the grand vaTuka pUja
starts from the pratipat (first day of the fortnight) and lasts till the
amAvAsya where the visarjana of the pUja dravya-s is done and extends
till the eighth day of the Lunar calendar. On the pratipat one starts
preparing the house by cleaning etc. while on the second, third, fourth
and fifth one prepares the vessels, the pulses and other materials etc
that will be used in the vaTuka pUja. On the sixth and seventh one makes
preparations for the bhairava yAga and kShetresha is offered bali. On
the aShTamI one does lepana (smearing) of sugandha dravya-s (natural
perfumes) to the house and keeps vigil in the devAlaya. On navamI, one
acquires the pots required for the bhairava pUja. On this day a married
woman visits her parents house(? a bit unclear to me) and comes back to
the in-laws house with certain dravya-s (materials) on tenth. On the
ekAdashi, for removing vighna-s, bali of fish and meat are offered to
the 11 bhairava-s who are represented in different AlAya-s in kAshmIr.
On the twelfth, kShetresha pUja is done and one does sankalpa to perform
vaTuka pUja on the 13th, while placing walnuts in a small pot of certain
shape. On the thirteenth is the vaTuka pUja and on 14th the family and
relatives are to get together to wish each other on shivarAtri. The
visarjana of the pUja dravya-s happens on the amAvAsya.

The eleven bhairava-s mentioned above are detailed below. During vaTuka
pUja these 11 bhairava-s are invoked and offerings are made to them
together by uttering each name and the respective direction from East to
pAtAla and the middle. In the East – vaTuka nAtha, Agneya –
bhutabalebhyaH (? perhaps bhUteshvara bhairava), dakShiNa – vetAlarAja,
nairR^iti – bahukhAtakeshvara, pashchima – sthAnakShetrapAla, vAyavya –
ma\~NgalarAja, uttara – yoginI balebhyaH(?), IshAnya – vishvaksena,
Urdhva – jayaksena (jayatsena?), pAtAla – teja, and madhya – chaNDa. Is
it possible that originally it was tejashchaNDa which in time got
separated as tejas and chaNDa? The common practice is to invoke deities
from pUrva to IshAnya or when extended to pAtAla but invoking a non
central deity in the middle seems unusual. To quote from [AchArya’s post
on the pa\~nchAvaraNa
stava](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2008/02/26/the-panchavarna-stava/):
“5 (end) tejashchaNDa. tejashchaNDa is the equivalent of the agent of
rudra named chaNDeshvara in the context of saura-shaiva worship. This
section represents the sUryopAsana element of the shaiva-s.” This scheme
of vaTuka bhairava with 10 or 11 bhairava-s seems similar to the vaTuka
digbandhana mentioned in the previous post, though at the moment it is
unclear as to which system influenced the other.

A cursory examination of these names of the 11 bhairava-s gives the
impression that the above process might have evolved over a long period
(spanning a millennium perhaps) and has come to include in itself
deities of the siddhAnta, pA\~ncharAtra, and the bhairava traditions
along with local deities. As we know the shaiva siddhAnta, pA\~ncharAtra
and the various bhairava traditions were once flourishing in Kashmir. In
that way, the vaTuka puja of kAshmIra desha seems to be a pleasant
amalgam of diverse pan-Indian ritual traditions involving the
family-community. Hopefully we will get to see the [people of Kashmir
settle
back](http://shivajiganjoo.blogspot.com/2019/12/rashtradhipatis-of-pravarasenapuram.html)
and celebrate the vaTuka pUja with much fervour & vigour in entire Jammu
& Kashmir over the coming decades.

![[A picture of vaTuka
pUja](http://risingkashmir.com/home/news_description/373418/On-this-Herath-Is-Kashmir-really-incomplete-without-Kashmiri-Pandits)](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/image-5.png?w=1024)

Further notes on March 23rd:

Arthur Avalon mentions in his Shakti & Shakta in the context of pa\~ncha
makAra some vaTuka bhairava upAsaka-s follow brahmacharya and that they
do not indulge in rituals involving maithuna.

The jaina-s deploy the vaTuka bhairava mantra in different contexts.
During kShetrapAla pratiShTha a variant of the vaTuka bhairava mantra is
uttered in the ear of the deity/mUrti 27 times. In a different context
where sAdhana is done to get answers i.e. divination, the jaina-s record
the usage of standard mantra with some bIja-s added and it is mentioned
that the sAdhana is to be done with utmost care and that any lapse can
potentially cause madness.

Even in the Astika realm the mUla mantra is seen as not suitable to
everyone and often other bhairava mantra-s are suggested as alternate
options. The popular vaTuka Alaya in kAshI, offers [alcoholic drinks
along with meat as
naivedya](https://hindi.news18.com/photogallery/uttar-pradesh/varanasi-varanasi-unique-temple-of-lord-shiva-where-people-offer-non-veg-and-liquor-upat-3384411.html)
during night/evening to the boy bhairava.

This entry was posted on March 9, 2021 at 4:39 pm and is filed under
[bhairava](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/bhairava/),
[shaiva](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/). You can
follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/09/vatuka-bhairava-katha/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/09/vatuka-bhairava-katha/trackback/)
from your own site.

