+++
title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI –"
full_title = "devAmR^itavarShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी"
date = "2021-03-01"
upstream_url = "https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/01/list-of-bhairava-s/"

+++
Source: [here](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/01/list-of-bhairava-s/).

devAmR^ita-varShiNI – देवामृत वर्षिणी

## List of bhairava-s

As the standard list is well known, we will start those that are part of
the vaTuka digbandhana.

hetuka bhairava, tripurAntaka bhairava, agnibhetAla (vetAla) bhairava,
yamajihva bhairava, kAla bhairava, karAla bhairava, ekapAda bhairava,
bhIma bhairava, nirAlaMba bhairava & baDabAnala bhairava invoked
beginning from pUrva to pAtAla.

Of these the hetuka could be an alternate reading of heruka seen in
bauddha tantra-s. \[Update on March 26th: A kAshmIrian text gives the
name as heruka instead of hetuka. heruka is probably the correct
reading\]

In the kubjikA tradition we encounter a list of bhairava-s which are not
seen together elsewhere. Or at-least they seem to be not that popular
going by contemporary publications on the topic. Here they occur as part
of a mahAmAraNa prayoga rite with pratya\~NgirA as the main deity
combined with kubjikA or rudra kubjikA. The bhairava-s here would be,
chaNDograshUlapANi bhairava, pretAkarShaNa bhairava, svarNAkarShaNa
bhairava, vIrAkarShaNa bhairava, jIvAkarShaNa bhairava,
mahogravirUpAnanda bhairava, kubja bhairava and chaNDa bhairava. There
are to be placated in the shmashAna with makAra-s and mahAmAMsa! In
recent times we have an incident where a [bauddha mantrin was made a
guest of
vaivasvata](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/10/05/the-encounter-with-the-pashanda-s-of-the-nastika-mata/)
by deploying the above. It is interesting to note that one of the
bhairava-s who is seen as an a\~Nga vidya for high deities like
vanadurgA and ShoDhashI, in their respective traditions, is also
associated with this pratya\~NgirA rite.

The bhairavAShTaka of the svachchanda bhairava system. kapAlIsha
bhairava, shikhivAhana bhairava, krodharAja bhairava, vikarAla bhairava,
manmatha bhairava, meghanAdeshvara, somarAja bhairava & vidyA rAja
bhairava. All these bhairava-s are five headed, three eyed, ten handed,
adorned with the moon and a kapAla mAla and shining like gems (mANikya).
Their colors are yellow, red, dark like the rain laden clouds, fire,
black , smoky, moon like and the last as crystal.

Other Notes from the svachchanda:

\*astrANi-lokapAlAshcha-bhairavAShTaka\* meva cha

pa\~nchabrahmAnyathA\~NgAni etAnyAvaranAni tu

As for the bhairavI:

yAdR^ishaM bhairavaM rUpaM bhairavyAstAdR^igeva hi

IshatkarAla vadanAM gaMbhIravipulasvanAM

prasannAsyAM sadAdhyAyedbhairavIM vismitekShaNAM

kShemarAja vyAkhya: karAlatvaM bhairavAnukArataH pAshabhakShaNAt,
gaMbhIravipuilasvanatvaM vimarsha prAdhAnyAt, prasannAsyatvaM,
prasannAsyatvaM parabhairavAnu rUpyeNa anugraha pravaNatvAt, ataeva
bhairavamudrAnupraveshAdeva vismitekShaNatvaM.

Ayudha notes: 1) khaDga 2) kheTaka 3) pAsha 4)a\~nkusha 5) shara 6)
pinAka 7) varada mudrA 8) abhaya mudrA 9)muNDa 10)khaTvA\~Nga 11) vINa
12) Damaru 13) ghaNTA 14) trishUla 15) vajra 16) daNDa 17) parashu 18)
mudgara

khaDgena GYAnashaktyAtmanA pAshachChedanaM, kheTakena kriyAshakti rUpeNa
bhaktAnAM saMsAratrAsa pariharaNaM, pAshena vishvabandhanena
svAtantryaM, a\~nkushena tadAkarShaNaM, sharapinAkAbhyAM
kAraNagranthimAlA bhedanaM, varadAbhaya hastena bhogamoxa pradatvaM,
muNDadhAraNena akhyAtAtamaka mAyAmuNDApahartutvaM, anAshritAntasya
vishvasya asthi kara\~NkasthAnIyasya svachidbhittilagnatvaM khaTvA\~Nga
dhAraNena, vINADamaru ghaNTAbhiH mandratAramadhyadhvani
vaichitryAshrayanAdAvamarshanibhAlanAvahita shaktitvaM, ichChA GYAna
kriyAyogi svAtantrya shakti daNDena trishUlena pAshatraya shAtanaM,
vajreNa Urdhva sthitechChAdi shakti trayena adhaH sthitaiShaNIyAdi
trayeNa cha asheShavishvAtmaka nija shaktitvaM, daNDena niyati
shaktyAtmanA vishva niyamanaM, parashunA halAkR^itinA nAdashaktyAtmanA,
mudgareNa bindushakti rUpeNa asheSha bheda vidAraNa chUrNIkaraNaM, siMho
– vidyeshvara sadAshiva shakti shivAtmaka pa\~nchAnanashchitsphAraH
tasya charma charitaM, gajasya, vitatavitatasya mAyatmana uktasvarUpa
siMhanirbhedasya charma charitaM vilasitaM svasvarUpa
saMlagnatvAtparIdhAnaM bodhAbhedAtmaka svasvarUpopari parivartamAnaM
yasya…

![](https://goghritam.files.wordpress.com/2021/03/image-1.png?w=918)

This entry was posted on March 1, 2021 at 9:29 am and is filed under
[bhairava](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/category/shaiva/bhairava/).
You can follow any responses to this entry through the [RSS
2.0](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/01/list-of-bhairava-s/feed/)
feed. You can [leave a response](#respond), or
[trackback](https://goghritam.wordpress.com/2021/03/01/list-of-bhairava-s/trackback/)
from your own site.

