+++
title = "Some comments about a"
full_title = "Some comments about a humanities apology"
date = "2018-03-11"
upstream_url = "https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/03/11/some-comments-about-a-humanities-apology/"

+++
Source: [here](https://agnimaan.wordpress.com/2018/03/11/some-comments-about-a-humanities-apology/).

Some comments about a humanities apology



Original article
[here](https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2017/11/no-case-humanities/).

(Please read the comments as being imaginarily addressed to the author)

“Progressives who want to turn the humanities into a laboratory for
social change, a catalyst for cultural revolution, a training camp for
activists, are guilty of the same instrumentalization. When they impose
de facto ideological litmus tests for scholars working in every field,
they betray their conviction that the humanities exist only to serve a
contemporary political and social end.” :-) Reminds me of NN Taleb
saying: “Humanities academics are rejects w/no common sense substituting
thinking w/universal slogans, destroying student’s discernment,
reasoning”.

“From that period on, for two centuries, to become a reputable and
licensed teacher of theology, you needed to produce hundreds and
hundreds of pages of densely argued commentary on the Sentences of Peter
Lombard, a twelfth-century compendium of theology. Tens of thousands of
these commentaries weigh down the shelves of European manuscript
libraries, many of them probably never actually read in the seven
hundred odd years since they were written. Masters of arts wrote
commentaries on Aristotle. These number again in the thousands—so many
that we do not even know how many still exist, much less what they
actually say.” – Reminds me of the expectation from paNDita-s of worth
to produce a commentary on a nyAya or kAvyashAstra text in our past.

“Academic overproduction has always been a feature of the university and
always will be. It is structural. Academic works are written for many
reasons—for qualification, for institutional and personal advancement,
even to be a lasting contribution. But they are not written to be read,
at least in the normal sense of the term.” – Insightful and true. This
one I must save.

“Another says that the humanities is about the search for values. But
“values” is a hard thing to put in a long diachronic frame because it is
not clear that there is any analogous notion in any culture besides our
own.” – hehe. we call it puruShArtha-s bro.

“No one is ever going to want to learn Sanskrit because it will give
them a leg up in a fast-moving economy. No, people want to learn
Sanskrit for inscrutable reasons, and along the way they may (or may
not) obtain mental sharpness and intellectual agility.” – yeah,
inscrutable to you. And the “mental sharpness” may or may not come to
those such as you westerners who claim to be sanskrit scholars but are
unable and unlikely to ever compose a decent kAvya or even converse at
length.

“But do they? An informal survey of humanities scholars might not lead
one to optimism on that score. Even then, incommensurate paradigms pose
a challenge. A polyamorist who volunteers for Greenpeace may be one
person’s ethical paradigm; a staunch monogamist who happens to drive an
SUV is another’s. But they are not obviously compatible with each other.
Which one would a humanistic education produce?” – yeah, stay confused.
it’s up to the ideology to have the infrastructure for producing \*its\*
humanities scholars. In our case we want Arya-s like vyAsa, vAlmIki …
and appayya dIxita.

“They did, however, believe that conjugating irregular verbs would
mysteriously produce moral improvement (perhaps it did), but they were
not too concerned about how. They simply believed in the humanities, and
knew from experience that they would bring students above the categories
of nation, vocation, and time to become members of a class constrained
by no such boundaries.” – first sentence is good, but you slip in the
second. In our case, saMskAra was to be accumulated in a variety of
areas – language, music, dance, ritual etc.., and the notion was not to
join the ranks of the sages of yore.

“The humanities and the university do need defenders, and the arts have
had advocates as long as they have existed. The way to defend the arts
is to practice them.” – Good – you got it. Especially the last sentence.
I’ve seen far far better nyAya, vyAkaraNa and kAvya savants OUTSIDE
universities than within them.

“The humanities, which predate the university and may well survive it,
will endure—even if there is no case to defend them.” – too bad you
haven’t got a case. you’re quite condescending with the first part
though. Independently wealthy people (not in the sense of having lots of
money but in the sense of not needing much more than they have/ get)
will quite ably take it forward (as they always have).

