+++
title = "Podcast countdown to"
full_title = "Podcast countdown to 2021 day 3, Thomas Chatterton Williams beyond black and white"
date = "2020-12-28"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-3-thomas"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-3-thomas).


Podcast countdown to 2021 - day 3,  Thomas Chatterton Williams: beyond black and white



![But he does look good in black and white, doesn’t
he?](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fbb36ebcc-2c4e-4fdc-8bcf-29c3fa48861e_940x529.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

In anticipation of releasing new podcasts in 2021, including with
[Armand Leroi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armand_Marie_Leroi) and
[Alina Chan](https://twitter.com/Ayjchan), I’ve been reposting some of
my favorite conversations of the past few years in the last week of the
current year.**I'm counting down to the new year here by re-releasing a
favorite past episode from the archives of my other podcast homes each
day until 2021.**Hope you'll discover a memorable voice or two you
might have missed before. If they weren’t famous to you before, I hope
they are now.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-3-thomas?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some guests need no introduction. [In 2020, Thomas Chatterton
Williams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Chatterton_Williams) is
one of those individuals. But back in March of 2019, when we talked for
1 hour and 15 minutes he was neither quite as internet-notorious nor as
widely fêted. The author of two books, [Losing My Cool: Love,
Literature, and a Black Man's Escape from the
Crowd](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0143119621/geneexpressio-20)
and [Self-Portrait in Black and White: Family, Fatherhood, and
Rethinking
Race](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0393358542/geneexpressio-20),
Thomas has also become renowned and reviled for his role in organizing
“[the
letter](https://harpers.org/a-letter-on-justice-and-open-debate/) ”,
which made a calm plea for open debate and discussion on the Left.

Since reaching that level of visibility in the summer of 2020 Thomas has
been caught up in a series of “internet-controversies.” But as much as I
appreciate his cool under social-media pressure, there has always been a
lot more to him than internet drama, and over the course of our
discussion, we get into his background as a mixed-race black American,
his ex-pat life in France and the birth of his “white presenting”
children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Also, if you were too busy over the holidays, my series of five quick
pieces from this holiday season:

[The Age of Genetic Engineering
Begins](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins)

[The Original Chinese
Man](https://razib.substack.com/p/3000-years-of-chinese-history)

[Applying IQ to IQ](https://razib.substack.com/p/applying-iq-to-iq)

[Your Roots are
Showing](https://razib.substack.com/p/your-roots-are-showing)

[In Gods We Trusted](https://razib.substack.com/p/in-god-we-trusted)

*One reason I shared this sampler of my writing was to leave those
considering
a[subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?)plenty of time
to grab one at Substack’s lowest rates b**efore I adjust the pricing
upward in the new year.***

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

