+++
title = "Podcast countdown to"
full_title = "Podcast countdown to 2021 day 6, Chris Stringer the state of paleoanthropology in the 2010's"
date = "2020-12-31"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/revisiting-chris-stringer-the-state"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/revisiting-chris-stringer-the-state).

Podcast countdown to 2021 - day 6, Chris Stringer: the state of paleoanthropology in the 2010's



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F28c89d25-5bdb-4d97-b363-210d6b413a62_600x338.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

I'm counting down to the new year here by re-releasing favorite past
episodes from the archives of my other podcast homes each day until
2021. Hope you'll discover a memorable voice or two you might have
missed before. These episodes are free for all; next on the docket are
new episodes for paying subscribers only, including conversations
with[Armand
Leroi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armand_Marie_Leroi)and[Alina
Chan](https://twitter.com/Ayjchan).

**My conversation with Armand releases today for paid
[subscribers](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?).**

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/revisiting-chris-stringer-the-state?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

With the steady downpour of new fossil finds and ever more freshly
sequenced ancient DNA, ours is an era of plenty in the field of human
evolution. In June of 2020, I had a chance to record a long discussion
for *The Insight* podcast with [Chris
Stringer](https://www.nhm.ac.uk/our-science/departments-and-staff/staff-directory/chris-stringer.html),
one of the doyens of human paleoanthropology. We talked about all the
discoveries we've been lucky to witness over the past few years on these
topics of such incredible interest to the general public.

Stringer has been active in the field for decades, first as an early
advocate of the African origin of modern humans, and now as an
all-around synthesizer and public intellectual. His gift for
communicating the pith of abstruse results is on fine display in this
conversation. I enjoyed it very much and I hope you will too.

This is day 6 of 6. Here is day 1:[Shadi
Hamid](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-1-shadi),
day 2:[Vagheesh
Narasimhan](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-2-vagheesh),
day 3:[Thomas Chatterton
Williams](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-3-thomas),
day 4:[Alexander
Ioannidis](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-4-alexander),
day 5: [Suhag
Sukhla](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-5-suhag).

And in case you missed them in the busy runup to the holidays, here is
my series of five quick pieces from last week:

[The Age of Genetic Engineering
Begins](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins)

[The Original Chinese
Man](https://razib.substack.com/p/3000-years-of-chinese-history)

[Applying IQ to IQ](https://razib.substack.com/p/applying-iq-to-iq)

[Your Roots are
Showing](https://razib.substack.com/p/your-roots-are-showing)

[In Gods We Trusted](https://razib.substack.com/p/in-god-we-trusted)

*One reason I shared this sampler of my writing was to leave those
considering
a[subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?)plenty of time
to grab one at Substackâ€™s lowest rates b**efore I adjust the pricing
upward in the new year.***

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

