+++
title = "The age of genetic"
full_title = "The age of genetic engineering begins"
date = "2020-12-19"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins).

The age of genetic engineering begins



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fb2b6977e-fbd7-4854-9230-2dd5f994ed7c_1000x667.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

The holidays are upon us. By way of thanking all of you for being so
willing to support my fledgling substack project, **this week I'm
releasing a little set of year-end mini-posts.** These
are**five**quick daily reads about the state as I see it
of**five**sectors I follow. Might have been perfect for raising the
level of chitchat at a normal year's run of December parties. In 2020, I
hope they'll edify if it's not your field and that you'll let me know
what I'm missing if it's your bailiwick I'mreflecting on.

Thank you for reading, for
[subscribing](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?)**,** and for
forwarding to friends who you think might enjoy. A quick administrative
note: I'll be adjusting my Substack price levels upward in the new year
so now is a great time to grab a paid
[subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?) if you've been
considering. Or to use Substack's
[gift](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?gift=true) option while the
prices are lowest. Cheers!

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the late 2000s Peter Thiel and Tyler Cowen made waves arguing that
technological progress had declined since the middle of the 20th
century. Having spent my adulthood in the period between 2000 and 2020,
I was quite open to the idea. I watched the Jetsons. **We don’t live in
the world of the Jetsons.**

But there is room for hope. We may not have flying cars, but we are now
grasping the machinery of life itself and reshaping it. To behold
today’s changes in biology is to witness a revolution.

The last twenty years have seen a massive crash in the price of genomic
sequencing:

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fdae62048-6e45-4480-9ac2-93b23c788e58_1456x819.jpeg)

While the first human genome cost $3 billion dollars, you can now get a
good quality medical-grade genome for $1,000. I got my genome sequenced
during a sale for $300 two years ago. Meanwhile, in 2014 I got my [son
sequenced](https://www.technologyreview.com/2014/06/13/172528/for-one-baby-life-begins-with-genome-revealed/)
while still in utero for free as part of a university project. In less
than a generation, genomics has gone from blue-sky giga-science to cheap
commodity consumer technology. About 10% of Americans have availed
themselves of direct-to-consumer genomics, and it is so banal that South
Park even [did an episode](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8uvAn6Mk-s)
on the theme.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

**CRISPR!**

If genomics is the reading revolution, then genetic engineering is
writing. Strangely, genetic engineering predates genomics by decades, in
the form of [recombinant DNA
technology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recombinant_DNA#History). This
is a cumbersome method of modification whereby gene fragments from one
organism are inserted into vectors such as bacterial plasmids or
viruses, which can then transfer them into the organism of interest.
Though this technology had early [successes in the
1970’s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genentech#History), its
application was constrained due to limitations in scope and scale. The
clunky multistep process of cutting DNA and stitching them into
intermediate vectors which must be grown in cultures, and then inserted
into the target organism, required large investments and deep
institutional support. This is a reason that genetic engineering with
recombinant DNA was notable in the context of
[agribusiness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roundup_Ready#History).
Massive corporate resources were necessary to implement and execute the
technology as anything more than a curiosity.

If recombinant DNA technology allowed us to play God, it was a small
primitive tribal god. As long as genetic engineering was restricted to
expensive tinkering you’d be more likely to encounter it in science
fiction than *Scientific American*.

[CRISPR-Cas9](http://www.crisprtx.com/gene-editing/crispr-cas9) changed
this in 2012. This form of genetic engineering became mainstream within
science almost immediately and transformed laboratories overnight. It
was a revelation in its power, flexibility, and ease of execution.
Recombinant DNA technology arose in a pre-genomic era. CRISPR came to
prominence during a period when genomics was already a banal part of a
biologist’s toolkit. Not only was CRISPR technology much more effective
as far as genetic engineering went, biologists now had “maps” that they
could use as guides, rather than grasping blindly through vast,
uncharted terrain. It is like the difference between Phoenicians sailing
into vast oceans guided only by the positions of the stars, and the
celestial mechanics deployed by NASA to explore the solar system with
laser-like precision.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

**Innovation’s preconditions**

The confluence of technologies is critical for takeoff in a particular
sector. The ancient Greeks had primitive toy steam engines, but their
mathematical and metallurgical science would not have enabled full-scale
industrialization. It was not just a lack of vision or focus. The
ancient world was not ready to harness steam as the motor for
industrialization.

Similarly, mass-scale genetic engineering wouldn’t have been feasible
even if CRISPR-Cas9 had been discovered in the 1980s. For example, the
gene for Huntington’s Disease wasn’t identified until 1993. The major
age of gene discovery actually post-dates the development of early
genetic engineering. The
[PCR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymerase_chain_reaction#:~:text=Polymerase%20chain%20reaction%20(PCR)%20is,amount%20to%20study%20in%20detail.)
method which makes genetic testing so simple and ubiquitous wasn’t
widely used until the 1990s. Also, advances in other fields like stem
cells [produce incredible
synergies](https://www.synthego.com/crispr-stem-cells#:~:text=Since%20its%20discovery%2C%20CRISPR%2DCas9,body%20as%20personalized%20cell%20therapies.&text=CRISPR%2DCas9%20has%20since%20been,diseases%20as%20hemophilia%20and%20HIV.)
between the ability to edit genomes and their practical applications in
medicine and health. CRISPR-Cas9 allows for the efficient and precise
editing of genomes, but modern stem cell technology allows for the
production of modified cells at a large scale that will not be rejected
by the patient’s body.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

**The end of Mendelian disease**

![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F7238df28-f737-440f-9137-772e1ee2935d_1200x630.png)

Genetically edited stem cells were critical in the breakthrough that may
help cure [many individuals suffering from sickle-cell
disease](https://qz.com/africa/1943510/scientists-progress-on-sickle-cell-disease-cure-with-gene-editing/).
This illustrates the reality that genetic engineering is not magic.
There are important practical questions of how you edit the cells, and
how you can get the changes to suffuse tissue and effect a cure. But in
many cases, those obstacles will be overcome. There are [encouraging
trials](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2018/08/180830143205.htm)
in dogs on muscular dystrophy, a disease caused by mutations in the
largest gene in the genome. Trials are [also beginning for cystic
fibrosis](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-02111-z). These are
two childhood and young-adult diseases which inflict great suffering
upon so many, but which may soon be wholly unfamiliar names to the
young.

What these diseases have in common is that they are Mendelian conditions
caused by impactful mutations in single genes. Often they are recessive
or sex-linked. They are the bread and butter of medical genetics. But
will they always be?

Because of the simple genetic characteristic of these diseases, the
“target” for genetic engineering is narrow and precise. Fix the
mutations and fix the diseases.

A combination of prenatal screening and gene editing in adults may mean
that many Mendelian diseases are stamped out in the next twenty years.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

**The persistence of polygenic disease**

Many conditions are not due to simple genetic causes but rather to a
mutational burden across many genetic positions. There are [hundreds of
genes](https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/type-2-diabetes/#causes)
implicated in the risk for type 2 diabetes. And then CRISPR-Cas9 is a
notably accurate and precise technology, but even it sometimes produces
errors. “Off-target effects.” Attempting to fix polygenic conditions may
introduce many new errors (perhaps, soberingly, even [causing
cancer](https://cen.acs.org/business/Untangling-CRISPR-cancer-scare/96/i27)).

Also, polygenic diseases often have environmental factors that impact
risk, so a genetic fix may not “cure you.” It would just alter your risk
profile.

The reality is that for most genetic traits, which are due to lots of
genes, genetic engineering will be a matter of science fiction for at
least another generation. It is worth noting, that unfortunately, it is
unlikely that there will be a genetic cure for schizophrenia or autism,
which are highly heritable mental illnesses caused by mutations across
many loci.

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

**The genetic engineering of “things”**

The other major aspect of the “writing revolution” in genetics in the
2020’s besides better health through the beating back of Mendelian
diseases is likely to be in the area of the modification of non-human
organisms. In other words, basically everything besides us. GMO’s are
still taboo in much of the developed world, but on a planet of eight
billion humans subject to the exigencies of climate change, it seems
likely that many nations will begin to invest in producing better crops
and livestock to wring more out of scarce land. Mistakes in the context
of medicine and health are deadly, but in plant and animal breeding
dead-ends are common and not problematic. Due to simple Malthusian
pressures, it is easy to imagine the proliferation of heat and cold
resistant crops or super fecund livestock that are more efficient at
converting feed to meat. “Meat things.” Traditional practices are
limited by the methods of evolution, breeding within a species or
amongst closely related species. Genetic engineering opens up the
possibility of broad synergies across the tree of life. Keeping things
“natural” and “organic” may become a developed-world luxury. Intelligent
design in evolution may not be our past, but it could be our future!

**An unnatural world**

The next decade will not see an end to hunger or illness. But, there may
well be less disease. There will be more choices for producers in crops
and livestock. The phrase “better living through chemistry” dates to the
1930’s. **The 2020’s may usher in “better living through genetics.”**
Though I suspect that this revolution won’t be advertised...

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thank you again for reading, for subscribing and for forwarding to
friends who you think might enjoy. A quick administrative note: I'll be
adjusting my Substack price levels upward in the new year so now is a
great time to grab a paid subscription if you've been considering. Or to
use Substack's gift option while the prices are lowest. Cheers!

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

