+++
title = "Podcast countdown to"
full_title = "Podcast countdown to 2021 day 5, Suhag Shukla Hindus in America"
date = "2020-12-30"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-5-suhag"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-5-suhag).

Podcast countdown to 2021 - day 5, Suhag Shukla: Hindus in America



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F392744d1-9c87-4015-a57c-140f64f44537_400x400.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

I'm counting down to the new year here by re-releasing favorite past
episodes from the archives of my other podcast homes each day until
2021. Hope you'll discover a memorable voice or two you might have
missed before. These episodes are free for all; next on the docket are
new episodes for paying subscribers only, including conversations
with[Armand
Leroi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armand_Marie_Leroi)and[Alina
Chan](https://twitter.com/Ayjchan).

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-5-suhag?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

What is a Hindu? In pre-modern times that might encompass all the people
of the Indian subcontinent, irrespective of ethnicity or religion. But
over the past few centuries, the term has narrowed to include just those
who adhere to the subcontinent’s indigenous religious traditions And,
over the last decades of the 20th century and into the early 21st, these
people have migrated in large numbers to the United States. About 1% of
Americans are now of Indian origin, and the majority of those are Hindu.

[Suhag Shukla](https://twitter.com/suhagashukla) is an attorney and
executive director of the [Hindu American
Foundation](https://www.hinduamerican.org/). In an hour-long
wide-ranging conversation we recorded in the summer of 2019 for *Brown
Pundits* we explore what it means to be Hindu in American in the year
2019. As it happens, the most prominent person of the Hindu faith today
in the United States is not of Indian subcontinental origin: Tulsi
Gabbard. Additionally, the hold of Hinduism on many Indian Americans
whose family traditions are of that faith seems to be tenuous at best.

Shukla’s organization is fundamentally American, recapitulating the
pattern of ancient faiths adapting to the American landscape like
Judaism and Roman Catholicism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is day 5 of 6. Here is day 1:[Shadi
Hamid](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-1-shadi),
day 2:[Vagheesh
Narasimhan](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-2-vagheesh),
day 3:[Thomas Chatterton
Williams](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-3-thomas),
4: [Alexander
Ioannidis](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-4-alexander).

Also, if you were too busy over the holidays, my series of five quick
pieces from this holiday season:

[The Age of Genetic Engineering
Begins](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins)

[The Original Chinese
Man](https://razib.substack.com/p/3000-years-of-chinese-history)

[Applying IQ to IQ](https://razib.substack.com/p/applying-iq-to-iq)

[Your Roots are
Showing](https://razib.substack.com/p/your-roots-are-showing)

[In Gods We Trusted](https://razib.substack.com/p/in-god-we-trusted)

*One reason I shared this sampler of my writing was to leave those
considering
a[subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?)plenty of time
to grab one at Substack’s lowest rates b**efore I adjust the pricing
upward in the new year.***

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

