+++
title = "Buffalo gourds and"
full_title = "Buffalo gourds and Josephson junctions"
date = "2017-08-04"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/04/buffalo-gourds-and-josephson-junctions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/04/buffalo-gourds-and-josephson-junctions/).

Buffalo gourds and Josephson junctions

Every technique is in competition with rival techniques. This inhibits
the development of new techniques, even if they have high potential in
the long run. To succeed, they have to beat out existing techniques *in
the short run*.

For example, there are potential advantages for superconducting
electronics for computing, but CMOS keeps improving. It’s a moving
target: it’s not enough to be good, or interesting, you have to be
better. Soon, not in 50 years. This is particularly difficult
considering the enormous amount of resources currently invested in
improving semiconductor computing technology.

In the same way, one successful domestication tends to inhibit other
domestications. Several crops were domesticated in the eastern United
States, but with the advent of maize and beans, most were abandoned.
Maybe if those Amerindians had continued to selectively breed sumpweed
for a few thousand years, it would have been competitive: but nobody is
that crazy. Pretty crazy, but not that crazy.

Teosinte was an unpromising weed: it’s hard to see why anyone bothered
to try to domesticate it, and it took a long time to turn it into maize.
If someone had brought wheat to Mexico six thousand years ago, likely
the locals would have dropped maize like a hot potato. But maize
ultimately had advantages: it’s a C4 plant, while wheat is C3: maize
yields can be much higher.

Modern scientific plant breeders seldom or never start with a wild plant
and try to domesticate it. Instead they modify already-domesticated
plants. Many wild plants *could be* domesticated, but people aren’t
willing to put in the huge effort required to get that plant to the
point of being competitive with existing, highly optimized crops.

Maybe they should: but there’s a huge startup cost. Plant breeders at
the University of Arizona made efforts to domesticate buffalo gourd as
drought-tolerant source of oi, protein, and starch. But that was 35
years ago: the natural fate of such long-term projects is death by
boredom, impatience, and retirement..

Why didn’t people domesticate foxes, back in the day? Is it because
foxes are solitary hunters, don’t have the right pack structure and thus
can’t be domesticated, blah blah blah? No: they’re easy to domesticate,
at least they if you’re a crazy Russian. But we already had dogs: what
was the point?

