+++
title = "Psychometrics"
full_title = "Psychometrics"
date = "2017-08-21"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/21/psychometrics/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/21/psychometrics/).

Psychometrics

Jared Diamond says ” Sound evidence for the existence of human
differences in intelligence that parallel human differences in
technology is lacking.”

In short, he dismisses the entire field of psychometrics. Doesn’t even
bother to argue about it. The word “IQ” isn’t even in the book.

Regional scores on IQ tests and educational test scores *do* track
regional differences in technology. Not perfectly – northeast Asians
have the highest scores but have not made the largest contributions to
the development of modern technology – but very well. Populations that
have low average scores on such tests have contributed very little to
the development of modern science and technology.

It’s a ballsy approach – implying that’s the whole field is just
pointless crap, not even worth discussing. It’s how I would deal with
astrology or gender studies. It’s how everybody should have dealt with
Freudian analysis.

There may be a valid argument, starting from basic evolutionary
principles, that humans should have a general problem-solving ability,
not just a bunch of distinct mental modules like face recognition, but I
haven’t seen it. At least not one that’s blindingly obvious. I doubt if
there is a similarly obvious argument that a pencil-and-paper test over
an hour or so should give a reasonable measurement of that general
problem-solving ability, one that can predict ( to a fair extent) how
someone will do at learning difficult material and solving complex
problems, even years later.

It works, though.

If there was some fatal flaw in our methods of testing academic
aptitude, you’d see some people that had low test scores but were still
whizzes at electrical engineering or molecular biology. But we don’t see
that.

If Diamond were right ( and the tests wrong), there would be tremendous
arbitraging opportunities, something like how sabermetrics showed
baseball managers how to identify undervalued players. For example, if
people from PNG were indeed significantly smarter than the world
average, UCLA could develop powerhouse departments, full of likely
future Nobelists, at low cost. People would eventually try to look
intelligent by putting a bone through their nose. Why hasn’t this
happened? Pure stubbornness? Shouldn’t Harvard pre-emptively adopt this
policy, in order to stay on top?

