+++
title = "mtDNA capers"
full_title = "mtDNA capers"
date = "2017-08-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/17/mtdna-capers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/08/17/mtdna-capers/).

mtDNA capers

There’s an interesting pattern in the mtDNA of archaic humans.
Neanderthals have mtDNA that’s a lot closer to that of anatomically
modern humans than to Denisovans, although Neanderthals and Denisovans
are close if you look at nuclear DNA. While really ancient mtDNA from
Atapuerca is like Denisovan DNA.

People now suspect that there was a bit of contact between Neanderthals
and AMH a long time, maybe two interglacials ago, contact that led to a
mtDNA lineage from AMH humans being introduced into Neanderthals – one
that spread until all (or almost all) Neanderthals had it.

This kind of thing is especially likely to happen with mtDNA, because
there is reason to suspect that Neanderthals had crummy mtDNA.

The first problem is that there may not have been enough Neanderthals.
Selection is not very effective in removing deleterious alleles when
their selective disadvantage is \< 1/N. For Neanderthals, some analyses
indicate the effective population size was around 1000 (others think it
was a large but deeply subdivided population), but the effective pop for
mtDNA (haploid and only transmitted by females ) was 1/4th that – so, N
\~250. Not very big.

The other, general, problem with mtDNA is lack of recombination. In an
asexual lineage, mutations accumulate. [Muller's
ratchet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muller%27s_ratchet). The only fix
is back-mutation, which is very rare, unless the species population size
is huge. Sex, on the other hand, reshuffles: a kid can have fewer
deleterious mutations than either parent.

So you don’t expect hominid mtDNA to be in great shape, nearly perfectly
optimized. That’s closer to true for nuclear genes. Since hominid mtDNA
is not too close to optimal, it’s not a huge surprise if population A
has noticeably more effective mitochondria than population B.

Since mtDNA also does something very important, Neanderthal mtDNA being
replaced by AMH mtDNA isn’t particularly surprising. Along the same line
of thought, zero success of Neanderthal mtDNA in modern humans is also
not terribly surprising. Neanderthal and AMH mtdna being so functionally
close as to be effectively neutral – now that would be surprising.

