+++
title = "Common deleterious"
full_title = "Common deleterious recessives info for Taleb"
date = "2019-01-09"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/01/09/common-deleterious-recessives-info-for-taleb/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/01/09/common-deleterious-recessives-info-for-taleb/).

Common deleterious recessives: info for Taleb.

There are two reasons that you might see common deleterious recessive
alleles in a population.

Founder effects or other bottlenecks: the population is so small that
some ungood mutations have become unusually common, just by chance. The
total number of bad mutations is generally not higher, but particular
ones are. Since they’re usually recessive, a 10% frequency of one bad
gene causes more trouble \[ 1% homozygotes) than 5% frequency of two
different bad genes \[ 0.5% homozygotes\] .

If you mix a lot with neighboring populations, gene frequencies tend to
even out. But endogamy is not the cause: it’s going through a time of
very small population size. You’re not going to see a lot of unusually
common Mendelian diseases driven by mutation in a population that has
been large for a long time, even if they are endogamous.

Second reason is that an allele has heterozygote advantage, increases
the fitness of heterozygotes, like sickle-cell or cystic fibrosis. These
tend to cluster in metabolic paths related to the selective agent: in
areas with lots of malaria, you see a number related to hemoglobin or
the red cell. We have fairly recently found a couple that defend against
sleeping sickness: likely we will find more.

Common deleterious mutations due to bottlenecks are random: they don’t
cluster in metabolic paths.

Most deleterious mutations are rare, haven’t been around for long. If
you marry your first cousin, the odds of a kid being a homozygote for
some such go way up, since the cousin has a fair chance of sharing that
rare mutation. On the other hand, if the mutation is common in your
population, due to chance or selection, your children have a noticeable
risk for being homozygotes even when you and your mate are not closely
related. In other words, Tay-Sachs in Ashkenazi Jews is not a product
of inbreeding.

Since the average person has many rare deleterious mutations, with
effects ranging from lethal to being a little subpar, children of such
consanguineous unions have a spectrum of problems, ranging instant death
( rare) to ” not very healthy”, not so rare. On average, kids of first
cousins seem to have have about twice as many serious genetic problems,
average about 5 iq points lower & 0.7 cm shorter.

Where is inbreeding a problem? Much of the Moslem world.

Acceptance of consanguineous unions is increasing in liberal circles,
since A. It’s an Islamic thing and B. It’s obviously stupid.

