+++
title = "Gene Flow"
full_title = "Gene Flow"
date = "2019-01-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/01/07/gene-flow/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/01/07/gene-flow/).

Gene Flow

Someone was wrong on the Internet, saying that there had always gene
flow between human groups, which supposedly inhibits people from
becoming different.

If you assume that everything is neutral, it doesn’t take a lot of gene
flow to keep populations genetically similar – something like 1 migrant
per generation, regardless of population size. There’s a relationship
between average gene flow and Fst:

![{\\displaystyle
Fst=1/(4N\_{e}m+1)}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/f2cd5a98a8731c57aa2a29bb28328349459e9fd0)

Fst between CEU ( Mormons) and YRI ( Yoruba, in Nigeria) is 0.165. (
Same as that between timber wolves and coyotes). Going from Fst to
number of migrants per generation :

![{\\displaystyle
Nm=1(1/Fst-1)/4}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/ee63422b5eaf4329c2dcf5a0dad6887cba05b001),
where Nm is the number of migrants.

So, the average number of migrants per generation between sub-Saharan
Africa and Europe, over the past hundred thousand years or so, was
1.26. Not a hell of a lot of gene flow. I blame the Sahara, distance,
human cussedness, and the Ice Age.

Was this enough to keep natural selection from pushing the two
populations in different directions? Not at all. I worked this out in
my Ashkenazi paper: for gene flow to substantially block adaptive
divergence of a polygenic trait, gene flow has to average on the order
of 2% or more per generation. Not two individuals: **2** ***percent***
of the population.

Since the actual number for all of sub-Saharan Africa was something like
1 migrant per generation, we don’t have to worry about European
admixture damping out local adaptation in Africa, or vice versa.

Now there may well have been significant gene flow between one tribe and
a neighboring one in some parts of SSA, which kept them from becoming
too different from each other: but there was nothing keeping them from
becoming different from people in the Middle East, or Europe, or East
Asia. In fact, we know some populations in SSA were sufficiently
genetically isolated from each other to develop lots of Fst (Bushmen vs
Bantu), and end up quite different from each other. Obviously
different.

Generally speaking, people seem not to have mixed much in Ice Age times.
Fst between the Levant and the Zagros mountains, the west and east ends
of the Fertile Crescent, was like that between Germany and China today.

As for the idea that local drift can swamp adaptive evolution — see
[this](//www.dropbox.com/s/o2kvd8cvfew3i1c/Selection%20versus%20Drift.docx?dl=0).

Lande (1980) argues that, “because of the high mutability of polygenic
characters, even smallisolated populations of several tens or
hundreds…can generate sufficient variation for rapidevolution into a
new adaptive zone.”

I knew this, not just by being the sort of nut that reads the
literature, but because I knew of many actual examples of rapid adaptive
evolution in small populations.

A tip to biologists everywhere: if it happens a lot, it’s probably not
theoretically impossible.

{parenthetically, biologists have been known to say that adaptation (
any adaptation, not some specific adaptation) is unlikely, because the
null in neutral theory is that there isn’t any. Think about this. }

Eskimos show special adaptations to a high-fat diet, and a body form
adapted to cold , consistent with Bergmann’s rule and Allen’s rule. I
don’t think there were ever many Eskimos. Tibetans developed their
altitude adaptations some time ago, before agriculture: how many
hunter-gatherers could there have been in Tibet?

Key deer: need I say more? An insular populations of possums on an
island off Virginia ages more slowly ( lives three years instead of
two) – a consequence of low predation risk \[ evolutionary theory of
senescence\].

Drop anybody into a real tropical jungle, wait a few tens of thousands
of years (maybe less), and you get Pygmies or Negritos.

Darwin’s Finches on the Galapagos: specialized beaks for different food
sources. Specializations that change over a few years of drought \[ ENSO
cycles\].

Every example of island dwarfism or gigantism: tiny Maltese elephant,
giant Majorcan dormouse.

Why would someone, not just Dan Graur, say that you need a big
population in order for adaptive evolution to occur? it can help (
generates more favorable mutations) but standing variation is sufficient
to allow a lot of selection.

