+++
title = "Drugs"
full_title = "Drugs"
upstream_url = "https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2015/08/21/drugs/"
date = "2015-08-21"

+++
Source: [here](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2015/08/21/drugs/).

Drugs

When you read the title what came to mind? Illegal, party substances? The mainstream smokeable and drinkable poisons which anyone over a certain age is entitled to imbibe? Or the pills and potions your doctor prescribes, the ones you get from a drugstore?

I listened to a podcast the other day on [Daniel Vitalis](https://svargaonearth.wordpress.com/2015/07/27/rewilding/)‘s website in which a serious scientific figure noted that cannabis is safer for human consumption than aspirin. And yet at just a few weeks or even days we gladly give our babies [calpol](http://www.calpol.co.uk/) (the English crocin, successfully marketed for decades as the wonderfully benign magic pill to all baby issues – fever, aches and pains, cold, sore throat, teething, earaches and even, rather ironically, vaccination reactions) but are terrified that those same babies, now teenagers, might one day have a spliff. Ok aspirin and paracetamol – the active ingredient in calpol and crocin – are not the same but they are similar enough to make the point. And by the by my understanding of fever is that it is the body’s way of tackling infections. So automatically seeking to lower the temperature may in fact disarm the body’s natural defences; although of course when fever rises too high it needs to be brought down using whatever means works.

India has a massive potential problem brewing in its overuse of antibiotics, either prescribed wrongly by a doctor (how many of you in Bangalore have been asked to take antibiotics for the city’s favourite illness, viral fever?) or self-prescribed and bought for a few rupees over the counter. An article the other day noted that 500 million antibiotics are needlessly prescribed every year in the UK too. For those who aren’t yet anti-antibiotics, they kill all the good bacteria as well as the bad bacteria and research is showing that their overuse may be responsible for many other health problems we are facing as a race. This is not to deny their live-saving properties in certain situations, and their quick-fix solution in others – but in such cases the patients should be fully aware and accepting of the short-term and long-term effects on to their bodies.

In the UK, doctors tend to be professional at least. They may not look at things as holistically as some would like but they are usually honest and sincere in trying to diagnose and treat your problem. Many also now refer patients to alternative medicine.

In India, it’s a very different picture. For a start, they very often misdiagnose with no hesitation, and prescribe totally inappropriate medicines. We went to one of the premier children’s clinics in the city where we saw the top-ranking doctor. He told us that our one year old son had an ear infection and we needed to start antibiotics. Unconvinced, I checked an hour or so later with a less hi-fi doctor who said there was no ear infection. Time showed that the second doctor’s diagnosis was correct. And dentists are even worse, recommending totally unnecessary, invasive procedures to help them pay back the loans on the expensive equipment they’ve bought.

And can you imagine going to an allopathic – the term given to non-alternative, ‘regular’ in the Western sense, medicine – doctor in India, and being recommended to give homoeopathy a go instead? In our experience at least it just doesn’t happen. They tend to laugh at or instantly dismiss any mention of alternative treatment.

Alternative doctors can be better – and certainly are less pernicious – but alternative medicine is not subject to much regulation and is pretty hit and miss. The medical system may be sound theoretically, but the doctor may not know enough about it to diagnose and treat you properly. How many ayurvedic doctors have actually read all the texts on which their practice is based in translation, let alone in the original? And the medicines they give you, either manufactured locally at the surgery or branded, may or may not be effective and at times are harmful.

In our experience, doctors are good at medicating – and making money – but do we really want to trust them with our health, especially when so many of them are so obviously unhealthy?

So having dismissed the entire legalised drug industry in one fell swoop – with apologies to the good doctors out there – who should we turn to instead?

Well first let’s backtrack a little and ask ourselves who we think is healthy. The people who look truly well and rarely get sick tend to be the yogis, the wholefoodians, the rishis… And I would further specify that among those it is the ones who are truly body-literate – able to read their bodies and adjust their nutrition, exercise, spiritual practice, etc accordingly to ensure physical and mental health – that are holistically healthy. That means giving yourself a break if you’re not feeling well one day, listening to your body about whether you eating foods such as dairy suits you or not, remaining balanced and open-minded, flexible enough to adjust. It means not following rules and regimes blindly.

So rather than finding a pranic healer-cum-nutritionist to advise and guide us to all-round good health, the person we really need to trust with our health is ourself. That might mean a lot of experimentation with different food and functional food (kefir and kombucha are our two new trials – we’re even seeing if we can use kefir, which colonises the gut with good bacteria, instead of antibiotics), different forms of exercise and movement, different lifestyle patterns and different spiritual and meditative practices. We can borrow a few grandmothers’ remedies to get us started. For instance, when you have a cold it makes sense to stay away from cooling foods (most people in the West have little idea about the distinction between cooling and heating foods; in India almost everyone is aware to some extent) such as yoghurt and cucumber, cooling activities such as swimming or exposing yourself to cold air (eg: under a fan), and to have lots of pepper and ginger. In short to work with the body rather than against it. This is certainly better than the standard Englishman’s way: drink a paracetamol-rich Beecham’s Powder or Lemsip every four hours and otherwise continue as usual. Really, though, we need to get away from a rules-based method and rather try each thing out and then gauge our body’s reaction. Ultimately this kind of approach should keep us fit enough to ward off bugs and lifestyle diseases so that we only ever need to go to a hospital in a true emergency – a broken leg for instance or a bad burn. And it should also contribute to our mental well-being which in turns helps foster a healthy body.

So let food, movement, meditation, how you live your life as a whole, be thy medicine.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Apologies in advance for any scientific or medical detail I may have got wrong in trying to drive home the point I hope to make (yes Kabir this is an attempt to pre-empt an attack…).
