+++
title = "The Ganesha Of Kabul –"
full_title = "The Ganesha Of Kabul – And His Custodian Guard [ ArteFacts #14 ]"
date = "2021-09-20"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/20/the-ganesha-of-kabul-and-his-custodian-guard-arte-facts-14/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/20/the-ganesha-of-kabul-and-his-custodian-guard-arte-facts-14/).

The Ganesha Of Kabul – And His Custodian Guard [ Arte-Facts #14 ]



![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/df0ibuexcaamdfx-1.jpg)

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/236438754_364192192024825_2034667503718137780_n.jpg)

In our field, we are so often delving into impressive legends of long
ago – myths about men who once lived and wrought deeds so mighty that
they seem frankly ‘incredible’ (in the old sense of the term) today. And
that can leave one quite jaded about the modern era for reasons that
ought be obvious. After all, it seems so lamentably rare to encounter
such larger-than-life occurrences in our own time – to the point that
one might be forgiven foreither thinking that the archaic age has been
over-hyped, or that heroism died with its flame extinguished ever so
long ago.

And yet … every so often, we come across something rather astounding
which renews our faith that even amidst all the turgid horrendousness of
the modern age – some lights really do still shine out. Not only
‘brighter than others’, but as a beautifully luminous exemplar to all
the rest of us who are able to see moreclearly thanks to their glow.

This is one of those latter stories.

Pictured, is Pandit \[Priest\] Rajesh Kumar. And pictured also – is an
impressive millennium-and-a-half ancient Ganesha Murti, found in
Afghanistan around Gardez in the mid-20th century, and then taken to
Kabul where it was installed in a Hindu Mandir \[Temple\] there.

Now this latter detail should prove rather remarkable all by itself. As
here we have a relic of Afghanistan’s Hindu past – several centuries,
most of a millennium even following the Islamization of the area, being
unearthed and thence re-installed for the very purpose to which it was
originally intended. And in what was, even in the mid-late 20th century
under the socialists, hardly the most hospitable of climes. We often
talk about resurrecting the Past here – bringing back the flame of
ancient days. These Hindus, these Hindus of Afghanistan – actually did
it ! It brings a tear to my eye !

And yet, what makes it even more remarkable is that this Temple then
continued to exist, with its most illustrious denizen, even despite the
roiling turmoil which has engulfed Afghanistan in more recent times
still.

Indeed, the reason it had come to my attention is due to the actions of
this aforementioned Pandit – who had declared at a time when many were
fleeing the country and the Americans, the mightiest (human) military
force upon this globe of ours were retreating likewise … that he was
going to remain there.

As the man himself put it:“Some Hindus have urged me to leave Kabul and
offered to arrange for my travel and stay.”

“But my ancestors served this Mandir for hundreds of years. I will not
abandon it. If Taliban kills me, I consider it my Seva \[Devotional
Service\].”

I had held off on commenting about this story and endeavouring to bring
it to a broader audience until I had successfully confirmed with an
associate with connection to Afghanistan that it was, in fact, true. And
Ganesh Chaturthi seemed the most ideal point in time to speak upon this
– as this is, after all, in close accordance with our theme of “Ganesh
Gets In Everywhere”. Even Afghanistan, even Kabul under Taliban control
– there He is. Just as He had been since long ago. Not in the sense of
being buried under the sands of the hinterland, but actively worshipped,
protected, venerated. As He Should Be.

Now before we get into discussing the Murti, it is perhaps necessary to
elucidate some measure of historical context – for you see, the
situation of being, in effect, under siege in what was once the native
land, is regrettably not unfamiliar either to this Murti or to its
Custodes.

The name upon the Murti that is the commissioner of its carving and
installation is ‘Shahi Khingala’. And unfortunately, we are not quite
sure *which* Khingala this refers to. Some suggest that it is a Huna
King of the 5th century – although this conflicts somewhat with both the
potential archaeological evidence for the statue itself (which appears
to prefer a later 6th or 7th century dating), and the identification of
the ruler as being a Shahi, and therefore of a later regime. One rather
enlightening possibility is that this Khingala might have been one of
the earlier ‘Shahi’ rulers found around Kapisi, who were forerunners to
the later and much more well-known ‘Turk Shahi’ and ‘Hindu Shahi’ of
later centuries; and who ruled from the seat of the Asvakas … the
‘Horsemen’ or ‘Cavaliers’, whose name may even survive today in
“Afghanistan” itself. This would quite handily resolve our timelining
issue, at the cost of acknowledging much of the uncertainty about just
what was going on around that area at that particular point in time. We
shall not seek to get heavily into those matters here, except to note
that the identification often propounded online of this as being a
“Hindu Shahi” ruler is … both correct and not – insofar as the ruler was
unquestionably a Hindu and a Shahi, but the Hindu Shahi dynasty *itself*
is a specific later occurrence.

What is important to note for our purposes, is twofold.

First, that there is a long record for Elephant representation in the
iconography of Hindu Afghanistan. I shall not get into a huge depth of
detail here, but suffice to say we have a persistent record for
Elephantine deific expression running back pretty much as far as we can
go. Greco-Bactrian coinage attests, for instance, an Elephant head in
relation to the ‘Kavi(pi)shiye Nagara Devata’ – the ‘Deity of the City
of Kapisi’ ; and this is of significant interest for reasons we shall
shortly explore.

The second reason, which we shall return to later on, is the conditions
which came to characterize the reign of these Shahi dynasties – and how
these, too, have some certain ‘resonancy’ for the situation of
Afghanistan today.

But to return to the point on this Elephantine deific of Eastern
Afghanistan, we find ourselves indebted to the traveller’s account of
one Xuanzang (also anglicized as Yuan Chwang or Hsuan Tsang), who
directly confirms a genius of the nearby mountain to Kapisa of
elephantine characteristic – indeed, doubly so given his phonetic
presentation of the name of said mountain as ‘Pi-lo-sho-lo’ … or, in its
original Sanskrit formulation: ‘Pilasara’ – also known as ‘Pilugiri’.
What does this latter term translate as? ‘The Mountain of the Elephant’.
The former term, Pilasara, meanwhile, would likely mean ‘Pool/Waterfall
of the Elephant’ – and that is most interesting for reasons we shall
return to momentarily.

To place this in context of the various Hellenic-infused evidence from
the numismatics, it is clear that there is a relationship for the
Elephant deific acting in a protective capacity to the Mountain *and*
the City – which is as we should expect, given there is a longstanding
coterminity between the terms and conceptual understandings for
‘Mountain’ and ‘Settlement / Fort / City’ in Indo-European
mytholinguistics, as I have covered at some length elsewhere \[see, for
instance, my previous ‘Bharat Mata And The Indo-European Deific of
National Identity’; and other points, including those pertaining to
Cybele and the Corona Muralis, etc.\]. This gives an intriguing
potential interpretation to some of these aforementioned Greco-Bactrian
etc. coins, as they bear a throned figure accompanied by the head of an
elephant and what’s identified as a ‘Pilos’ (a sort of conical hat
usually – although here, it would appear that the conical shape is of
rather differing interpretation).

Academic opinion is divided as to whether the throned figure is intended
to be male or female – and therefore, whether this is Zeus, or a female
Goddess of the City; with the corresponding question of whether the
elephant head is intended to represent an *additional* figure that acts
in protection of whichever deific, or whether, indeed, the elephantine
visage is intended as an alternate ‘face’ for the deity in question. If
it were the latter, this should prove rather intriguing, as an
‘Elephant-faced’ Zeus would accord rather interestingly with the fact
that the major Ganesha invocation (and, for that matter, epithetic
theonyms – Gana-Esha, indeed) is a RigVedic hailing for the Sky Father
which has been repurposed to His Son in more recent times. However, I
consider this to be rather unlikely upon the face of things – and the
result of a longstanding presumption that a deific associated with a
mountain, in the Classical imagination, ought be Zeus. There is some
currency for this in the Hellenic sphere to the West, of course – and
also, for that matter, in the East, where we find Lord Shiva likewise
strongly associated with high Mountains even to this day all the way
from the Himalayas to Indonesia. Dionysus in relation to Mt Meru might
be of similar potential provenancy. Although there is also an
association of *female* deific figures with the Mountain(s), as we have,
again, repeatedly demonstrated in the course of our previous work –
including not only the aforementioned ‘Bharat Mata’ piece but also the
recent work on Artemis Orthia. The ‘Mountain’ upon the coin, in case you
were wondering, should likely prove to be that ‘Pilos’ – instead of a
hat idly floating by the side of the throne, becoming the Mountain which
was proximate to the city in question instead.

Presuming for a moment that the enthroned figure is, infact, a female
national / city personification – as seems eminently likely to be the
case in light of an array of evidence we shall leave unaddressed here
(seeM. K. Dhavalikar’s Origin of Ganesa, for instance, for further
expansion upon various point of interest in that regard) – then this
makes for a rather remarkable discovery.

The myth of Ganesha – the one everybody knows – pertains to how He
attained His Elephantine head. We shan’t retell it here – except to note
that its key and core salient detail has Ganesha standing guard over a
most particular Mountain that is in a pool.

Or, to phrase things in terms perhaps more familiar – the young Ganesha
stands guard over His Mother, Parvati \[‘Mountain’, to translate
literally\] as She bathes in a pool. The elephant is, of course, a
prominent emblem of regal power in the SubContinent and its sphere of
influence, however it is also known to be absolutely ferociously
tenacious in its defence of the grounds it considers sacred – the
proverbial ‘Elephant Graveyard’, for instance. It therefore seems rather
appropriate that Lord Shiva, Ganesha’s Father , would choose to bestow
an Elephantine visage to this young Custodian in recognition of His
Role.

All of this, taken together, suggests that the environs proximate to
Kapisi played stage to a loka-lization for this core essence-tial myth
of Ganesha; the ‘Elephant’s Pool’ \[Pilasara\] being located proximate
(indeed likely upon) to the nearby Mountain \[known both as Pilasara and
Pilagiri\], and the Goddess, the Wife of the Sky Father, Who is also so
frequently encountered as both ‘Mountain’ and City / National Deific
being found at both locales. Under the stately protection of, just as
with the mythic template for the occurrence, an Elephant-visaged
Guardian – that is to say, Ganesha. ‘The Gana As Custodian Guard’,
indeed!

And that is important to note given what ‘Gana-Esha’, ‘Gana-Pati’
actually means … ‘Lord of the Host’, ‘Chief of the Armed Company’,
perhaps ‘Lord-Sentinel’ or ‘Commander of the Watch’ if we are to be
somewhat figurative in our interpolation to better explicate here the
meaning. This is partially why Ganesha is encountered at the entrance to
Hindu temples to this day – because He keeps watch on the Gate via which
we enter. And protects the House of the Gods from those who would seek
to despoil and assail Their Domain. An admirable deific, therefore, for
Pt. Kumar of Kabul to be both availed by and to act in evident emulation
of here in this modern day.

Now before we address our second point, concerning the historical
situation of the Shahis – and, indeed, Hindu Afghanistan as a whole
throughout much of the past 1,500 years … we should turn to the actual
characteristics of this fine Murti.

The inscription reads that “This Great and Beautiful Maha-Vinayaka
\[another name for Ganesha\] was consecrated by the renowned Shahi King,
the illustrious Shahi Khingala, Who was
Parama-Bhattaraka-Maharajadhiraja
\[‘Highest-Venerable-Great-King-of-Kings’\], in the Eighth Year \[of His
Reign\], in the Maha-Jyestha-Masa \[‘Great Month of Jyeshtha’\],
Shukla-Paksha \[‘Bright Fortnight’\], Trayodashi \[‘Thirteenth’\],
Vishakha Nakshatra \[‘\[Under the\] Astrological Sign of Vishakha’ – the
‘Forked’\] and Simha Lagna \[‘Leo Ascendant’\]”.

Or, phrased another way, the name of the commissioning king along with
the astrologically codified dating.

The surviving statue may be tentatively suggested to have been in Alidha
posing – an iconographic convention for an archer, his feet in the
manner you can see here. This would therefore imply that the arms, when
they were in full form, bore a bow and arrow in the process of being
drawn back. Although obviously, in the absence of further surviving
remains this must, by necessity, remain conjectural. As we can also see,
the ears (which some commentators have noted seem almost closer to
‘wings’ in their style of carving here), trunk, and tusks have also
become detached – although, to be sure, one of those is *supposed* to be
in such a fashion, per the mythology and customary depictions of the
God.

Upon the brow, there is an Ardha-Mukuta – a ‘Half-Crown’. This,
iconographically, connoted a Commander of the Army \[‘SenaPati’\] or
other High Executor \[‘MahaMatra’\] of the King, or even a YuvaRaja
\[‘Young King’ – what we would, perhaps, term the ‘Heir Apparent’ in
modern English\]. It is not hard to see how such connotation is
eminently apt for Ganesha. His Father, of course, being the Ishvara –
the God-Emperor, and His Mother the Radiant Queen of the Heavens, the
Universe, and All.

Other adornments include a Kanthi \[‘Necklet’\] and a rather impressive
Naga-Yajnopavita – that is to say, the Sacred Thread comprised of a
Serpent; an iconographic detail of some especial prominency in the
Shaivite (but also Shakta) sphere of things, the Yajnopavita itself
referring to membership of the Dvija-Varnas – the Twice-Born Castes –
and also visually linking Him to His Father, Lord Shiva. It likewise
occurs within the Ganesha Sahasranamah \[the Thousand Name hymnal to
Ganesha\], wherein we find Him hailed as ‘SarpaYajnopavitay

Interestingly, the Antariya \[‘Lower Garment’\] appears to be comprised
of a lionskin, as can be seen via the prominent claws, head, and other
such features. The wearing of a lionskin is certainly a prominent
identifier of a particular Son of the Sky Father in the Classical
imagining – however, here it is instead a party to a broader convention,
as seen with, for instance, His Father’s famed tiger-skin garmentry.
There is a point of coterminous commonality with the Heraklean /
Herculean lionskin, insofar as the prowess required to best such a
fearsomely formidable beast speaks volumes for its wearer.

There is more which could most certainly be said pertaining to the
iconography of this statue (and, for that matter, Ganesha more
generally) – but I think we shall leave those points for others to make.
For now, at any rate.

Also to be left for another time is what I had initially intended the
final paragraphs of this piece to contain – a cursory overview of the
Hindu regimes of the last few centuries of the 1st millennium A.D. which
reigned in Afghanistan.

Why? Because it is such a tale, that I found it impossible to keep to
‘once over very lightly’ fashion; and it would be a disservice to even
attempt to do so.

So instead, I shall simply state the essence of it.

Hinduism was once the dominant faith of the Afghan sphere. If you know
where and how to look – whether with an archaeologist’s trowel, or with
an erudite eye within the realms of literature and museums’ worth of
artefacts – then you can still see this … the varying ‘high-water marks’
where the wave broke and finally rolled back. However, the rather
remarkable thing I had observed is that characterizing the Hindu
dynasties of those last few centuries in the region … was an indomitable
will to take everything that was thrown at them, and still be there. Not
to be a high-water mark of an oncoming wave – but to be the steady,
redoubtable rock upon which the waves themselves should break and
retreat from.

We see this with the Turk Shahi when they were still a significantly
Hindu polity. In 665 AD, a mere 33 years following Muhammad’s death,
Arab armies succeeded in taking Kabul from them. It would not be the
last time that Muslims conquered it – and yet, it would also not be the
last time that Hindus would be found there, either (and before somebody
calls me up on this, it is important to note that yes, the Turk Shahi
kingdom was substantively Hindu. Don’t take my word for it, instead
consult our aforementioned Chinese traveller, Hsuan Tsang, observing
that just prior to this, Hindus remained in the majority of the kingdom
– with Buddhism ‘tolerated’).

Yet within a few years, the Turk Shahi had managed to not only reconquer
Kabul – but also liberate significant swathes of other territory as
well.

Now, to be fair, the tale of the Turk Shahi is a rather sad one – as a
little more than a century following their recapture of Kabul, the Turk
Shahi ruler of the day was forced to submit to the Abbasid Caliph. And
then, following a rather disastrous backfiring of an attempted
power-play, a subsequent Turk Shahi regent some 35 years later in 815
was forced to convert to Islam himself. What’s interesting is that these
significant further reversals appear to have been somewhat coterminous
with the increasing Buddhist orientation of the regime – something which
we can tell due to the nature of the ‘tribute’ sent by that last Turk
Shahi king back to Mecca. Namely, a singularly impressive Buddha
depiction – in keeping with the custom enforced upon various converts to
the earlier era of Islamic religion whereby they would consciously
disavow their previous faith through iconoclasm and/or sending its major
devotional focus to be displayed as a trophy at the Ka’aba in Mecca.

I do not seek to suggest that it was because the Turk Shahi had moved
away from Hinduism and become increasingly Buddhist that they suffered
such reversals of fortune – but however it came about, it is
demonstrably the case and demonstrably sad that they wound up bereft of
the Gods of their forefathers in the end.

However even here, there is hope – a rather remarkable occurrence, in
fact. For while the strength of the Turk Shahi rulers may have failed,
especially in terms of their protection and upholding of the Dharma and
support for the DevaRajya – the strength of Hindus did not.

The last Turk Shahi ruler, a somewhat hapless fellow by the name of
Lagaturman, was deposed by his own Minister – a pointedly Hindu Brahmin
by the name of Kallar, who then incepted another dynasty … the
aforementioned Hindu Shahi.

And this is where I really must exert some self-control to avoid going
on at great length as to the course of that particular dynasty – a
legend worthy of an intergenerational Norse Saga it is so abundant with
heroic doomed stands, remarkable courage, and incredible besting of
seemingly insurmountable odds. They, too, managed to lose – and then
regain – Kabul as well as other swathes of territory on multiple
occasions; and in the end, after having resisted no mere Arabs, but the
fearsome onslaught of Mahmud of Ghazni and his ilk for near two hundred
years … even despite no longer even having a kingdom, they kept on doing
the exact same thing over and over. Refusing to be enduringly conquered.
Seriously, it is difficult to overstate – toward the end, they had been
driven out of their previous capital and holdings, and somehow managed
to pull together a multi-national Hindu coalition of kingdoms from all
across the North and Central regions of India to oppose the Ghaznavids.
It was apparently such an inspiring effort that, as the Muslim
chronicler Firishta puts it – “Hindu women sold their jewels and sent
the money from distant parts to be used against the Musalmans. Their
poorer sisters, who had no jewels to sell, worked feverishly at the
spinning-wheel or as hired labourers to be able to send something to the
men of the army.”

The battle in question, fought in 1008 AD, did not go the Hindu
coalition’s way – defeat was snatched from the seeming jaws of victory
due to an elephant’s panic just as the Hindu host was on the cusp of
triumph. Yet even following the disastrous aftermath of this reversal,
they refused to give in. The Ghaznavids forced the ouster of the Hindu
Shahi from their capital and now much-reduced heartland – the Hindu
Shahi relocated into the mountains, occupied a temple-fortress, and
swiftly rebuilt to be able to put another army into the field against
Mahmud less than half a decade later. Again, I must restrain myself from
going into depth and detail about the ensuing campaign – but suffice to
say that history somewhat repeated. The Ghaznavids thinking they had
subjugated and erased from the pages of history the Hindu Shahi – and
with them, the major vestiges of independent Hindu resistance along the
invasion-corridor into North India … only to find that the Hindu Shahi
had once more managed to seemingly resurrect, dig in at new locations
(in this case,Lohkot – twice, in fact; successfully protecting Hindu
Kashmir in the process), and exact a bloody toll from the numberless
hordes of Mahmud. In doing so, I have absolutely no doubt that – even
though it might have looked quite forlorn at the time – they actually
changed the course of history.

It is not for nothing that the Iranian Muslim writer Al Biruni, who had
served under Mahmud and accompanied him into India on various of his
later incursions, had this to say of Ghazni’s direst foe:

“The Hindu Shahiya are now extinct, and of the whole house there is no
longer the slightest remnant in existence. We must say that, in all
their grandeur, they never slackened in the ardent desire of doing that
which is good and right, that they were men of noble sentiment and noble
bearing.”

It is definitely the case that thanks to the Ghaznavids and their
earlier predecessors (as well as certain much more recent ones … ), that
we lack very much at all to detail the existence of the Hindu Shahi.
What we know has been painstakingly reconstructed off of fragmentary
attestations cobbled together from coins, passing references, occasional
artefacts of other kinds … and, of course, the testaments of their
enemies. And yet, this is not the same thing as to say that the legacy
of the Hindu Shahi is in any great doubt.

As I have said – and as I do intend to expand upon at greater length and
grandeur in a subsequent piece to prove my point more thoroughly – their
actions for those two centuries in acting as the bulwark, the rampart,
the hope … they held the line, and helped to preserve Hindu
civilization. It’s as simple as that.

It is true that they were eventually overwhelmed, and went down fighting
– but in their absence, one can only ponder with horror how much more
despoilment could have been wrought by the architect of the iconoclasm
of Somnath, Thanesar, and so many other sites besides.

Where I am going with this, I think, is that these actions – they
resonate, out across the generations and the centuries. Not simply in
terms of being able to marvel at their outcome and the ripple-impacts of
this or that battle upon the coursing streams of causality as they wend
their way toward us here in the present. But also in terms of setting
forth the template for us to be inspired by. A ‘challenge’, if you like,
for us to take up – as lain down by those who have gone before. To live
up to their great and glorious standard – or, at least, to live in
trying to.

Pandit Rajesh Kumar is not exactly singlehandedly holding off a Muslim
invasion of India, nor is he endeavouring to cobble together a kingdom
out there in Kabul (at least, as far as I know). Yet what he IS doing,
is giving tacit, tangible expression to *exactly* that *resonancy* I had
spoken of so approvingly earlier.

The experience of Hindus in Afghanistan over the past millennium and a
half – even longer, in fact – has been a rather arduous one. Under
constant and continual threat not merely of expulsion – but active,
outright, overt, and downright deliberate “erasure” (in multiple senses
and contexts) alongside this. Not merely lives, but also memories! So
that today, nobody could possibly contemplate that Afghanistan once used
to be a Hindu territory – nor, for that matter, that there might be such
a thing as a Hindu Mandir in operation even ‘midst a country being run
by the inheritors of Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and those malignly
aforementioned Ghaznavids et co.

So just as Ganesha – Ganapati , Vinayaka – is a Sentinel, a Soldier
standing watchful over the aperture to what is both possible and present
and piously imperative above all … so, too, do we find Pt. Kumar acting
as just such a Protector.

Not only of that blessed Ganesha Murti – although also, quite
importantly, of that.

But also of what that Murti represents.

A Heritage, a History, a Future – and all of Hindu civilization.

Not to mention, of course, a certain God – Who *really does* seem to Get
In Everywhere !

To Pt. Kumar , we can only commend his courage, his sense of duty – and
say but two things:

‘Good Luck’ (which, as one of my Pandits at my own Mandir here used to
observe, is an idiomatic rendering of remarkable simplicity forॐ नमः
शिवाय ) … and

Dharmo Rakshati Rakshitaha.

May That Which He is Protecting – Protect Him Also.

Earlier, I mentioned that there is a particular RigVedic Hymnal which
has provided a modern and prominent Ganesha invocation. That is RV II 23
– and in particular, line 1.

It is, of course, more properly a verse which is oriented toward
Brihaspati – and, via the co-identification of this most august (indeed,
jovial – jupiterian) figure with Rudra and the Sky Father deific
complex, it should therefore be thought of as thusly offered up to
Ganesha’s Father. Therefore, perhaps, rendering its later employment for
Ganesha specifically a case of, we may say, “Like Father, Like Son”.

However the line from that particular RigVedic Hymnal which springs to
my mind here in closing is another –

4 Thou Leadest with Good Guidance and Preservest Men; Distress o’ertakes
not him who offers Service to Thee.  
Him who hates Prayer Thou Scorchest, Brhaspati, Obliterate hostile fury:
Herein is Thy Great Mightiness.

Or, in the original –

सुनीतिभिर्नयसि त्रायसे जनं यस्तुभ्यं दाशान्न तमंहो अश्नवत् ।  
ब्रह्मद्विषस्तपनो मन्युमीरसि बृहस्पते महि तत्ते महित्वनं ॥

Hail to Ganesha

Hail to the Guardians

जय गणेश, जय गणेश, जय गणेश देवा ।  
माता जाकी पार्वती, पिता महादेवा ॥
