+++
title = "A Brief Point On"
full_title = "A Brief Point On “Barbarian” Labelling In Sanskrit"
date = "2021-09-12"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/12/a-brief-point-on-barbarian-labelling-in-sanskrit/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/12/a-brief-point-on-barbarian-labelling-in-sanskrit/).

A Brief Point On “Barbarian” Labelling In Sanskrit

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/riderraid-1.jpg?w=1024)

Earlier, I’d been discussing with associates the curious co-occurrence
of Barbaros / Barbara in Sanskrit and Ancient Greek respectively. This
lead to the following – presented here for a broader audience.

“as applies the linguistics, I *think* from memory that earliest
attested occurrences in Ancient Greek are some centuries prior to
earliest attested occurrences in Sanskrit (and the former are also prior
to established cultural contact between the two spheres), but I’ll have
to check my notes.

I mean, Sanskrit is a language which has .. how to say – it is like
Eskimos and Snow.

There is a well-known cliche that the Eskimo has 50 different words for
snow.

This is false.

What he *actually* has … is fifty words which mean very different things
to him. The sort of snow it is safe to walk upon, the sort of snow that
is fine powder and is unsafe for foot, the sort of snow which is freshly
fallen, and presumably the sort of snow that is yellow and should not be
drunken. All of these things, in English, we would simply term “Snow”.
But for him – that would not be acceptable, it would not suit what he
perceives, as he is more attuned to it and needs to be able to make
succinct meaningful distinctions between these different kinds as they
constitute his environment … and so he has this beauteous pallet.

I feel it is rather similar as applies “Barbarian” and Sanskrit.

Insofar as yeah, sure, one can find terms that can be rendered as
Barbarian very, very easily … but there are *so very very many* of them.
Some of them denote ostensibly quite specific peoples and tribes –
others … actually don’t, but appear to (and there I am thinking of
rather peculiar ethnonyms wherein the two bearers are at opposite ends
of the country of Aryavarta, their only coterminity being that they both
live in relatively mountainous regions). Some are ‘functional usage’ –
these ones are ‘hunters’ with the bow, for instance; others are more
‘descriptive’ in other senses – ‘these ones are flesh-eaters’, you get
the idea.

This has occasionally produced some rather interesting and downright
innovative ‘folk-etymologizing’ – around Yavana, for instance. We know
it to be ‘Ionian’ calqued into Sanskrit \[likely via Iranian\]; and yet,
native grammarians instead insisted that it meant something along the
lines of ‘Nomads’, ‘People Who Go’ – which makes quite some logical
sense when one considers the direction these ‘Yavanas’ were coming in
from …

Now, the most archaic *general* term which I can think of for this
sphere … leaving aside Dasa and Dasyu and all of that (or, for that
matter, the simple ‘opposite form’ A-/An- prefixed terms which ‘bolt on’
to terms for somebody *of* the community) – is Mleccha. A term which
appears to derive from ‘Mala’ ,in the sense of ‘dirty’ etc .. and
likewise, is utilized to refer to somebody with ‘indistinct speech’,
‘dirty speech’ for the ritual context. Indeed that’s literally where it
first occurs – in the Shatapatha Brahmana, describing some suspiciously
Indo-Iranian speaking A’suras \[as in, they are apparently speaking a
corrupted form of not-quite Sanskrit\] in just such an event.

Speech, here, is a shorthand for ability to participate in and ‘belong
to’ the community. Just as, we might say, ‘Arya’ in its true sense – is
somebody who knows (and performs) the proper ways , and connotes
belonging to the Ethos \[note: not ‘Ethnos’\].  
However, the thing which interests me is that we also have all of these
*other* terms of potentially more archaic – but also more specific –
usage , that are so often glossed over.

There is some very interesting speculation around Avestan (I think?)
Maryana \[it is spelled .. infuriatingly differently in various sources
– Mariyana, etc.\] which may be correlate with Marut. And refers to,
implicitly #GangSteppe – (young) guys out riding chariots and horses,
dressing in black leather and with a silver dragon emblem carrying out
raids on the more settled and sedentary Zoroastrian polities of later
times. A remembrance of the Indo-Iranic past and all which Zoroaster in
his calumny had sought to suppress! No wonder they were terrified of
them!

Turanian is, of course, conceptually related to this – as i’ve detailed
elsewhere. And as a point of brief interest, we find “Scythian” utilized
almost as a shorthand for “Barbarian” from the ‘outer’ / ‘utter’
\[indeed that’s English but you can see the Sanskrit cognate ..\] most
reaches, in various texts including the New Testament of the Bible.

But I digress.

The term I had *actually* felt was worthy of bringing up here is Vratya.

We find it utilized in quite some interesting ways! For example, to mean
I suppose ‘Outlaw’, ‘Vagrant’ \[if memory serves, there is some semi
cognate relationship of conceptry – ‘Vagrant’ is from same root as
‘Wanderer’\] … and yet also at the same time, particular sorts of
devotees of Lord Shiva in the Vedic Age. Men on the periphery,
‘barbarians’ of frightful appearance and strange potencies – like Munis,
you know ? And Lord Shiva as the AdiVratya amongst Them. Hence the
AtharvaVeda’s *very pointed* instruction that one *must* treat the
Vratya Who appears at one’s gates with utmost respect. You know … just
in case. \[and in this, there is direct correlation with Odin, with Zeus
and Hermes, going about in disguises as vagrants testing the commitment
to the Xenia, the Sacred Hospitality, of the Nordic and Greek peoples
alike\]

However, it *also* shows up in application to an array of persons on the
‘periphery’ of Vedic sphere proper. And most prominently in later usage
wherein we find the Greek rulers of the Indo-Greek realm hailed as
“Vratya-Kshatriyas’. Because they were ‘Outlaw Kshatriyas’, ‘Barbarian
Kshatriyas’ .. and yet also, at the same time .. *were* effectively
Kshatriyas .. both in the broad sense of being warriors, but also the
rather narrow sense of ruling kingdoms under which Hindu communities
existed as ‘legitimized’ figures, if you will. It gets complicated.

Anyway, I have digressed – and wandered – rather wildly.

My point here was simply to note that when one delves through the Vedic
and later Hindu literature, one finds quite an array of ‘Barbarian’
terms employed.

Some of which, yes, are reasonably simple and straightforward and simply
mean somebody exterior to our realm \[and interestingly, ‘Rakshasa’ even
today has some coterminity of utilization in that regard\] … and others
of quite more specific intended scoping and ambit of meaning.
