+++
title = "The Description Of The"
full_title = "The Description Of The Vajra In The Vedas – Some Initial Points"
date = "2021-09-28"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/28/the-description-of-the-vajra-in-the-vedas-some-initial-points/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/28/the-description-of-the-vajra-in-the-vedas-some-initial-points/).

The Description Of The Vajra In The Vedas – Some Initial Points

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/243489895_10165609341515574_6961228661566633882_n.jpg?w=1023)

This is a modern depiction of Indra, and it forms a bit of a
counterpoint to the more simple Vajra renderings you’ll often see –
however, the interesting thing is … this is actually rather close to how
the Vajra is described in various RigVedic verses. \[Although this
\*specific\* version may in fact be intending to represent the Vajra as
something close to a ribcage, due to the sacrifice of Dadhyanc to
provide the bones of the weapon in other versions\]

RV I 80 12, for instance, describes the Vajra as having a thousand \[or,
at least, ‘many’ – if we interpret the ‘Sahasra’ of सहस्रभृष्टिः
\[sahasrabhrstir\] idiomatically rather than more literally\]
spikes/edges , as well as a certain ‘metallic’ \[‘ayasa’\] quality
(perhaps the shinyness is also meant).

As for the actual term being enumerated there – भृष्टि (‘Bhrsti’) – it
is interestingly a close cognate for ‘Bristle’, ‘Bristly’ in English. In
Sanskrit, this means ‘Spiked’, ‘Pointed’. The sense being communicated,
however, is likely a dual one – as there is *another* Bhrsti of exactly
the same pronunciation yet different etymological derivation that means
‘To Fry’. Indeed, modern English ‘Fry’ is actually a pretty direct
cognate. Not hard to see how this might apply to a lightning-bolt, no?

This sense is also found in RV I 52 15, which describes the weapon as
being भृष्टिमता – that is to say ‘Bristly’. Indeed, there it is hailed
as the ‘Bhrstimata Vadhena’ – the ‘Executing Spiked/Angled’ \[Wilson
translates Bhrstimata here as ‘Angled’, Griffith, as ‘Spiked’\].

RV X 96 3, meanwhile, whilst also having that ‘metallic’ descriptor –
pointedly repeats ‘Hari’ terminology .. which I think it is quite
feasible to interpret not simply as ‘Golden’, but with an accompanying
‘energy’ sense around ‘fire’ and ‘light’; although हरिमन्युसायकः
\[‘harimanyusayakaḥ’\] is a most intriguing term due to its last
component , for our purposes here – sayaka is an ‘arrow’ or a ‘sword’,
but often something to be shot or thrown or discharged.

Now, this is rather curious because of course – it is quite rare for one
to wish to throw one’s sword (I believe there are *some* examples in
Nordic verse, but that is another matter for another time). That would
instead suggest that the ‘Killing’ root … or perhaps ‘Sharpness’ is what
underpins the term – for it to mean both ‘Arrow’ and ‘Sword’.

Although I cannot help but recall the citation given in
Pseudo-Apollodorus’ Bibliotheca for Herakles having confronted the Hydra
in part by deploying flaming arrows/spears – as well as the more
familiar club. Given the observed strong coterminity in other
particulars for Herakles contra the Hydra with Indra against Vritra –
this would perhaps suggest the relevant root for Herakles utilizing
flaming projectiles is, in part, some shared understanding of that
nature around .. well .. depicting Lightning in such a manner that may
run back to PIE times.

Certainly, we have attestation for the Arrows of Rudra being Lightning,
as one iconographic comparative to exemplify. And the Thunder*Bolt* of
Jupiter is similarly a Javelin/Spear weapon that also takes form of the
incomparable radiance of Lightning.

There’s a few other Hymnals that should probably be looked at – and, of
course, various other Vedic texts including the Brahmanas.

But for now – that weapon Indra is wielding in this depiction … would
appear to be reasonably recognizable as the same as \[and informed by\]
that in the Shruti scripture.

Although, of course, in much the similar manner to ‘bottling lightning’,
actually being able to properly *depict* such a thing – even in poetic
terms rather than illustration – is of course going to be rather
difficult.
