+++
title = "‘Nomads’, ‘Murmurers’, &"
full_title = "‘Nomads’, ‘Murmurers’, & ‘DeathSeekers At the Border’ – Three Further Perspectives On Barbarians Drawn Into The Broader IndoEuropean Sphere"
date = "2021-09-13"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/13/nomads-murmurers-death-seekers-at-the-border-three-further-perspectives-on-barbarians-drawn-into-the-broader-indo-european-sphere/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/13/nomads-murmurers-death-seekers-at-the-border-three-further-perspectives-on-barbarians-drawn-into-the-broader-indo-european-sphere/).

‘Nomads’, ‘Murmurers’, & ‘Death-Seekers At the Border’ – Three Further Perspectives On Barbarians Drawn Into The Broader Indo-European Sphere

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/purehorseclan.png?w=1024)

Following on from our earlier piece looking at ‘Barbarian’ in Vedic
understanding – here are several further examples .. along with broader
Indo-European comparanda contextualizing each.

Two of these were furnished by the same associate \[A.P.\] whom I had
been discussing with in the excerpt posted earlier. I have not
independently tracked them down in the textual corpus with the
‘Barbarian’ meaning – but I trust his recollection upon these matters.

The first of these is a very cool term – Sarasara (सरसर or सरासर). What
does it mean? Well, it’s comprised of a reduplication of a shorter
Sanskrit particle – Sara (सर ). Sara refers to ‘motion’, ‘wandering’.
It’s also utilized in more concrete reference to the ‘flow’ – for
example, of a liquid \[I hesitate in light of Sanskrit ‘Saras’ (सरस् )
to suggest somewhatjokingly – ‘Sea People’\], but also potentially of
thought or speech. In terms of the former, it can particularly signify
quite a forceful gushing – as with a waterfall.

Now this is perhaps interesting to us, given the speculated etymology
for an array of European terms for the Nordic peoples. Goths, Geats,
Gautae, Gutes, etc. These terms link back to one of the two possible
Proto-Germanic and thence Proto-Indo-European roots for “God”, as it
happens – Proto-Germanic \*Geutana and PIE \*Ghewd, respectively. What
do these mean? ‘To Pour’ – as in ‘To Pour Libations’, thus explaining
its potential linkage to ‘God’ – “One To Whom Libations Are Poured”.

There are several not-necessarily-exclusive theories on just what these
ethnonyms were intended to mean. The one which is immediately relevant
for us here is the rather figurative one – perhaps prominent in the
minds of those they came into contact with on their migrations
(Völkerwanderung ) southward from Scandinavia. That of these incredible
waves of ‘Barbarian’ peoples ‘flowing forth’, ‘pouring out’ from their
Heimat in nighunstoppable waves.

It is not hard to see how, in the Hindu imagination, the continual
stream of invaders turning up from the Steppes of Central Asia via the
northwest passage out of the SubContinent through Afghanistan, might
have seemed a similar succession of torrents.

As applies Sarasara, the duplicated ‘Sara’ effectively gives an
idiomatic definition of, to quote one Sanskrit dictionary – “Moving
hither and thither”.

That is to say .. “Nomadic”. Which, of course, the Central Asian
#GangSteppe tribes often *were*.

There are several other understandings for ‘Sara’ which might also have
some bearing, of course –सर for ‘Arrow’, would be one prominent
example. Usually it is *another* Sara (शर – ‘Shara’, perhaps more
properly) which would mean ‘Arrow’ more pointedly, but perhaps the
notion of the arrow’s flight being swift motion underpins this
understanding for the same ‘Sara’ as ‘motion’ here. I mention this
because it has long been felt that the etymology for an array of
Scythian ethnonyms are, in effect, terms for ‘Shooters’, ‘Skewerers’.
Indeed, the speculated Proto-Indo-European root is \*Skewd – which may
also, aptly enough, underpin Lord Skanda’s theonym, as it can also refer
to just such a forceful advance, a ‘charge’ even. Via K => H
sound-shift, it is not hard to see how this eventually turns into our
modern English ‘Shoot’. And given the wide-renown for the famed Scythian
Archer – or, for that matter, the figure upon horseback (or even riding
some more exotic creature) whilst wielding a long spear-like weapon – it
is not hard to see, either, why an ethnonym would so closely mirror such
an endemic activity to same.

I am also very intrigued byसार (‘Saara’) as in ‘Wind’. There are
several reasons for this. One of which is the immediately obvious – and
is buttressed further by the array of ‘Wind’ related expressions we find
for #GangSteppe in its native environs.“Ride Like The Wind”, and “May
As Well Attempt To Catch The Wind” (the latter in relation to Darius’
foolhardy ‘Scythian Campaign’ and his inability to actually bring his
foes to decisive battle except at the time and place of their choosing),
for example. However also due to the perhaps coincidental resonancy
between the utilization for this ‘Saara’ in relation to the Vyomakesha –
the ‘Heaven-Hair’ – of Lord Shiva. I have discussed this iconographic
and cosmological element elsewhere at greater length (as well as its
Ancient Greek cognate understanding for Dionysus, Hades, Poseidon –
theKyanokhaitis characteristic shared by all ‘Three’) and shall not
reduplicate that work here. Suffice to say, my mind recalled a rather
later Jat folk-belief that they and their ethnonym are similarly
descended from Lord Shiva’s Hair. The idea being that as His Hair is
“Jatta” \[ जट – ‘the matted hair of the ascetic’ – a figurative
rendering quite commensurate with the above-mentioned Vyomakesha and
that Greek perception\], so too do the Jats arise \[ जात – ‘Jaata’ \].
More specifically, their legend appears to build from the storied
accounts in far more archaic Sanskrit scripture wherein Rudra, or an
emissary of same, not only arrives Himself in a state of furor, but
congeals an army of Rudras, Maruts, Ganas, etc. (the precise complement
is contingent upon the specific text) from His Form to aid in the
violence about to ensue.

The Jats therefore position themselves as a ‘resonancy’ of sorts with
this Divine Warhost and Favoured Sons or Huscarls, we might almost
suggest, of the mighty Sky Father Himself. A situation which is ever
more intriguing when considered in light of two further factors:

First, the array of conceptry I considered in ‘On Scythian Tabiti
Invoked As Protector Goddess For The King ? A Further Illumination Of
The Might Of The Radiant Queen Of The Indo-Europeans Via The Light Of
Vedic Aditi ; The Scythians As Storm-Borne Host Of Her Children’ –
wherein yes, it does appear possible that the Scythians occupied a
situation analogous to those famed Sons of Rudra and Aditi, the Maruts …
right down to the appropriate iconographic elements and pointed
self-reference as the Sons of the Sky Father (Papaios) and Radiant Queen
of the Heavens (Tabiti). (Also, alongside this, my ongoing series of
observations about the ‘Turanian’ etc. Scythian groupings acting in
exactly a ‘Divine Avenger’ manner when confronted by certain … invidious
opponents to the Great God and other orthodox Indo-European deifics in
question; a situation perhaps somewhat less successfully recalled via,
say, the Jat conflicts with Mahmud of Ghazni following the latter’s
abominable raid upon Shiva’s sanctum as Somnath in Gujarat; all of which
may be worth mentioning due to the additional sense of सर as a
‘purgative’ … ) At the very least, we have quite prominent attestations
amidst both ancient Hindu texts and the archaeological record for
Shaivite devotion out there amidst #GangSteppe.

And second, the fact that archaeogeneticanalysis shows that the Jats –
despite their occasionally … over-enthusiastic claiming of seemingly
every vaguely relevant people across Eurasia as some form of forebear …
*do* actually appear to have frequent genetic contribution from archaic
Scythian-sphere \[i.e. Steppe Indo-Iranic that remained out upon the
Steppe\] populations. This does not, however, mean that ‘Jat’ is
etymologically related to or even ancestral of those array of Nordic /
Germanic ethnonyms I had aforementioned – but it is still rather
remarkable all the same.

Perhaps, just perhaps, there is some ‘mythic truth’ to the stories they
have told about themselves or others have told with them as focus. I
digress.

The point is – ‘Sarasara’ fits rather well for what a somewhat later
Hindu perception of ‘Barbarian’ would entail. A ‘Nomad’ moving with
great speed and force; and interestingly, a term which would seemingly
connote almost the opposite of what we more usually seem to expect for
an array of ‘Barbarian’ / ‘Other’ terminology, as discussed in my
previous piece upon this subject. What I mean by this is that given the
utility of ‘Sara’ in Sanskrit to refer to a flow of speech – a ‘full
flight’ of elocution, indeed (c.f. ‘Sara’ of ‘Saraswati’ : सर of
सरस्वती) – ‘Sarasara’ as a doubled formulation would seem to suggest a
diametric antithesis to the idea of ‘halting’, ‘jabbering’, and
ponderously incomprehensible ‘baah-‘ing speech of the ‘Barbarian. Or
maybe these Sarasaras simply happened to talk really fast. And produce
voluminous torrents of words at a time.

The second of these ‘Barbarian’ terms pointed out to me by my associate
is ‘Marmara’ (मर्मर) – which A.P. correctly addeuced to be a cognate
to modern English ‘Murmur’. In Sanskrit, it can also refer not only to a
‘murmuring’ but also to a ‘rustling’ noise.

Now this is, again, an intriguing term which correlates with what we
*should* expect for a ‘Barbarian’ labelling. From Proto-Indo-European
\*Mormur, which appears to be an onomatopoeic formulation to describe
exactly what it sounds like – the act of indistinct vocal expression. In
Ancient Greek, this PIE turns into μορμύρω ( mormuro ), which means “to
roar” or “boil” and particularly applies to water in either sense. There
is a particular Sanskrit theological expression I often quote which
posits Thunder (utilizing a ‘Garj’ term that also means ‘To Roar’) as
‘Indistinct Speech’ likewise, although there it is more of the ‘subtle’
and divinely resonant variety. In Old Armenian, meanwhile, we
haveմռմռամ ( mrmram ), which does not simply incorporate the ‘murmur’
we might be expecting – but actively goes for the ‘growling’ and
animalistic, aggressive and angry connotations as well. It is not hard
to see how this, too, would be both relevant to the Proto-Indo-European
conception’s meaning (the ‘low gutteral’ of a threatening predator as a
tangible exemplar for such an indistinct and lower-pitched noise even if
it is perhaps not overtly what we think of when we say ‘murmur’ today)
and also, as applies the aggression, and yes animalistic connotations ..
‘savagery’, we might suggest .. for a figurative development into
‘Barbaric’ epithetery. This is particularly the case given the
well-known proclivity for ‘Barbaric’ Indo-European warbands to adopt
totemic creatures that may themselves have exactly such a habitual noise
to them – the growling of the kind of canine which starts off in the
back of their throat and promises to soon be in the back of somebody
else’s, for instance.

Again, I must emphasize that I have not as yet managed to track down
either Sarasara or Marmara in the Sanskrit textual corpus being utilized
in such a manner – but I am trusting the recollection of A.P.; and Pali
derivative usage would probably vindicate him in any case.

One which is on somewhat surer footing (by which I mean, I had overseen
and been able to check this one myself) – isमर्यादा (Maryada).

Now this is, again, fascinating on a comparative basis. The actual term
itself is *supposed* to mean ‘Boundary, Border’. It is *hypothesized* to
derive from Proto-Indo-European \*Mori to refer to a ‘sea’ – an obvious
‘hard limit’ on territory. Except I’m not quite sure how correct that
may be. PIE \*Mori is, itself, from PIE \*Mer – a term that
simultaneously encompasses in its meaning-field both bodies of water
(compare ‘Mere’, ‘Mare’, or ‘Mer’ in more recent European languages) and
Death. The coterminity on it is best explicated mytholinguistically –
both in terms of both Death and a body of water being somewhere one can
‘Disappear’ (also part of PIE \*Mer’s meaning field) … and more
especially the notion of water as ‘liminal space’ between the Worlds.
Whether we are speaking of the Sea of Sky which must be sailed to reach
the Afterworld (‘Underworld’ is not quite the right term of reference
for reasons which ought be obvious – see my previous works for
additional explication), or we are looking at the River of the Dead
which turns up with such regularity across an array of Indo-European
descended cosmologies and metempsychotic jaunts.

The reason I have really dived into this etymological matter here, is
because that \*Mer, as in ‘Death’ … also has some conceptual
resonancyfor \*yet another\* PIE \*Mer – in this case, to mean a young
person (frequently – although not always – a ‘young man’). It turns into
an array of subsequent terms of potential bearing upon these matters.
One which I ought flag for later investigation is my spur-of-the-moment
supposition that ‘Mars’ and ‘Martial’ may be thusly derived – something
which I have not seen suggested by orthodox linguistics which instead
sees the origins for these terms in Etruscan (a situation which need not
countermand a PIE root – given well-founded academic re-evaluation of
Etruscan as a potentially Indo-European language) or simply leaves it
unexplained. \[Slight update: it would appear that there have indeed
been some previous scholars who have sought to link Mars to Latin ‘Mas’
– with ‘Mas’ having upon occasion been supposed to link to PIE \*Mer,
although this proposal having been moved away from in more recent years.
I am evidently in good, if archaic, company then. Just where I prefer to
be – at least some of the time.\]

However, the main suite of meaning of interest for us here is an
impressively broad one. By which I mean geographically in its evident
breadth of dispersion. How broad? Well, it turns up rather prominently
in the ancient Near East – not ordinarily thought of as Indo-European
territory (Hittites and Mittani overlords excepted) – where we find the
‘Maryannu’ … chariot-mounted warriors, who appear to have imported both
term, technology and tactics from the Indo-Aryan expansion then ongoing
much further to the East. How do we know? Because we find just such an
Indo-Aryan superstrate for Mitanni brought in along with the
swift-moving warriors who were the effective core and likely ruling
elite for that Confederation. Indeed, via the linguistics of the
horse-training manual of Kikkuli it should seem quite plausible that
there were ongoing interrelations between the Mitanni sphere and that of
the more ‘core’ Indo-Aryans who had then entered into the SubContinent.

In any case, Maryannu is, in essence, Indo-Aryan ‘Marya’ with the
addition of a localized suffix (ostensibly Hurrian) – eminently
appropriate for a polity which was substantively Hurrian with an
Indo-Aryan warrior elite.

Why is this of interest to us? Simply put – because those ‘Marya’ acting
as warriors, horse-borne and hungry for glory, don’t just show up in the
Levant or in worried Egyptian letters detailing the happenings there in
same. They also show up in both the archaic major subdivisions of
Indo-Iranian – as Marya, as we have met, in Indo-Aryan and thence
Sanskrit, and as Mairya in Avestan. And the contrast could not be more
apparent.

In Sanskrit, ‘Marya’ ( मर्य ) means – an array of things, including
simply a young man, a suitor, or a stallion (perhaps akin to both
‘horseman’, and the other more figurative connotation of calling a man a
‘stallion’ today, Italian or otherwise). In Avestan? Mariya turns up in
post-Zoroaster \[i.e. post-Zoroastrian Heresy and accompanying social
and religious “reformation”\] usage to refer to not simply ‘warriors’ –
but raiders, marauders, ‘scoundrels’ (as M. Boyce renders the figurative
connotation). To be clear about this … these are the exact same figures,
broadly speaking, as their Vedic Sanskrit counterparts – only the
‘valuation’ has significantly shifted in Avestan usage due to the
Zoroastrian ethos.

Partially, this was due to the perception that such activities were
incompatible with the ‘social order’ Zoroaster wished to promulgate –
and so therefore could not be part of the society. That would be the
‘official reason’.  
The somewhat less officially stated – yet more comprehensively correct
account expands upon this, and notes that the ‘revaluation’ largely due
to the fact that these warrior-bands were bastions of religious
conservatism and the orthodoxy we should find quite recognizable to the
religious spheres of the Vedic and Scythian / Turanic #GangSteppe
peoples. That is to say, they were therefore living, breathing
manifestations of what Zoroaster and his reformers hated and feared upon
a metaphysical basis – as well as what defeated them in the civil war
they sparked up in Bactria and which resulted in the Zoroastrian exodus
to Media far to the west. Not for nothing do we find ‘Mairya’ utilized
to refer to Angra Mainyu, and – as Wikander observes – an effective
synonym for ‘Daevic’ \[i.e. ‘Divine’ in the proper understanding –
‘Demonic’ in the insistent calumny of the Zoroastrians\]. Holy Warriors,
we might almost venture. Certainly fighting against a most unholy cause
indeed !

As a point of further interest – Marut , the fearsome Storm-Sons of
Rudra Dyaus Pitar and Aditi , is plausibly somewhat coterminous with
these terms – however, not necessarily in the direct sense occasionally
proffered of descending directly from Death (notwithstanding, of course,
that yes, yes the Maruts do *directly* descend from not one but *two*
deities that may be fairly addressed as ‘Death’ in relevant
circumstances and contexts … I mean PIE \*Mer – with the ‘Sea’
understanding perhaps being additionally relevant given the Sky of Sea
concept known to exist in archaic Indo-European cosmology … the Maruts,
after all, having a rather prominent association with the Rain which is
Water From On High – ‘Sea People’ again, perhaps .. again, somewhat
jokingly).

Rather, it would be via the useful intermediary of that which is implied
by this third \*Mer sense – pertaining to the young person. The same one
which gives us ‘Marya’, ‘Mairyu’, and ‘Maryannu’, etc. Why? Because the
warband in question – in this case, the true and direct Sons of the Sky
Father and the Radiant Queen of the Heavens, iconographically described
in terms that seem \*suspiciously\* resonant with how the Scythians
appear to have endeavoured to come across, if the archaeological finds
at Pazyryk for ‘horse-antlers’ etc. are anything to go by …

This warband – or, if you prefer, ‘mannerbund’ – is not simply comprised
of ‘Young Heroes’. Rather, the essential characteristic for these young
men is to be found in that *other* sense to PIE \*Mer – ‘Death’. What am
I saying? That these young warriors are, in a sense, ‘death-seekers’,
‘daredevils’, engaged in the sorts of things which younger men are so
renowned for: derring-do and attempts to impress through ‘do-first,
think-later’ conduct so typical of humans whose prefrontal cortexes
aren’t \*quite\* in full commission yet. And who therefore do not,
perhaps paradoxically, fully comprehend their own mortality in earnest.

All of which brings us nicely back to Sanskrit ‘Maryada’ (मर्यादा ).
Which is, per folk-etymology upon the subject, derived from our friend
‘Marya’ (मर्य ) in conjunction with ‘Ada’ (अद – cognate with ‘Eat’ and
meaning ‘Devourer’, ‘Carnivorous’); effectively giving a meaning of ‘The
Young Men Devoured / Consumed \[By Warfare\] In Securing The Border’.
The more standard suggestion would instead trace it via ‘Maryaa’ ( मर्या
– ‘Limit’, ‘Measure’, cognate with English ‘March’, ‘Mark’ –
interestingly also related to Sanskrit मार्ग (‘Marga’), which, as
‘Track’, turns also into a term for wild animal and informs certain
‘Hunter’ conceptry likewise .. including pointed Shaivite conceptry in
scripture), and I shall perhaps leave the various permutations of ‘Ada’
and ‘Da’ conceptry to inform the second half for another piece.

In any case, where I was ultimately going with all of this was the
notion of the Barbarian as the ‘Man Upon The Periphery’. Something
which, to be sure, usually posits the Barbarian in question as being *on
the other side* from the viewer (and it is always a useful question to
ponder just which side of the glass one is really on, to reference me
some Trent Reznor at this odd hour of the morning), a ‘Wolf At Your
Door’ looking to rampage on in to the realm of civilization and
civility.

Yet with this figurative understanding and folk-etymology for ‘Maryada’,
I suggest that we have something quite different. The Marya may indeed
be something of a ‘Barbaric’ figure (to the terror of the Zoroastrian
and the delight of the Vedic Arya in seeming not-quite equal measure),
yet here we see the ‘barbaric’ warrior standing watch on the border
*against* the invader, the interloper, the invidious infidel. A most
‘Martial’ situation and standing indeed !

And interestingly, something which has seemingly resonated down the ages
– A.P. was intrigued to note the saliency in the Punjab for a certain
‘Babbar’ … which appears to have maintained the ‘strength’ and ‘honour’
connotations to ‘Barbarian’ yet without various of the also-thought-of
negatives for Sanskrit ‘Barbara’. Given the position of the Punjab as
exactly that ‘Gateway to India’ and inhabited by the Frontiersman
defenders of same from various threats most immediately to the west and
north thereof … it should seem quite apt for this to have evidently
occurred.

Looking at this piece, which has .. grown quite considerably from what
was initially supposed to be merely a few relatively succinct, short
paragraphs in train … it is abundantly clear (if it weren’t already) –
that when it comes to “Barbarians” … they’re *so* much more than just a
speech-impediment !
