+++
title = "Deific On Horseback With"
full_title = "Deific On Horseback With Two Ravens From Central Asia"
date = "2021-09-09"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/09/deific-on-horseback-with-two-ravens-from-central-asia/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/09/deific-on-horseback-with-two-ravens-from-central-asia/).

Deific On Horseback With Two Ravens From Central Asia

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/khotanese-ii.png?w=1024)

  
Another votive panel from the Khotanese Saka (Scythians) at Dandan Oilik
in the Taklamakan.

Now there are a few points of interest here. Obviously, one of these is
the fine horseman figure on the right of the image. He’s a direct
resonancy with the similar figure I wrote about yesterday – tentatively
identifiable as a form of the Sky Father (Vedic Rudra and other such
forms), in a ritual offering context bringing/bestowing the Soma.

Here, there is no clearly visible offering-bowl, but the style of horse
is obviously the same – and rather than *one* black bird (ostensibly a
Corvid – a Crow or Raven), we have *two*. And yes, yes this *would*
comport rather closely with the broader Indo-European typology I set out
in my previous (A)Arti-cle that also draws significantly from Nordic
Odin.

Of further interest is the Tree in the middle – which, as with the
painting of the bird in yesterdays’ image, appears almost deliberately
to visually recall the Trishula \[Trident\] of Mahadev. And thus the
World-Spear which is also the Axis Mundi that we find so closely
correlate with the Sky Father deific.

This has some figurative resonancy with the Iranic sphere conception of
the Empowering Elixir being brought from a high tree of brilliant
whiteness by certain birds, as well. Perhaps also mirroring the ‘Meli’
double-meaning which references both the Ash Tree and Honey as found in
Ancient Greek linguistics and religion.

The figure on the left has not been identified – indeed, likely cannot
be identified with any surety. One proposal from entirely within the
Buddhist sphere would be a Vaishravana depiction. However, amongst the
Khotanese’ Sogdian neighbours (part of that same East Iranic and trading
sphere), it is well remarked upon that what is often identified as
Vaisravana … draws heavily from the Hindu iconography of Lord Skanda.
The lack of these (Hindu) elements may, therefore, ironically render the
Buddhist (co-)identification less likely.

There are not *necessarily* the suitable iconographic details preserved
upon this left figure to really make a hard determination in either
direction. About the only thing we can say is that the figure on the
left is a warrior – armed with a spear, armoured, and with what *may* be
a building or shrine over the right shoulder.

Nevertheless, impressive art – especially given its age and provenance.
