+++
title = "Devi At Panjikent – A"
full_title = "Devi At Panjikent – A Sogdian Depiction Of The Great Goddess Accompanied By The SpearWielder"
date = "2021-09-24"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/24/devi-at-panjikent-a-sogdian-depiction-of-the-great-goddess-accompanied-by-the-spear-wielder/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/24/devi-at-panjikent-a-sogdian-depiction-of-the-great-goddess-accompanied-by-the-spear-wielder/).

Devi At Panjikent – A Sogdian Depiction Of The Great Goddess Accompanied By The Spear-Wielder

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/painting-from-penjikent-sector-xxv-room-12-after-grenet-marshak-1998-fig-12.png?w=850)

I am a bit late with this one – but Friday’s Day is Devi’s Day, and with
Dawn just creeping over the horizon … outline reproduction of one of the
incredible mural paintings from Panjikent, a Sogdian centre in
modern-day Tajikistan.

The central figure to the depiction is Nana, mounted upon a lion-like
vahana. As I’ve detailed in my previous work upon the subject – despite
persistent prevarications from academia, *not* some “Mesopotamian
import”, but instead a quite direct loka-lized depiction of the
Indo-European Great Goddess – more usually known as Durga to the south
in India, amidst many other theonyms and epithets.

The figure in the upper right is presumably a human supplicant, and
there are quite an array of mythic and mytho-historical occurrences that
are of an eminently similar theme. Particularly involving a prince or a
king or some other such figure praying for the provision of a weapon or
other such militarized blessing as required to then ride forth and unify
his (soon-to-be) kingdom.

Now, the figure on the right … I may return to at some future time,
because there’s quite a lot which can be said even of such a
fragmentarily preserved presentation. One academic identification for
Him is that this is Tishtrya / Tisya / Tir … and I do not necessarily
disagree. Only choosing to enhance this identification with my own suite
of annotation built from the Vedic observation that, to quote the
Yajurveda: “Tisya is Rudra”.

And, looking upon it – without going into further detail as to the
relevant iconography … a spear-wielding figure situated next to the
lion-mounted Goddess, well, in Hindu terms we should consider the
identification obvious.

In any case, even despite the sadly time-worn state of the rendering, it
is nevertheless an enigmatically beautiful devotional set of imagery.

Jai Mata DI !
