+++
title = "Juno Sospita of the"
full_title = "Juno Sospita of the Palatine – An Interpretatio Romana In Motion !"
date = "2021-09-30"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/30/juno-sospita-of-the-palatine-an-interpretatio-romana-in-motion/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/09/30/juno-sospita-of-the-palatine-an-interpretatio-romana-in-motion/).

Juno Sospita of the Palatine – An Interpretatio Romana In Motion !

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/09/juno_sospita_lanuvium.jpg?w=768)

Friday is, of course, Devi’s Day – and so therefore, a visage less
frequently depicted … a well-armed Warrior Goddess – Juno !

Now at first, this might seem strange. We are used to the idea of Juno
as a regal, queenly figure; yet a shield and spear equipped female
warrior amongst the Gods we would ordinarily presume to be Athena /
Minerva.

However, this is Juno Sospita – Juno the Savioress. And so it is perhaps
apt that we find Her to be well-armed and of a certain degree of martial
bearing.

Of additional interest to us is that this fine Juno sculpture may have
stood in a shrine connected to the Temple of Magna Mater \[‘Great
Mother’\], or even within that Temple itself.

Why this is noteworthy is that Magna Mater was, of course, Cybele – Who,
as I have previously observed, represents a rather clear expression of
the archaic Indo-European ‘Mountain Mother’ deific figure … imported
under intriguing circumstances into the heart of Rome Herself.

Those intriguing circumstances were in the context of the Second Punic
War against hated Carthage – when the Sibylline Oracle stated that only
by bringing the Cybelian figure and attendant worship to Rome could Rome
triumph over Her direst adversary.

This caused quite an uproar in some portions of Roman society at the
time – there was an understandable opposition to bringing a ‘foreign’
deific into the city, even given the words of the Sibyl upon the matter.

The sentiment was partially countered via the ingenious pointing out
that as the Romans claimed descent from the Trojans – bringing in an
Anatolian Goddess was, therefore, simply ‘welcoming home’ one of their
own Ancestral Deities, as it were.

Now of course, today we know that this is false – the Romans were not
descended of Troy; and in any case, the situation of Anatolian
Indo-European religion is quite a complicated one which we shall not get
into here.

Yet I do not disagree that the Romans had brought an ‘ancestral Goddess’
after a sort back to Rome. The Phrygians had come from a locale close to
the Indo-European Urheimat, after all – and so the Magna Mater that came
to Rome was ultimately of arguably similar provenancy.

The co-location of the Savior Juno, therefore, with the Savior Great
Mother Who had arrived just when Rome needed Her the most … cannot be at
all coincidental.

Instead, it is – if you like – a sort of ‘real-time’ Interpretatio
Romana : where we see the co-identification via co-location of two
expressions of the same Indo-European Goddess Who acted in the same
functional role.

Jai Mata Di !
