+++
title = "Teaching the"
full_title = "Teaching the Tarkasaṃgraha to firstyear students"
date = "2016-02-28"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/28/teaching-the-tarkasa%e1%b9%83graha-to-first-year-students/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/28/teaching-the-tarkasa%e1%b9%83graha-to-first-year-students/).

Teaching the Tarkasaṃgraha to first-year students

What follows is a reflection onmy experiences teaching the
*Tarkasaṃgraha*, as I promised in the comments to a recent post*.*Part
of my job at Yale-NUS College is to teach a college-wide common
curriculum course that spans two semesters. It’s called “[Philosophy and
Political
Thought](https://www.yale-nus.edu.sg/curriculum/common-curriculum/philosophy-and-political-thought/)”(PPT).
The course introduces students to three intellectual traditions
categorized roughly by geography: Chinese, Indian, and
Greco-Roman-Western thought. (While demarcating these boundaries is
contentious stuff, for the purposes of teaching, we do have to mark
boundaries somewhere.) Thecurrent semester begins with Śāntideva’s
*Bodhicaryāvatāra*and ends with Hannah Arendt, “Thinking and Moral
Considerations: A Lecture.”

**Teaching the*Tarkasaṃgraha:* How and Why**

Two weeks ago, before spring break, our students read the “inference”
chapter (*anumānapariccheda*) of the*Tarkasaṃgraha*(*Primer on
\[objects of\] Reasoning*), along with a few selections from
his*Dīpikā* on the text. Why this text? Well, for one thing, part of
what we want our students to consider in this course is how to reason
well, and the*Primer’s*discussion of*anumāna* gives them a framework
to think about when claims are justified, what to do in the face of a
counter-argument, and so on. They also were introduced to epistemology
with selections from Descartes’*Meditations*, and the*Primer* is a
nice way to challenge some dichotomies they might think are neatly
carved out there–between empiricism and rationalism, for instance. It
also uses doubt in a different way, as a spur for reasoning, and as a
possible defeater, but at local, not global level.

As I have done for introductory-level classes the last few years, I put
a selection of the text on [Classroom
Salon](http://www.classroomsalon.com) for students to annotate. We
focused on the opening part of the chapter, which distinguishes
between*svārthānumāna* and *parārthānumāna*, and addresses
the*pūrvapakṣin*‘s worries about *vyāpti*, or regular concomitance.
Having just been exposed to Descartes, they were quite worried that we
could ever have certain knowledge of the relationship between smoke and
fire, for instance. The result of their discussion online and in class
was that we were able to talk about what*bhūyodarśana*(“abundant
experience”) is, and why the Naiyāyikas might begin there, rather than
with the sort of project Descartes has in mind.

Further, while the pedagogical focus was not explicitly what Anand
Vaidya calls “[the character
view](http://blog.apaonline.org/2016/02/15/the-inclusion-problem-in-critical-thinking-the-case-of-indian-philosophy/),”
in my opening lecture, I gave the students some context about debate
culture and the burgeoning cosmopolitanism in Annaṃbhaṭṭa’s time (for
which see Ganeri’s*[The Lost Age of
Reason](https://books.google.com.sg/books?id=ApGqngEACAAJ&dq)*). The
goal was for students to see connections between their PPT course and
its multiple textual traditions as well as their contemporary position
in an increasingly global world. We could then talk about the role of
the examples in*parārthānumāna* and what kinds of inferences are
compelling and why. The biggest challenge for them was to see that, now
that they had all experienced arguments for and against certain beliefs,
they were in a tricky epistemic spot, given the fallacy known as
“\`counter-argument.”Can they claim that they know that the self
exists, for instance? As we move in the course to focusing on the skill
of formulating good objections and responses, my hope is that they will
be more sensitive tothe virtues of argumentation.

**Challenges of Teaching**

One of the topics we’ve talked about on this blog is the challenge of
introducing Indian philosophy into the default “Western philosophy”
courses. I’m in a special situation at Yale-NUS, where this course is,
by design, incorporating multiple traditions, and it is team-taught. Yet
there are still similar obstacles as in any other institution. My peers
are generally experts in areas other than Indian philosophy(save for
Amber Carpenter and Gavin Flood–not on this year’s teaching team) and
when introducing a new text, they do not have time to get up to date on
the secondary literature on Nyāya. This means it is my job to teach
other philosophers Nyāya epistemology in a way which (1) enables them to
feel competent teaching the text and (2) is philosophically robust
enough to satisfy their own questions. This process (which I have also
had to do for the *Gīta-bhāṣya-*s of Śaṅkara and Rāmānuja, and
Uddyotakara and Vatsyāyana’s commentaries on the*Nyāya-sūtra*) has been
humbling and eye-opening. While I’m in no position yet to be writing
textbooks for introductory courses, I have a better sense ofwhat
suchresources might need to do for non-specialists wanting to teach.

There are two major difficulties these kinds of books need to surmount.
First is the well-known problem of “Sanskritese” translations. I
adaptedG.Bhattacharya’s translation (Calcutta: Progressive Publishers,
1976), along with V.N. Jha’s (Kerala: Chinmaya International Foundation
Shodha Sansthan, 2010), with reference to some Sanskrit editions, in
order to put together something a bit more readable and accurate (no
reference to “middle” and “major terms”, for instance). However, there
are still spots which could be clarified–which my colleagues helped me
see, as they are unfamiliar with the kinds of locutions common in these
translations. Second, there are questions that philosophers not trained
in Indian philosophy will naturally askwhichneed to be answered or
reframed. So, in teaching*anumāna*, how deeply should one get into the
debates over itsmonoticity, its purportedly hybrid inductive/deductive
character, on the ways in which it can be represented formally? (That
isn’t to say these aren’t questions that those of us trained in Indian
philosophy ask–we do–but we may not ask them at the same places, or find
them obstacles in the same way.) These questions are bound to arise, and
something needs to be said, even if it is only to remind the reader
ofthe limitations of certain categories.

Finally, a difficulty that the students seem to have with Indian
philosophy and not so much with Chinese philosophy, is the successful
employment of these concepts in a modern context. While they (generally
speaking) do not fault Zhu Xi’s metaphysics of Pattern and*qi*for
being out of step with the deliverances of science, this is a worry for
Indian philosophers. I think this is in part because Indian philosophy
reads in a way that is more “technical” than Chinese philosophy (whether
such a difference exists is a further question). Second, the claims are
more immediately comparable for introductory students. It’s hard to know
how to determine whether Pattern and*qi* are consistent with what
first-year college students think of as “science”, but they can come up
with objections to claims about earthiness being characterized by the
property of having odor. For this reason, I’ve been focusing on
motivating the metaphysics behind the Nyāya examples–emphasizing the way
in which categories map onto sense modalities. And second, I’ve been
challenging them to come up with their own examples using Annaṃbhaṭṭa’s
structure. In this way, they could see that the scientific method of
hypothesizing about cause-and effect is not so far off as they
originally thought (I had one set of students construct
a*kevala-vyatireka* or “negative-only”**inference using mercury
instead of earth!).

All in all, the feedback (so far) from my colleagues has been that the
text was at the right level of challenge for the students. It was
difficult, but not insurmountably so. One colleague had students
construct the Nyāya-Bauddha debate using the inferential forms they
learned–a good way for them to see in retrospect what was going on when
they read Vasubandhu, Uddoytakara, et al. The text also lacked any
explicitly religious elements, which I think was helpful for the
students to see that Indian thought is not only religious, which is a
sense they might get if they only read the *Gīta,* Buddhist texts, and
Gandhi. So, for anyone looking to incorporate some Indian philosophy
into an epistemology, intro, or logic course–try the*Primer on
Reasoning*? It is, after all, written to be an introductory textbook.
