+++
title = "Dialog between Science"
full_title = "Dialog between Science and Philosophy a new event"
date = "2016-02-20"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/20/dialog-between-science-and-philosophy-a-new-event/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/20/dialog-between-science-and-philosophy-a-new-event/).

Dialog between Science and Philosophy: a new event



The event, sponsored by the Indian council of Philosophical Research,
Delhi, is scheduled to be held as a Discussion meeting in the
Poornaprajna Institute of Scientific Research, **Bangalore from 25th Oct
to 27th October**.

The event is an outgrowth of the ongoing Dialog between Science and
Philosophy started nearly a decade back in Nava Nalanda Mahavihara
‘Nalanda’ Bihar (for the past Nalanda Dialogs, please visit this
[link](http://www.nalandadialogforum.org)).

This Bangalore Event is actually a part of a current project motivated
by the lessons of the Nalanda Dialogs — a project entitled “Dialog
across Traditions – Modern science and traditional Indian insight about
Reality”*.*  


In this event the organisers will try to engage Indian philosophers of
different schools in a Dialog with science*,* will try to get the
philosophers response to questions pertaining to different areas of
difficulties related to foundation of science issues. Sample questions
are already being distributed among the philosophers after locating them
mainly in places of traditional importance like Mithila, Varanasi and
places in South India .

The process of locating scholars interested to respond to the issues are
still going on.

For almost all details related to this Project as well as many events
prior to the October Dialog, check this
[link](http://sciencephilosophydialog.wordpress.com). The organisers
will really appreciate suggestions from readers about Areas of Indian
Philosophy which can be better extended to meet the epistemological
criteria of modern science (particularly Physical science, since the
organisers come themselves from Physics).
