+++
title = "Old Prābhākaras"
full_title = "Old Prābhākaras"
date = "2016-02-18"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/18/old-prabhakaras/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/18/old-prabhakaras/).

Old Prābhākaras

Mīmāṃsā has had a “split personality” for roughly the past millennium:
interpretations generally follow one of the two great teachers, Kumārila
Bhaṭṭa or Prabhākara Miśra, and attack the other. The historical
development of these “two systems” still needs a good deal of
research—it must have happened for entirely different reasons than the
various splits within Vedānta, which were strongly linked to
institutions and religious movements—but for now we can look at just a
single point where Mīmāṃsakas ancient and modern have projected some
ideas about this history, and where we can possibly attain some clarity.
That point is “the Old Prābhākaras” (*jaratprābhākara-*).

First, I have only ever seen *jaratprābhākara-*, and not
*jaratprabhākara-*. This should therefore refer to the “Old Followers of
Prabhākara” and not “The Old Prabhākara.” But Subrahmaṇyaśāstrī for some
reason has taken the latter course, suggesting (in his introduction to
the edition of the Prakaraṇapañcikā, p. 24) that Old Prabhākara was a
predecessor and teacher of Prabhākara, the author of the *Bṛhatī*.

Second, I am not aware of any author earlier than Vācaspati Miśra (late
9th century) using this phrase. And Vācaspati distinguishes between “Old
Prābhākaras” and “New Prābhākaras.” The latter refers (primarily if not
exclusively) to Śālikanāthamiśra. The former seems to be some Mīmāṃsakas
who had slightly different interpretations of Prabhākara’s ideas.
Contrast the interpretations given of Prabhākara’s statement
“obligation, which has the fact that something is to be done as its
content, does not denote the fact that something is to be done”
(*kartavyatāviṣayo niyogo na kartavyatām āha*) in Vācaspati’s
*Nyāyakaṇikā* (p. 77 of Mahaprabhu Lal Goswami’s edition). Jayapurī
Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa also refers to the Old Prābhākaras in his commentary to
Śālikanātha’s *Prakaraṇapañcikā*. Śālikanātha himself doesn’t refer to
the Old Prābhākaras, or quote from any texts of theirs, and I am not
always sure that the “others” in the *Prakaraṇapañcikā* that Nārāyaṇa
Bhaṭṭa identifies as Old Prābhākaras are actually “Prābhākaras,” that
is, followers and interpreters of Prabhākara Miśra. They don’t seem to
follow Prābhākara particularly closely, and indeed Śālikanātha uses
Prabhākara’s remarks to argue against them. They might possibly be older
Mīmāṃsakas.

Third, this raises the issue of Śālikanātha’s proximity to Prabhākara.
Later scholars, such as Vācaspati, clearly thought that Śālikanātha was
several generations removed from Prabhākara. More recent authors have
been misled into thinking that Śālikanātha was Prabhākara’s student by
Śālikanātha’s commitment to defending and explicating the thought of the
person he calls his *guru*. What would be useful to know is whether
Śālikanātha ever refers to other people in his interpretations of
Prabhākara’s comments. As it stands, it appears as if a few groups of
scholars were studying Mīmāṃsā through Prabhākara’s commentary
*independently*, and later on Vācaspati distinguished these groups as
Old and New Prābhākaras.
