+++
title = "“We came to look for Christians and spices.”-First encounter of Vasco da Gama and his fleet with India."
date = "2020-06-29"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/06/29/we-came-to-look-for-christians-and-spices-first-encounter-of-vasco-da-gama-and-his-fleet-with-india/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2020/06/29/we-came-to-look-for-christians-and-spices-first-encounter-of-vasco-da-gama-and-his-fleet-with-india/).

The date was 20th May 1498, at the port city of Kozhikode or Calicut,
with all the hustle and bustle of a famous trading point, was business
as usual. A Portuguese fleet came and anchored itself near the city of
Calicut. After loosing the sea route to India for a long time, making
wrong turns, unknowingly finding landmasses hitherto unknown to them,
Europeans had finally reached the shores of this land and changed the
course of history!

This post is going to explore the very first encounter of the
Portuguese, with the kingdom of Calicut, whose ruler was the Zamorin, as
he was called and the backstory of how this encounter came about.

But firstly, this needs to be clarified that the word Zamorin, evidently
not very Indian, is most probably a mispronunciation. For the real word
was Samuri or Samudrin which meant Lord of the sea. Zamorin was its
corrupt Europeanised version.

**Background** **:**

Venice, the beautiful city of Europe had established itself at the helm
of the trade with East. On account of that, it had become a great
maritime power of the Mediterranean Sea. The pretty obvious outcome of
this was the increasing restlessness of the other kingdoms in Europe.
But Venice had kept the reins of trade in its hands through various
treaties with the Islamic nations. Other European kingdoms not
unexpectedly wanted their share.

This jealousy was “one of the chief motives that led the Genoese and the
Iberian nations to enterprises of maritime exploration, leading to Vasco
da Gama’s discovery was the desire to get direct to India without the
intervention of Venice or Egypt.”**(a)**

But, this certainly was not the only motive. When trade and allure of
the riches was the head, the heart of all of this was, not surprisingly,
religion, something which the textbooks in India don’t really explain.
Even if it is divulged by some miracle, its usually by making only
passing references. They came to trade in spices, they say. This is all
the more irritating when, the Portuguese themselves did not shy from
explaining their aims as to why they came to India. For them it was
always religion and trade, and in that particular order.

The man behind this humongous task of finding the sea route to India was
Dom Henry, Duke of Viscau, better known to the world as Prince Henry the
Navigator. He was given all the support of the royalty of Portugal. “By
this royal encouragement he had at his command, the immense resources of
the Order of the Christ, of which he was the grand master. That the
wealth of this religious Order should be used for the purpose of
exploration was nothing strange, because Prince Henry like a devout
Christian, regarded his discoveries as the conquest of the new world for
Christ. It is important to remember this because the policy of the
Portuguese in the East, becomes intelligible only in the light of the
firm belief which they entertained, till the very end of their supremacy
in the Indian seas, that their work was the work of God and, therefore,
as against them, no body of men, unless they be Christians had any
rights.”**(b)**

For all the new land that was being ‘discovered’, Prince Henry claimed
them for Portugal, the right of sovereignty over these ‘new’ lands. He
requested the same to the Pope and his request was granted. The result
was that a Papal Bull was issued . “Dom Henry did not fail to point out
that as a Christian prince he considered it his first duty that the
heathen people of the lands discovered should be claimed for Christ.”
**(c)**

Under the king Dom Joao II important discoveries were made. In 1486,
Bartholomeo Diaz rounded the Cape of Good Hope, the southern tip of
Africa and new horizons opened. After Joao’s death in 1496, Dom Manuel
succeded him and the explorations continues with the same zeal. Three
ships were ordered to be especially constructed so that they can
withstand the long voyage. Their construction took almost a year. “The
armada was ready in 1497 and the King, to the surprise of all entrusted
its command to an unknown courtier, a fidalgo of his Household, Vasco da
Gama.”**(d)**

![**Vasco da Gama embarking for India in 1497**. **Alfredo Roque Gameiro
\[1864-1935\](source: unknown)- One can see the emblem of Order of the
Christ on the
flags.**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/0913_vasco_crop-768x576-1.jpg?w=768)

**The Voyage:**

The ships sailed on 8 July 1497. The three ships were *San Gabriel*
which was the flag ship, second was *San Rafael* and the third was a
traditional Barrio. It is generally considered that Vasco himself
travelled on the flag ship. The three ships were also accompanied by an
unarmed supply ship. By the month of November, they rounded the Cape of
Good Hope and they encountered several ports on the eastern coastline of
Africa which had many Arabic speaking people. The journey from here to
the port of Malindi on the same eastern coast of Africa is full of
fascinating tales of Arabic Sultans of these petty principalities trying
to get these Europeans attacked and arrested. Its at Malindi/Melinde,
where the Sultan in order to have some allies against the Kingdom of
Mombasa, provided da Gama with an experienced pilot, who is said to be a
Moor from Gujarat. Some say that the pilot was the famous Arab navigator
Ibn Majid, but the little evidence in support of this is very sketchy.

About the capabilities of da Gama, some consider it his triumph, his
leadership that resulted in finding the sea route to India, but some
consider it to be an overstatement. “He *(da Gama)* was not sailing in
uncharted seas like, Columbus or Magellan, but sailing along recognised
routes to a country which was situated at a known distance from the
African coast. There is nothing in Vasco da Gama’s discovery which
entitles him to the claim, of a great explorer or navigator. His glory
is based entirely on the historical results, that followed for which he
was hardly responsible.”**(e)**

From here within 23 days, on 20th May 1498, the Portuguese fleet reached
near the port of Calicut. A journey of almost ten months had ended in an
event that held immense importance to both the parts of the world.

![**Painting of Gama’s arrival in India by Ernesto Casanova(source:
WikiMedia
Commons)**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/220px-vascodagama.jpg?w=220)

**Final Destination:**

There is a *‘Roteiro’*, an eyewitness account by an anonymous crew
member which details the encounter and description of the city, its
people, the king and gives us an idea of the ideological and the
economic motives of the Portuguese.

The following excerpt from that account explains a lot :

*“On Sunday, we sailed past some mountains, that tower over the city of
Calicut, and we sailed so close to them that the ship’s navigator
recognized them, and said this was the country we were trying to reach,
and in the afternoon on that same day, we dropped anchor, two leagues
below the city of Calicut.\[…\]*

*And after we were anchored, for rowboats came to us from shore. They
came to find out who we were, and they showed us Calicut and told us its
name. In the same way, these rowboats came back to our ship on the other
day, and the captain sent one of the exiles to Calicut and the people
whom he accompanied brought him to a place where two Moors from Tunis
lived, who could speak Castilian and Genoese, and the first thing they
cried out to him was, ‘Go to hell! Who brought you here anyway?’*

*They asked what we were looking for so far from home, and he answered,
**‘We came to look for Christians and spices**.***’***They said to him,
‘Why hasn’t the king of Castile sent anyone here, or the King of France
or the Signoria of Venice.?’ And he answered that that the king of
Portugal would not tolerate that from the other countries, and they said
that he would be well advised to do so.*

*Then they fed him wheat bread and honey, and after he ate he came back
to the ships, and one of the Moors came with him. And as the Moor came
on board, his first words were, ‘Welcome, welcome! Many rubies and many
emeralds! Get down on your knees and thank God that he brought you to
this land of so many riches!’ Hearing him speak we were very surprised
and we could hardly believe that there was a man so far from Portugal
who understood our language.”**(i)***

The very first thing that we notice is the visible shock amongst the
Arabic merchants at the Calicut that someone from that part of the world
had reached India through sea. We need to keep this in mind that the
Arabs had begun to control this east-west trade even before Islam, and
after the founding of Islam, there control had tightened. They had kept
the knowledge of the sea routes to themselves. Saying that they had fair
amount of knowledge about Spain and Portugal would be an understatement,
after all, they had ruled the Iberian peninsula not long ago. Sea route
to India was their trade secret. The rivalry was therefore evident.

The other thing which is very clear is the ideology of the Portuguese.
They were here for ‘Christians and spices’ and for them the goal was
very clear and firm.

**Visit to the ‘Church’:**

One thing which might interest the readers is that the Portuguese were
utterly ignorant about the world of the east. They knew next to nothing
about the religion and the culture of the natives of India. The only
exposure for these Portuguese had been regarding the Arabs and Turks,
basically about Islam. So, after reaching Calicut, their reaction was
very binary. They immediately understood that there were two kinds of
people here, the Moors and the non-Moors.

As the Moors were Muslims, which they definitely knew, everyone other
than them was a Christian. Hence, they confused the Hindus as the
Eastern Christians. The fictional tales of Prestor John and myth of St.
Thomas seems to have given them the impression that the Orient had
territories full of the population of Christians. What ever ‘strange’
customs and rituals they saw that didn’t fit the institution of
Christianity, they subscribed them to the ‘strange ways’ of the
Christianity of the Orient.

This gives us an explaination as to why they visited a Hindu temple,
even prayed there and it took them some time to realise that there was a
whole different religion, different culture that they had no idea about.
Unfortunately, they didn’t remain oblivious for long. Some might say
that it probably would have been better had they remain ignorant. The
realisation meant impending cruel and barbaric persecution of the
‘infidels’, the Hindus. But that is a tale for another day and out of
purview for this post about the first visit of da Gama. “Since they were
convinced that they were in the land of some sort of deviant Christians,
anything that was not explicitly Islamic, appeared residually, to be
Christian.”**(1)**

Another excerpt from that eyewitness account:

*“The city of Calicut is inhabited by Christians….They are of tawny
complexion. Some of them have big beards and long hair, whilst other
clip their hair short or shave the head.\[…\] On the following morning,
which was Monday, May 28th \[1498\], the Captain Major \[Vasco da Gama\]
set out to speak to the king, and took with him thirteen men, with me
among them. We put on our best clothes for the occasion and we took
bombards on to the boat with us and many trumpets and flags. On landing,
the captain-major was received by the alcaide with whom were many men,
armed and unarmed. The reception was friendly as if the people were
pleased to see us\[…\].*

*They took us to the large church and this was what we saw. The body of
the church is as large as a monastery all built of hewn bronze as high
as a mast, on the top of which was perched a bird, apparently a cock. In
addition to this there was another pillar, as high as a man, and very
stout. In center of the body of the church rose a chapel, all built of
hewn stone with a bronze door sufficiently wide for a man to pass, and
stone steps leading upto it. Within this sanctuary stood a small image,
which they said represented Our Lady. Along the walls by the main
entrance, hung seven small bells. In this church, the captain-major said
his prayers, and we with him.*

*We did not go within the chapel, for it is a custom that only certain
servants of the church, called **quafees** should enter. These
**quafees** wore some threads, passing over the left shoulder and under
the right arm, in the same manner as our deacons wear the stole. They
threw holy water over us, and gave us some white earth, which the
christians of this country are in habit of putting on their foreheads,
breasts, around the neck and the forearm. They threw holy water upon the
captain-major and gave him some of the earth, which he gave in chrge to
someone, giving them to understand that he would put it on later. Many
other saints were painted on the wall of the church, wearing crowns.
They were painted variously with teeth protruding an inch from the
mouth, and four or five arms. Below this church there was a large
masonry tanks, similar to many others, which we had seen along the
road.”**(ii)***

The very word *quafees* here suggest that the interaction of Portuguese
with Hindus was by the agency of the Arabs, since the word seems to be a
Portuguese rendering of Arabic terms like *qasis* and *kafir*, the
infidels *i.e.* the Hindus. The fact that they were not allowed “within
the chapel” also suggests that expectedly, even the Hindus were pretty
unsure about the identity and religion of the foreigners, and hence,
were not allowed inside the *garbha griha*. Some scholars also theorise
that the confusion could also be due to difference in dialects of
Arabic. “We should not forget that the Portuguese of the expedition had
learnt their Arabic in the Maghreb, and we may imagine that there were
significant differences of dialect, and oral expression, between that
Arabic and the version spoken in Kerala.”**(2)**

![“**Arrival of Vasco da Gama”painted in 1898 by Portuguese, Jose Velodo
Salgado.**](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/dsaxjd-ucaa0tl8.jpg?w=720)

**Visit to the Samudrin:**

The Portuguese were being led to meet the king, the huge crowd that had
gathered to see the foreigners captured their imagination. At one time,
the party had to be confined in a closed room for some time so that the
crown could diminish and sometimes even firearm *(espingarda)* had to be
used and “fired from time to time to clear the route.”**(3)**

After reaching the palace, they were escorted through an open courtyard
through four doors, and greeted by men of nobility and were even
embraced.

*“The king \[the Samorin of Calicut\], when he joined the
captain-major,\[Vasco da Gama\], threw himself upon another couch,
covered with various stuffs embroidered in gold, and asked the
captain-major what he wanted.*

*And the captain-major told him he was the ambassador of the king of
Portugal, who was Lord of many countries and possessor of great wealth
of every description, exceeding that of any king of these parts; that
for a period of sixty years his ancestors had annually sent out vessels
to make discoveries in the direction of India, as they knew that they
were Christian kings there like themselves. This he said was the reason
which induced them to order this country to be discovered, not because
they sought for gold or silver, for of this they had such abundance,
that they needed not what was to be found in this country.\[…\] In reply
to this the king said that he was welcome; that on his part, he held him
as a friend and brother, and would send ambassadors with him to
Portugal.\[…\]*

*On Tuesday, \[May 29\] the captain-major got ready the following things
to be sent to the king, viz., twelve pieces of lambel, four scarlet
hoods, six hats, four strings of coral, a case containing six wash-hands
basins, a case of sugar, two casks of oil, and two of honey. As it is
the custom, not to send anything to the king without the knowledge of
the Moor, his factor and of the Bayle, the captain-major informed them
of his intention. They came, and when they saw the present they laughed
at it, saying that it was not a thing to offer to a king, that the
poorest merchants from Mecca, or any other part of India gave more, and
that if he wanted to make a present it should be in gold, as the king
would not accept such things.\[…\]*

*It wounded our pride to be treated so shamefully by a king.\[…\] But,
we did not blame him overmuch, for we knew that we were a nuisance, to
the Moors who lived here. They were merchants from Mecca and from many
other areas, and they knew us and \[and slandered us to the
Samorin\].\[…\] On a Wednesday, the 29th \[of August 1498\], the
captain-major decided to set sail, since he was of the opinion that we
had already found that which we had sought – spices and jewels – and
because we were not able to take our leave, of the inhabitants of the
land in peace and brotherhood, and so we set sail without delay, and set
out on our return journey to Portugal.”**(iii)***

But why they were not able to take the leave of “inhabitants of the land
in peace and brotherhood”?

The king was becoming suspicious about everything. If they were really
from a rich kingdom, they certainly didn’t bring gifts which signified
that. The king probed da Gama even more- “what had he come to discover,
he asked ironically, stones or men?”**(4)** Gama then explained what
riches his country had (he very cleverly excluded gold and silver from
the list!) and asked the king for permission to go and fetch some
samples of *(amostra)* them from the ships, leaving few men behind at
the residence but the king flat out refused.

“The king insisted that he go back at once with all his men, unload his
goods, and sell them as best as he could. Gama was summarily given
leave, and left to gather his remaining men, so as to be able to leave
the next day.”**(5)**

The king also asked to pay the custom duties like any other trader to
which Gama to an offence and the relation grew strained. All the
Portuguese could get was a deal in some poor quality spices which they
sold back in Europe with a whopping profit of 3000%. Acting in sort of
revenge or annoyance, probably both at the failure of the meeting, Vasco
da Gama took few Nayars and sixteen fishermen with him by force – an
action that is utterly indefensible!

**Conclusion:**

And thus concluded the first encounter of the Portuguese who came
through the sea route to India. Back in Portugal after the voyage, King
Manuel very eagerly told the Spanish that Portuguese half of the world
now contained India- heavily populated by Christians, though not strong
in faith! A new and profitable phase for Portugal and a grim phase for
India was about to start.

**References and Quoted excerpts:**

-   [Malabar and the Portuguese by K.M. Pannikar. – (a) (b) (c)
    (d) (e)](https://archive.org/details/malabarandtheportuguesepannikark.m._20200306_18/mode/2up)
-   [A History of Christianity in Asia, Africa and Latin America,
    1450-1990 A Documentary Source book. *Edited by* Koschrke, Ludwig
    and Delgado. – (i)
    (ii) (iii)](https://books.google.co.in/books?id=dbq6fkyp698C&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false)
-   [The Career and Legend of Vasco da Gama by Sanjay Subrahmanyam – (1)
    (2) (3)
    (4) (5)](https://books.google.co.in/books?id=8wqMWl6sSwwC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false)

