+++
title = "Wheel in the Sky"
full_title = "Wheel in the Sky"
date = "2019-09-07"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/09/07/wheel-in-the-sky/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2019/09/07/wheel-in-the-sky/).

Wheel in the Sky

I noticed some idiot claiming that, in 1700, China and India were ”
more sophisticated scientifically than europe”. Nonsense, of course.
Hellenistic science was more advanced than that of India and China in
1700 ! Although it makes me wonder the extent to which they’re teaching
false history of science and technology in schools today- there’s
apparently demand to blot out white guys from the story, which wouldn’t
leave much.

Europe, back then, could be ridiculously sophisticated, at the highest
levels. There had been no simple, accurate way of determining longitude
– important in navigation, but also in mapmaking. For ships the best
solution was Harrison’s marine chronometer (insensitive to temperature
variations), but before that, astronomers used the Galilean moons of
Jupiter as a natural clock in the sky – observing when the moons entered
or exited the shadow of Jupiter. Comparing this with predicted times in
astronomical tables, you could determine the local time, and from that
your longitude. Not the most practical method on shipboard, but quite
useful on land.

Before this technique, estimates of longitude were crappy, and maps
showed it. Afterwards, maps stop looking like something drawn by a
sozzled ten-year-old :

[![](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/jupiter-maps.jpg?w=640&h=251)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2019/09/jupiter-maps.jpg)

In the course of playing with this technique, the Danish astronomer Ole
Rømer noted some discrepancies in the timing of those eclipses – they
were farther apart when Earth and Jupiter were moving away from each
other, closer together when the two planets were approaching each
other. From which he deduced that light had a finite speed, and
calculated the approximate value.









