+++
title = "Breeding Value"
full_title = "Breeding Value"
date = "2014-02-06"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/02/06/breeding-value/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/02/06/breeding-value/).

Breeding Value

I’m going to steal most of this example, to make a point. The numbers
are chosen for convenience.

Measured IQ can be decomposed into two components – genotypic
expectation and everything else, which means epistasis, developmental
noise, measurement error, environmental influences, etc. We don’t know
much about this second component.

Imagine that the narrow-sense heritability of IQ is 0.64 – which means
that 64% of the variance in IQ scores can be explained by differences
in genotypic expectation, 36% by the second, grab-bag component.

Imagine someone with a +4 SD IQ score (160). On average, that person
will have a higher than average value for both genetic and grab-bag
components: +3.2 SD for genotypic expectation and +2.4 SD in the
miscellaneous component.

Suppose that two people like this marry (a most unusual pairing). Their
kids will have an genotypic expectation of +3.2 SD and an average of
+0.0 “miscellaneous”, for an IQ averaging +2.56 SD. If two people with
that kind of ancestry married, their kids, the next generation, would
also have an average IQ of 2.56 SD.

They’re different from the typical kid with an IQ of +2.56 SD. His
genotypic expectation will be +2.048 SD, while he’ll have +1.536 SD in
the misc component. In other words, with the the typical kid with an IQ
of +2.56, a lot of it is luck. Marry two like this and their kids will
regress towards the mean (down to +1.6384 SD).

Families will vary. Some parents have high genotypic expectations and
hardly any luck: their kids won’t regress much. Others, whose high IQs
depended a lot on luck, will have kids that regress a lot.

By looking at the IQ values of close relatives, one can estimate the
genotypic expectation component – the “breeding value”. It may also be
possible to estimate this by a Visscher-type method, looking at overall
genetic similarity with a large set of distant relatives.

In other words, we should be able to estimate the extent to which a high
IQ will breed true, particularly easily in large families, but maybe for
everybody.

The estimated breeding value is what you want to consider when looking
at sperm or egg donors. Or, if you’re into that sort of thing, even in
an online dating or matchmaking service.

The ag majors know all this, but anyone majoring in any other discipline
is most unlikely to. I don’t think that the average young genomicist
knows it.

