+++
title = "Death by Chocolate"
full_title = "Death by Chocolate"
date = "2014-02-26"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/02/26/death-by-chocolate/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/02/26/death-by-chocolate/).

Death by Chocolate

I’ve been seeing some silly talk about the perils of GMO food here on
this blog, but of course there’s much more of that out in the world.

They’re full of it, of course, but that hardly means that there’s
nothing to worry about. The problem is that people have been worrying
about the wrong things.

The question is, what are people adapted to eating? That’s a big part
of it, anyhow. If your ancestors were dining on a certain food for
thousands of years, you will deal with it better than someone with no
such ancestry. You may be resistant to toxins in that food. You might
be less likely to overindulge in it, if that’s a problem (C₂H₆O). If it
made up a big fraction of the ancestral diet and is short on some key
molecule, your biochemistry may be better at coping with that shortage
(selection on an ergothioneine transporter). If it had novel nutrients,
or an unusual mix, you may be better than average at making use of that
nutrient (amylase copy number, lactase persistence).

But if your ancestors never encountered this particular food, you won’t
have any specific adaptations to it.

So… people need to worry about American crops, that nobody in the Old
World could possibly have encountered before Columbus. These food don’t
just differ from old-variant wheat in a couple of molecules – they’re
different in many ways. Sure, Amerindians tolerate them, but they’ve
had thousands of years to adapt. You haven’t. Since those foods differ
in many,many molecules from anything your ancestors ever tasted. you
don’t have that adaptive shield. It’s not whether that food is
‘natural’ – hell, poison ivy and hemlock are ‘natural’.

So, it would be hardly be surprising if some small fraction of Old
World-types had some problems with potatoes or tomatoes \[love
apples!\]. Maybe you should worry about peanuts. Cassava’s full of
cyanide. Green peppers – obviously you already have a death wish.
Chewing gum, vanilla, maple syrup, sunflower seeds – are they really
safe?

And above all – no chocolate.

