+++
title = "Does it matter what we"
full_title = "Does it matter what we call Buddhist?"
date = "2016-09-11"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/11/does-it-matter-what-we-call-buddhist/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/11/does-it-matter-what-we-call-buddhist/).

Does it matter what we call Buddhist?

\[Cross-posted at [Love of All
Wisdom](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/08/does-it-matter-what-we-call-buddhist).\]

Does it matter whether something is or isn’t Buddhist? Or whether it is
“distinctively” Buddhist? I was asked these related questions in two
blog discussions from last year, both involving [Justin
Whitaker](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/). Justin
[raised the latter question
here](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/comment-page-1/#comment-39710)
in response to
[my](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/is-buddhist-ethics-buddhist/)
[replies](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/)
to David Chapman; [Jayarava Attwood](http://jayarava.blogspot.com/)
[raised the
former](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/2015/10/influence-and-originality-in-the-buddhist-tradition.html#comment-2325739314)
on Justin’s blog.

Regarding what is “distinctively” Buddhist I want to start with what I
[said to Chapman
himself](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/comment-page-1/#comment-39703):
I don’t think there’s much value in looking for that which is found in
Buddhism and nowhere else. Many Buddhist tenets (including the rejection
of righteous anger, at issue there) can be found in Jainism too, for
example. But that wasn’t what I meant when I had asked, at the
[beginning of that
post](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/10/the-rejection-of-righteous-anger/),
“what might be distinctively Buddhist about a modern Buddhist ethics.”

Rather, I was asking: what difference does it make (within a modern
context) that your ethics, or for that matter your way of life, *is*
Buddhist? In Chapman’s context this
[meant](https://meaningness.wordpress.com/2015/09/23/buddhist-ethics-is-a-fraud/)
“not already understood by (say) a non-Buddhist college-educated
left-leaning Californian.” Suppose you already are a college-educated
left-leaning Californian or Bostonian or New Yorker or Vancouverite.
Does it then mean anything if you add the descriptor *Buddhist*? If we
describe a person as a Buddhist college-educated left-leaning Bostonian,
are we saying anything whatsoever that is different about that person
than if we describe the same person as a college-educated left-leaning
Bostonian and we leave out the adjective Buddhist?

Putting my question in that way ties it back to my discussion with
Jayarava. I had [said to
Justin](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/2015/10/influence-and-originality-in-the-buddhist-tradition.html#comment-2321240970),
“I’m a little sick of people pretending that anything that calls itself
Buddhist is Buddhist…” The comment thread that followed is long and (in
my view) interesting. I’ll try to be brief in summarizing, since it
remains up on Justin’s blog. The big questions [Jayarava
raised](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/2015/10/influence-and-originality-in-the-buddhist-tradition.html#comment-2327192391)
in the discussion were: “what is a stake when we define Buddhism? Who
benefits from the definition we value?” [I
agreed](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/2015/10/influence-and-originality-in-the-buddhist-tradition.html#comment-2329089538)
that these questions are significant, but noted that they apply just as
much to the “anything that calls itself Buddhist is Buddhist” definition
as any other: that definition “benefits the shallowest of Buddhists for
whom being a Buddhist means nothing, as well as academic social
scientists who see Buddhism as something stupid they want to criticize.
I do not wish to benefit either of these groups.”

In response, Jayarava [reasonably
asked](http://www.patheos.com/blogs/americanbuddhist/2015/10/influence-and-originality-in-the-buddhist-tradition.html#comment-2335029080):
“Would you like to elaborate on that? What makes a Buddhist shallow? Why
is it important that social scientists don’t think Buddhism is stupid?”

I had little time to elaborate then, and will do so now. I may as well
start with my own self-identification as a Buddhist. Readers may recall
that I [came to describe myself as a
Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/) when
I realized that in a hospital, I would want my guidance and advice to
come from a Buddhist chaplain.

That was what was at stake in the identification for me. Why then should
I care what is at stake in the identification for anyone else? Well, for
one, I would care very much what’s at stake for the chaplain! If a
hospital’s designated Buddhist chaplain didn’t care about suffering or
emptiness or ignorance but instead talked merely about social justice or
a divine plan for the world, I would object, and have *reason* to
object, for exactly the same reason a Muslim would justly object if the
designated Muslim chaplain started telling her to believe in Jesus.

Words mean something, and not merely something individual or arbitrary.
In the postmodern age, far too many scholars have been uncritically
enamoured of the words of Lewis Carroll’s Humpty Dumpty, from *Through
the Looking Glass*:

> ‘When I use a word,’ Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, ‘it
> means just what I choose it to mean — neither more nor less.’  
> ’The question is,’ said Alice, ‘whether you can make words mean so
> many different things.’  
> ’The question is,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘which is to be master — that’s
> all.’

As with so much else from the Alice series, the quote is charming, funny
and thought-provoking. What it isn’t, is *true*; I don’t think Carroll
himself believed it to be. The theory of meaning it advances is a
falsely individualistic one: it pretends that language is not a social
phenomenon, that concepts have no history, that words have no audience.
If I publicly call someone a murderer, it doesn’t matter if I say to
myself that I am inwardly defining “murderer” as meaning “lover of
flower arrangements”. Others are not going to react to my accusation by
providing the person with a flower arrangement. They are going to react
as if I have said he has intentionally killed someone – because that is
what I have done. They are going to react, that is, based on what the
word *actually means* – what it has meant and continues to mean in the
context of the history of the English language.

The meanings of words can change, of course, but they do not change by
arbitrary fiat. They can also, of course, be contested. The definition
of Buddhism (and other traditions) is at least as contested as the
definition of murder; the fact that we are having this conversation is
testament to that.

But one of the things that *makes* the word “Buddhism” contested is that
it is *normative*. The word “Buddhism”, [like the word
“science”](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2011/04/descriptive-and-normative-meanings-of-science-and-other-traditions/),
names not merely an aggregation of people but an *ideal*, or at least a
complex of related ideals. If a self-proclaimed scientist regularly
falsifies data to fit his preconceptions and ignores evidence to the
contrary, we are correct to tell him: it doesn’t matter what you call
yourself, *you are no scientist*.

I hope it is already clear that Justin’s and Jayarava’s questions touch
on just this point. To [identify as a
Buddhist](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2015/05/i-am-a-buddhist/),
especially when one was not raised as such, is at least partially to
affirm some set of normative ideals that one associates with Buddhism:
to say that there are certain ideals that one both a) takes as important
to the historical complex of traditions that one calls “Buddhist”, and
b) takes to be genuinely good ideals which one aspires to follow. And
ideals require their opposite, the non-ideal that they try to transcend:
there are certain things that a good scientist *qua* good scientist does
*not* do, and that a good Buddhist *qua* good Buddhist does not do
either.

It [matters whether something is or is not
scientific](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/08/why-we-should-ask-what-science-is/)
because science is good. If we consider ourselves Buddhists, it matters
whether we consider something genuinely Buddhist, because other things
being equal, we take there to be something *good* about being genuinely
Buddhist. If we didn’t think that, we wouldn’t consider ourselves
Buddhists – or at least, we would have no good reason to do so.
