+++
title = "Dialog across Traditions"
full_title = "Dialog across Traditions (part I)"
date = "2016-09-07"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/07/dialog-across-traditions-part-i/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/07/dialog-across-traditions-part-i/).

Dialog across Traditions (part I)

(As a consequence of the discussion which took place
[here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/02/20/dialog-between-science-and-philosophy-a-new-event/),
Debajyoti Gangopadhyay updated the structure and concept of the “dialog”
project.)

Description: This Dialog mission is intended basically to make sense of
a single question, which started getting shaped since our colonial
period:

How much of what was traditionally considered to be ‘Knowledge’ can be
meaningfully integrated with another knowledge system of so-called
Western origin, which had reached India by that time or at present?

This Question can be translated in different modern versions including
even its Needham variant, i.e., the question famously asked by the
British Historian of Science Joseph Needham, namely “Why in spite of
their having an unbroken empirical tradition, a Scientific revolution,
as we understand it in Western context, had never took place in India or
China?”. More in general, this is essentially a question regarding the
possibility of an Epistemic extension – the epistemic extension of the
traditional understanding in modern terms.

With this aim in view, the first part of the Meeting will be devoted to
telling the history of physics for the philosophers. This history will
be told with a stress on the external factors (rather than
subject–specific, technically internal factors), which played a crucial
role to develop our understanding of the world based on Physics.  
Physics, as it started developing ever since the 17th century in Europe,
is based on common sense ontology in the sense that its mathematical
language is, in one way or another, a technical outgrowth of our common
sense experience, of the fact of ‘believing’ in an objective world
out-there and in the other features of it, we are familiar with.  
However, Modern Physics, ever since the beginning of the last century,
started showing instances of gradual departure from the ideal of common
sense ontology as well as the classical theory of knowledge. With this
much in view, we will start telling the story in further details. We
will cover several steps in this history:

1.  The process of theory building in Physics and the metaphysical basis
    of different concepts (something we can call the padārthatatva of
    Physics) and the critiques of Newtonian methodology (\~ 17th -19th
    CE)  
    Here we shall discuss:  
    i) How the presiding common sense ontology had a role in the way to
    develop classical physics from observational data. We will also
    examine the crucial presumption of individuation and identity and
    its influence in the process of theory formation.  
    We will similarly discuss inter-culturally the Doubt-Mechanism
    operative in Physics along with the role of *anumāna* ‘inference’
    and *pratyakṣa* in theory building in Physics, the role of
    *arthāpatti* ‘cogent evidence’, and how *adṛṣṭa*s ‘unseen elements’
    are tackled in Physics. We shall follow the interpretive reference
    of the sense of ontology expounded by the German Philosopher Hans
    Vaihinger.  
    ii) The faint reaction against Newtonian metaphysics during the end
    of 19th century. Here we will mention only of a few philosophically
    oriented Austrian-German physicists like Ernst Mach, Gustav
    Kirchhoff, and H. Hertz and examine their reactions against
    Newtonian metaphysics motivated by Kant.  
    (this material will be covered in 2 lectures. Further readings can
    be found here).
2.  Failure of common sense ontology and its different outgrowth (1900
    CE onwards):  
    i) Modern Physics: a NEW Language artifact within the OLD jacket of
    common sense ontology in disguise!  
    Here we will discuss how the components of the old jacket of common
    sense metaphysics as well as the Traditional and the Classical
    Theory of Knowledge (hereafter CTK) were in trouble AFTER Modern
    Physics.  
    We will refer to the following different aspects and phases of this
    topic:  
    – Photon story and the different stages of the dramatic departure
    from the known particle ontology  
    – Implications of the Quantum hypotheses: Should we say a permanent
    goodbye to the CTK AFTER accepting the Quantum hypotheses?  
    – Two mathematicians. Simon Kochen and Specker, showed in 1967 that
    presuming the most simple Reality criteria like preexisting
    attributes of observable feature of quantum mechanical entities
    would lead to an algebraic contradiction. This result can also be
    read as a further substantiation of what was already implied by Max
    Born’s Quantum hypothesis (1926). So these results seem to indicate
    that quantum Reality can’t be thought in our familiar terms (namely:
    attributes/properties are preexisting or predetermined by Nature
    herself and observation is just for un-covering the veil over the
    preexisting Reality with a definite value of its attribute
    possessed. We have nothing to add from our part, as in the CTK).
    Thus, quantum reality seems to imply that Nature is not as simple as
    presupposed in CTK. The term Reality is supposed to be broader than
    we understand classically and might be ‘open’ in some sense,
    awaiting participation on our part. Hence the problem: Does Kochen
    Speker theorem substantiate further the failure of CTK, already
    implied by Born’s Rule? Doesn’t Reality possess preexisting
    attributes of her own, independent of observation?  
    – How Quantum formalism makes room for Free Will that couldn’t be
    reconciled with CTK  
    – Even the F-A-R away Quantum states seem to be generically
    entangled. Is this incompatible with the traditional metaphysics of
    relation?  
    ii) How Physics still works if its language is based on a
    metaphysics incompatible with reality (if time permits, we will
    discuss very briefly tricks of provisional, mock permanence and
    discernibility issue).  
    (this material will be covered in 5 lectures)
3.  Alternative metaphysics and its possible formal characterizations.  
    (further readings can be downloaded
    [here](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/09/dialog_references.pdf))

The next post will deal with the panels through which we will answer to
the above reconstruction.

(the author of the post is Debajyoti Gangopadhyay. Elisa Freschi edited
it.)
