+++
title = "On alGhazālī and the"
full_title = "On alGhazālī and the cultural specificity of philosophy"
date = "2016-09-25"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/25/on-al-ghazali-and-the-cultural-specificity-of-philosophy/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/25/on-al-ghazali-and-the-cultural-specificity-of-philosophy/).

On al-Ghazālī and the cultural specificity of philosophy

\[[Cross-posted at Love of All
Wisdom](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/09/on-al-ghazali-and-the-cultural-specificity-of-philosophy/).\]

A little while ago, responding to [Garfield and Van Norden’s call for
diversity in
philosophy](http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/11/opinion/if-philosophy-wont-diversify-lets-call-it-what-it-really-is.html?_r=1),
I argued that we should fight for the inclusion of non-Western thought
in philosophy programs on the grounds of its intrinsic worth as
philosophy, not merely on the grounds on geographic diversity. Now
[Fordham’s Nicholas Tampio has made an
argument](https://aeon.co/ideas/not-all-things-wise-and-good-are-philosophy)
far more diametrically opposed to Garfield and Van Norden’s: philosophy
departments should continue in their current habit of not teaching
non-Western thought *at all*. Or at least, they should make no special
effort to bring it in. (“Let philosophy departments evolve
organically…”) Why not? Because, Tampio says, many of the leading
non-Western thinkers we might consider philosophers – such as Confucius
– really aren’t.

In my experience, many who take such a position do so from a standpoint
of ignorance at best and apathy at worst: they don’t know non-Western
philosophy and they don’t care to learn it. Sometimes they will argue
for such a position; more often they simply rely on the departmental
inertia that allows them to get away with such ignorance and apathy. It
is the great virtue of Tampio’s piece that it is no such thing; Tampio
writes out of a long engagement with medieval Islamic thought and one of
its leading figures. And while it seems pretty obvious to me that
[medieval Islamic thought *should* be considered part of Western
intellectual
tradition](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/06/is-god-an-intellect-or-a-will/),
the fact remains that it usually isn’t. Not only does Tampio know at
least this one (supposedly) non-Western tradition, he is basing his
argument on that tradition and the self-understanding of its own
thinkers.

[![al-ghazali](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Al-Ghazali-300x256.png)](http://loveofallwisdom.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Al-Ghazali.png)Tampio
calls our attention to something very important which is often neglected
in debates about philosophy: in medieval Muslim thought, one finds
perhaps the most explicit and articulate *rejection* of philosophy in
the intellectual history of the world. What is noteworthy about the
thinkers involved here – of whom [Abū Hāmid Muhammad ibn Muhammad
al-Ghazālī](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/al-ghazali/) is the
foremost – is that they directly reject something for which they use the
term “philosophy”, transliterated directly into Arabic as *falsafa*.
Al-Ghazālī has most of the hallmarks by which we would now identify a
philosopher; he uses rigorous logical argument to make claims about the
nature of reality and the good life for human beings. So al-Ghazālī has
[an entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/al-ghazali/), and to my
mind he deserves it.

But – and this does matter – he wouldn’t *want* it. Al-Ghazālī knew well
of something he called philosophy, and he used his sharp skills of
logical argumentation to *reject* it, entitling one of his major works
[*The Incoherence of the
Philosophers*](http://www.ghazali.org/works/taf-eng.pdf). Philosophy
didn’t take this claim lying down; the self-proclaimed philosopher [ibn
Rushd](http://www.iep.utm.edu/ibnrushd/) (Averroës) issued a direct
rebuttal entitled [*The Incoherence of the
Incoherence*](http://www.muslimphilosophy.com/ir/tt/tt-all.htm). But it
didn’t convince Ghazālī.

Now we are already encountering one major problem with Tampio’s argument
here: his article makes no mention of ibn Rushd and says little about
his colleagues, the self-proclaimed philosophers (*falasifa*, singular
*faylasuf*). If we want to be true to al-Ghazālī’s self-understanding
and accept that he was *not* a philosopher, then we must in all fairness
extend the same courtesy to ibn Rushd and accept that he *was*.
Al-Ghazālī’s criticism of philosophy gets a long discussion in the
article, but if you read the section quickly you might even miss the
fact that there *were* self-proclaimed Muslim philosophers. Even though
Tampio clearly knows the *falasifa* and refers to some of them, his
article, when it speaks of “courses in African, Indian, Islamic, Jewish,
Latin American and Native American ‘philosophy’”, insists on putting the
latter term in scare quotes. When a key reason given to exclude
non-Western philosophers is that a Muslim like al-Ghazālī was against
philosophy as he understood it, it seems at least a little disingenuous
to give no real discussion to the Muslims who *did* see themselves as
philosophers.

But even if we take account of the self-understanding of the *falasifa*,
the problem that Tampio raises still remains. While ibn Rushd clearly
considered himself a philosopher, al-Ghazālī just as clearly *didn’t*.
So should we now then be excluding al-Ghazālī from study in philosophy
departments (or from encyclopedias of philosophy)? And – this is the
bigger question – what about thinkers like Confucius (or Śāntideva), who
never in their lives heard of the Greek word *philosophia* or its
translations into any other language? And who therefore never expressed
an opinion on ibn Rushd’s and al-Ghazālī’s questions of how to classify
themselves?

At this point, of course, we cannot avoid asking that interminable
question: *what is philosophy?* On this point Tampio issues two
sentences, one immediately following the other, which are in sharp
tension with one another if not outright contradiction: “Philosophy
originates in Plato’s Republic. It is a restless pursuit for truth
through contentious dialogue.” Are we so sure that “a restless pursuit
for truth through contentious dialogue” “originates in Plato’s
Republic”? Leave aside the obvious criticism that this is a
mischaracterization of the Western tradition (for both the term
“philosophy” and the pursuits it designates go back to the Presocratic
philosophers). More importantly, one finds exactly this pursuit of truth
in the contentious dialogues within the
[Bṛhadāranyaka](http://www.swamij.com/upanishad-brihadaranyaka.htm) and
[Chāndogya Upaniṣads](http://www.swamij.com/upanishad-chandogya.htm) –
which our best estimates (like [Patrick
Olivelle’s](https://www.amazon.com/Upanisads-Oxford-Classics-Patrick-Olivelle/dp/019954025X))
date to around 700 BCE, probably before even Thales. If philosophy is
*the* restless pursuit for truth through contentious dialogue, then it
originates well before Plato’s Republic – and is likely to originate
outside Greece. If it originates with Plato’s Republic or its
predecessors, *then* it is something more limited, a single culturally
specific Greek-originated tradition of inquiry; in this case, if it is
still “a” restless pursuit for truth, it is only one of many such. But
it cannot be both of these. So which is it?

Al-Ghazālī would have agreed with Tampio that “philosophy originates in
Plato’s Republic”, or at least with Plato’s predecessors – taking the
position that philosophy is something culturally specific to the ancient
Greeks and those who have learned from them. That position is suggested
by the very nature of the Arabic word *falsafa*, which transliterates
the word used by the Greeks instead of coming up with an indigenous
Arabic compound word translating “the love of wisdom”. Or, for that
matter, rendering it with some other compound concept deemed to be
equivalent – as is done in modern Marathi with *tattvajñāna* or Japanese
with *tetsugaku*.

The question, though, is whether we now should follow al-Ghazālī’s lead
ourselves. And I do not see why we should – especially if, *unlike*
al-Ghazālī, we see philosophy as something worthy of study and learning
rather than of mere refutation and rejection. It is true that we study
Western philosophy in part to understand the history of the Western
world and Western culture (which, nowadays, is also [indelibly a part of
every other
culture](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2016/06/the-west-within-the-rest/)).
But that’s not the *only* reason we study it, and not even the primary
one. For the Greeks there was no difference between saying “philosophy”
and saying “the love of wisdom”, and they expressed their love through
rational arguments that would bring them closer to that wisdom. The
Greek explorer [Megasthenes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Megasthenes),
for his part, had no hesitation in describing the brahmins and śramaṇas
he encountered in India as “philosophers”. When we now come face to face
with a Candrakīrti or a Mencius who also make rational arguments aimed
at wisdom, why on earth would we deny them that title?
