+++
title = "An interview with"
full_title = "An interview with Constance Kassor"
date = "2016-09-30"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/30/an-interview-with-constance-kassor/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/09/30/an-interview-with-constance-kassor/).

An interview with Constance Kassor

[Constance Kassor](http://constancekassor.net) is Assistant Professor of
[Religious Studies at Lawrence
University](http://www.lawrence.edu/academics/study/religious_studies)
and also affiliate faculty with the [Rangjung Yeshe Institute’s Online
Learning Program](http://www.ryi.org/programs/online-learning) based in
Boudhanath, Nepal, and with the [Vasudhaiva Institute based in Oslo,
Norway](http://www.vasudhaiva.com/). Her work focuses on knowledge in
Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. She has written extensively on Madhyamaka
thought and has two book projects in the works, focusing on theSakya
school of Buddhism’s influential GorampaSonam Senge.

**1. What are you working on right now, and what do you hope to achieve
by it?**

I am currently working on two separate, but related projects:

The first is a book manuscript that focuses on the Madhyamaka thought of
the fifteenth-century Tibetan scholar, Gorampa Sonam Senge.
Specifically, I am investigating Gorampa’s presentation of the
relationship between rational philosophical analysis and nonconceptual
meditative states in his text, *General Meaning of Madhyamaka (dbu ma’i
spyi don).*

I am also translating Gorampa’s *General Meaning of Madhyamaka* in
collaboration with Dr. Khenpo Ngawang Jorden, principal of the
International Buddhist Academy in Kathmandu. This text is encyclopedic
in its scope; in addition to presenting his own view regarding the
philosophy and practice of Madhyamaka, Gorampa also presents the
positions of his Indian and Tibetan predecessors, and analyzes their
views in light of his own.

My hope is that both the translation and the analysis of this text will
help to broaden the scope of Madhyamaka studies, and to introduce an
incredibly significant text to English-speaking scholars.

**2. How did you come to study Indian philosophy, and how is it related
to your current position?**

I first encountered Candrakīrti and Madhyamaka philosophy in a college
philosophy course on skepticism. After studying the Greek Skeptics and
their successors in Western philosophical traditions, we briefly studied
Candrakīrti and the Prāsaṅgika-Madhyamaka tradition that emerged from
his writings. I became fascinated by Prasanga reasoning, and started to
study Tibetan commentaries on Indian Madhyamaka. My initial studies led
me to India and Nepal, where I studied with Tibetan Madhyamaka scholars,
and to a graduate program in Religious Studies at Emory University. I am
currently an assistant professor of Religious Studies at Lawrence
University, where I am fortunate to have the freedom to teach courses on
both Indian and Tibetan thought.

**3. What advice would you give to students wishing to pursue the study
of Indian philosophy?**

Devote the time and effort to learning languages as soon as possible,
and spend as much time as you can with scholars in India. Even if you’re
a textualist, you will benefit immensely from your time “in the field.”

Also, it’s important to keep in mind that there aren’t a lot of jobs out
there. If you’re in the United States, don’t go into a Ph.D. program
unless your tuition and living expenses are covered by the program, and
be prepared for a long slog through the job market once you finish.

**4. What have your major intellectual influences been, philosophical or
otherwise?**

I have been studying Gorampa’s works for over a decade, so it is
inevitable that his philosophical views have influenced me in many ways.
Beyond that, Jay Garfield has been a major influence, especially in
terms of his work involved in bridging the gap between Western and
non-Western philosophical traditions in the academy.

**5. What do you think you’ll do next?**

I’ll get tenure, hopefully! Joking aside, I hope to continue my work on
Gorampa; he was a prolific author, and his philosophy has the potential
to change the ways in which English-speaking scholars of Buddhism view
Indian and Tibetan Buddhist philosophy. I have also started a
side-project on religion and comics, and I am hoping to teach some
courses on that topic in the near future to develop my research further.

**6. Where do you think the field should go next, in terms of priorities
and projects?**

We are starting to see more dialogue and discussion among scholars of
Asian and Western philosophical traditions, and I hope to see that
continue. Departmental divisions seem to be a necessary evil in the
academy, with many institutions creating divisions between, for example,
Philosophy Departments and Religion Departments. I am fortunate to be
working at a university where interdisciplinary collaboration is
encouraged, and I hope to see more of that trend in other institutions
in the future.

**7. Finally, a question (originally asked on the 3AM Interview Series):
What books do you recommend to help our readers be taken further into
your philosophical world?**

There aren’t many book-length works on Gorampa that have been published
in English, but [José
Cabezón’s](http://www.wisdompubs.org/book/freedom-extremes) *Freedom
From Extremes* provides an excellent introduction into the philosophical
world of Gorampa and his interlocutors.

[Jay
Garfield’s](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/engaging-buddhism-9780190204341?cc=sg&lang=en&)
*Engaging Buddhism: Why it Matters to Philosophy* addresses some of the
issues surrounding the potential for dialogue between scholars of
Western philosophy and Buddhist philosophy.

I’m also reading a lot of comic books (strictly for research purposes,
of course): *[Ms.
Marvel](http://marvel.com/universe/Ms._Marvel_(Carol_Danvers)),
[Lucifer](http://www.readcomics.tv/comic/lucifer)*, and Manga inspired
by the Aum Shinrikyo group are things that I’ve been looking at lately,
all of which deal with religious ideologies in different ways.

**Previous interviews in this occasional series:**  
[Matt
Dasti](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/08/20/an-interview-with-matt-dasti/)  
[Shalini
Sinha](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2016/07/30/an-interview-with-shalini-sinha-first-in-an-occasional-series/)

Suggestions for contributors welcome, along with self-nominations. Email
me at malcolm {dot} keating {at} yale-nus.edu.sg, or leave a comment.
