+++
title = "Interview With A Nuristani – The Mediation Via Memory Of Some Detail Of Their Once-Living Faith"
date = "2021-08-24"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/08/24/interview-with-a-nuristani-the-mediation-via-memory-of-some-detail-of-their-once-living-faith/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/08/24/interview-with-a-nuristani-the-mediation-via-memory-of-some-detail-of-their-once-living-faith/).

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/n58kzcpcgwiadfbssv0otnpvqalvoq17t4fol6evg4g.jpg?w=970)

Earlier this week, we ran an article looking at some of the issues with
Kalasha / Nuristani religion – specifically, why claims of its being a
somehow ‘more pure’ and ‘pre-Vedic’ Indo-Aryan faith don’t really stack
up.

I said in the course of that piece that I’d be adding more substantive
material in subsequent efforts, and as a bit of a primer for these I
present the following.

Now, to explicate what’s going on here … the core kernel of this is an
excerpt from a rather remarkable interview undertaken in 1973 by an
intrepid linguist and anthropologist – one Richard Strand – who trekked
up into Afghanistan to meet the subjects of his research.

There, he encountered a man by the name of Zaman Xan – the then-current
headman of the clan of Nuristanis whose role had been to keep a major
site of worship for the chief deific of the Nuristanis – variously known
as Imra, Imro, or Mara.

Now, obviously, the early 1970s were quite some time after the
conversion to Islam of the Nuristanis (this having begun in serious
earnest in the 1890s at sword-point) – however, it is worth noting that
what Xan is recollecting was still within his own living memory.

Indeed, holdouts to the ‘old faith’ still existed and were practising in
some fashion even after he had ascended to a position of authority
within his tribe. He describes, as a point of brief interest, an
occurrence some time previously when a ‘shaman’ of the old faith had
come back to the valley he lived in and engaged in the old customary
practices … only to have ‘Talibon’ \[translated as Muslim ‘Religious
Students’ – and yes, ‘Taliban’ is the same term\] turn up from elsewhere
and seek to violently suppress the character.

It can be fairly alleged that there is capacious room for things having
‘drifted’ even inside a few decades from what things might have more
‘authentically’ been when the faith of his forefathers was still a
properly ‘live’ one – and yet, I am not sure how much this might be
overstated. It *seems* that Xan had some awareness and could give some
limited information about previous Western visitation to the region in
pre-Islamic times – so certainly, given the depth of comparative
resonancy for what he had to say about other matters, it would be
entirely inappropriate to eschew it out of hand.

Nevertheless, on with the show. And our relevant excerpt:

Zaman Xan: “If one of them was going to put on a feast, he went to
Imro’s “Mecca”, as they would say, down there in Kṣtegi. That “Big
Mecca” is also in the Arabic language. “Mecca” is Persian, isn’t it? Our
old-time people would say o öl mâka. ‘öl mâkâ. The meaning of ‘öl mâkâ
was this: ‘Big Mecca’.”

Richard Strand: ”They would say “Mecca”?”

Z.X.: “Yes. They would say mâk’â. In the old days. They would say mâk’â.
They would be talking about ‘öl mâka. Furthermore, they would say that
in Mecca there were eighteen gods. Eighteen gods. Eighteen gods. Among
these eighteen gods there were three things they called h’elut, m’unut,
and ’uzut. They would say that these three things were three Imros. Imro
was one, but he had three names. If someone here wanted to tell the
truth and swear an oath, they would take him there.”

R.S.: “To that place there?”

Z.X.: “They went to that place.”

R.S.: “What’s the name of that place?

Z.X.: “The place is mâreš ‘ire. m’âreš, ’ire.”

R.S.: ”What’s ’ire?”

Z.X.: “‘ire, that is, mâreš place. Imro’s place. They would say, “Go
there and say it to h’elut, m’ulut, and ’uzut, if you want to make an
oath.” Now here if you think about Mecca, it’s almost the same thing.
How would it be; they had eighteen idols there in pre-Islamic times.
They were set up there in Mecca. With the eighteen idols were the big
idols låt; mån’åt, and ǧuz’åt. These were the big idols. The people here
would say h’elut, m’ânut, and ’uzut, right? I would think, “Son of a
bitch, words from way over there were brought all the way here?” Did
they hear about them and do it this way? Whatever it might have been. I
think they must have heard about it and done it this way.”

Now, straightaway you can see why I found this interview section to be
most interesting. Because what we have here is a situation wherein Xan
is pointedly aware that his own ancestral religious understanding bears
some overt resemblance to a Muslim one. By which I mean – those three
figures he mentions, look *suspiciously* like the al-Lat,Manat, and
al-‘Uzza that were three pre-Islamic goddess-figures associated with the
Muslim Mecca of Arabia. How do we explain this?

Well, the obvious answer is to presume that he’s got the details wrong –
and that a conflation has been made between a feature of the original
Mecca – that of Arabia – and the site referred to as ‘Mecca’ for the
Kafiris by others labelling their faith. Although it seems a rather
curious and specific one; and it is also rather jarring and out of
keeping given that various of the *other* details Xan is able to give in
the same interview and indeed the same portion of the interview, *do*
actually align with either what we know of the relevant Kafiristan
faith, or at least do resonate reasonably strongly with what we should
presume it to have contained upon the basis of broader Indo-European /
specifically Indo-Aryan comparanda.

However, another possibility – and one that I think strikes closer to
the truth of the matter – is that there had, indeed, been some degree of
cross-over influence at some point previously. And therefore, it is not
so much that Xan is mistaken – but that Xan is relaying a syncretic
perspective which was authentically what persons prior to him had
believed. Although just how far back these prior beliefs may stretch –
i.e. at what point such syncreticism may have ensued – I am not in a
position to say. It could be relatively recent, or it could be at any
point in pretty much the past thousand years that there has been
sustained culturo-religious contact between the Kafiristanis /
Nuristanis and their Muslim neighbours. Certainly, it would make a
rather great ‘active camouflage’ to enable them to be able to get on
with their non-Islamic religion almost in plain sight over that time, by
telling anybody who might seek to do as those ‘Talibon’ did to the old
‘shaman’ – that in fact, they were indeed practicing ‘Islam’, see just
look at our “Mecca”, etc.

A third element, potentially non-exclusive with the first and/or second
potential explanation – is that some level of inadvertent syncreticism
has ensued through genuine linguistic and functional coincidence. It is
not improbable that ‘Maka’ has some meaning in Vasi \[the relevant, and
rather rarified Nuristani dialect in question\], and that its reference
has been misinterpreted (whether deliberately or otherwise) to be the
same as Arabic ‘Mecca’. I am not sure if there is another ‘Mecca’ in
Persian that is not from that Arabic origination; although as a point of
interest, the relevant PIE term \[‘\*Meghs’\] informing Sanskrit ‘Maha’
and Ancient Greek ‘Mega’ (and, for that matter, ‘Much’ in our own
English language) – turns into ‘Maka’ in Tocharian B and ‘Mec’ in Old
Armenian, so perhaps … just perhaps … ‘Ol Maka’ as ‘Big Mecca’ is really
more ‘Big’, ‘Important’ as shorthand for the saliency and the size of
the relevant center of worship for them. No Arabic ‘Mecca’ required –
until later.

Still, it is a curious thing for the Nuristanis to have chosen – if that
is, indeed, what they might have done – to adopt *this particular*
Islamic-context garbing if they were endeavouring to ‘hide’ their
religion in plain sight. Why? Because Manat, in particular has some
‘history’ as applies Afghan Islam. Now, this is not the place to get
into the most curious and vexed situation of the three pre-Islamic
goddess figures in a Quranic context. Suffice to say .. it’s
complicated, and leads into some very problematic bits and pieces around
whether Muhammad may have been induced to err in writing the relevant
verses.

But what we *can* say, is that there was a belief amidst at least some
Muslims that the worshippers of Manat had survived, fled eastwards at
the time of their appointed destruction (by apostates from her former
worship to the new Islam), and carried an idol of Manat in that
direction with them. We can say this, because Mahmud of Ghazni – the
rather prominent warlord I have occasionally written things about \[see,
for instance, my ‘On the Gates of Somnath Temple’, et al.\] stated a
belief that his raid upon Somnath \[one of the holy Jyotirlingamsites
of Lord Shiva – the Lord of the Soma , ‘Soma-Natha’\] was justified by a
desire to ‘finish the job’ which Muhammad had started, under the
erroneous belief that Somnath was, in fact, ‘Su-Manat’ and therefore a
continued site of worship for this pre-Islamic Arabic deific. Even at
the time, that was not considered particularly sound reasoning in
various Islamic accounts of the raids, but I digress.

To return to Xan’s words, and our investigation of the faith of his
forefathers via his recollection – what interests me primarily is this
portion:

“They would say that these three things were three Imros. Imro was one,
but he had three names. If someone here wanted to tell the truth and
swear an oath, they would take him there.”

Now, a triform or ‘triple-aspected’ / ‘three-faced’ understanding for a
powerful deity is entirely within the realms of Indo-European
potentiality, and Indo-Aryan well-attested fact. I have written
extensively, for instance, upon the concept of Zeus Triophthalmos
\[‘Three Eyed Zeus’ – Zeus as simultaneously Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon
.. to succinctly summarize\], and ‘Rule of Three’ symbolism is an
indelible core of Shaivite iconography (as seen, for instance, with the
Trishula, Tripundra \[the ‘Three Lines’ worn upon the forehead\], etc.
etc. etc.\], whilst within the Nordic comparanda we find ourselves
confronted with Hárr,Jafnhárr, and Þriði \[i.e. ‘High’, ‘Just-As-High’,
and ‘Third’\] as forms of Odin. Triple-forms for a Goddess would make
even more sense – the Diva Triformis, as I have written upon elsewhere,
or Parvati – Durga – Kali, being two instantly prominent exemplars.

It should therefore be considered probable that there is truth to what
Xan is saying – and that a ‘Triple-Named’ or ‘Triple-Formed’ Imro is,
indeed, something that his ancestors believed in; even though there is
an immediate temptation to presume that such ‘Trinitarianism’ is instead
some kind of Islamicized confusion (an ironic situation were this to
have been the case, considering the pointed Islamic rejection of the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity – and labelling of Christians as
‘Polytheists’ in consequence). It would most certainly help to resolve
another situation that is observed elsewhere when rendering Nuristani /
Kalasha faith – that of the difficulty in reconciling what people keep
insisting are separate deifics, with the evident fact that the actual
inheritors of the religious sphere in question (i.e. those
aforementioned Nuristanis & Kalasha) don’t *quite* seem to view it that
way. Or, phrased more succinctly: if there really is an understanding
for Imra / Imro to have such triple-names and facings, then my ongoing
contention around their Mahandeo \[i.e. Mahadeva – Lord Shiva\] as being
coterminous with Imro, is less outlandish. In fact, it is not outlandish
at all considering the attested beliefs of various of these tribes in
this precise area – but more upon that in due course, in a subsequent
(A)Arti-cle when we come to it. Onwards!

The other issue here is in the second sentence of his statement – the
one around going to this site in order to “tell the truth and swear an
oath”.

Now, again, it’s *possible* that this is the result of syncreticism,
fuelled by the bringing together of Islamic influences with what was
there before. I say this, because various of the pre-Islamic deities of
Arab Mecca –al-Lat, Manat, and al-‘Uzza – which appear strongly to
have informed what Xan describes, were indeed correlate with swearing of
oaths. Although I am not quite sure how plausible it should have been
for Xan to have known that, even though he evidently knew the names
(although not, perhaps, that these were *goddesses*) – the attestations
for the characteristic in question being, for obvious reasons, something
predominantly *pre-* Islamic rather than post; and thusly, as applies
the former, not so much part of any textual corpus he might easily have
come into contact with.

However, it is *also* possible that this characteristic, too, is
something archaically endogenous to the Nuristani faith. There are
various attestations for, for a start, holy places and their altars
being places one should expect to tell the truth and swear an oath.
Although in the Vedic schema, we should more properly anticipate the
Fire (Agni) for this – as flaming witness. Which is certainly a logical
extension of both the Altar concept, and the Divine Witness concept also
relevant for it. In comparative Indo-European understanding we are
certainly familiar with Zeus Horkios and other such deific expressions
\[indeed, the Iuppiter Lapis – ‘Jupiter Stone’ – of the Romans stands
particularly out in my mind\], and there is likewise attestation from
the time when Kafiristani religion was still alive for Imro in this
regard – to be found in the very same work of that Britischer, George
Scott Robertson, who ventured to their lands in the 1890s shortly before
it was so actively suppressed.

Although ‘Oaths’, whilst correct, is perhaps incomplete in its
connotation. Much of the oath-making we seem to see exhibited in the
studies, appears to be peace-making between feuding individuals or
clans. Treaty-making, we ought perhaps term it. And while, again, there
is a strong Imra / Imro saliency to these – of perhaps more immediate
interest if we are to seriously explore the Kafiristani / Nuristani
religion in proper Indo-European terms, is ‘another’ figure: ‘Arom’.

Now Arom, has often been simply (and, to my mind, erroneously) stated to
be Rama. It is not hard to see how this conclusion has been arrived at –
there is an obvious phonetic resemblancy. And yet … something else seems
more salient – to me, at any rate.

Proto-Indo-European \*Rem – ‘Support/Hold Fast’, turns into various
terms such as Tocharian A ‘Ram’ and Tocharian B ‘Reme’. What does this
mean? ‘Witness’. There is some speculation linking this to Greek
‘Rhema’, as in ‘Utterance’, and thence PIE ‘Wremn’ (i.e. “Word’, in
particular here, a bearer of) – however that is another matter for
another time. One of the prospective etymologies (and corresponding, if
somewhat adjacently so, Sanskrit meaning-fields) for Hindu Rama pertains
to ‘pleasing’, ‘agreeable’ – something of potential utility for
treaty-making for reasons that ought be readily apparent.

What am I driving at here? The notion that this ‘Arom’, supposed to be
invoked and involved in such a context, *has* to derive from Hindu
‘Rama’, rather than something more closely akin to the meaning of these
other words – and therefore not, necessarily, a figure sharing a
similar-sounding name yet of not-to-be-assumed-to-be-related
character/identity – well, it is a bit lazy, to say the least.

Another point of interest viz. Arom comes from the reporting of
Robertson – who noted that this Arom had ‘seven brothers’, and yet was
disappointed to find that the ‘high priest’ he had been approached by to
speak of the Kafiri religion apparently knew nothing further of these
enigmatic figures. I should be tempted to speculate that these ‘seven’
may in fact be somewhat related to the ‘seven metres’, ‘seven tongues’
etc. we so often encounter with Agni and Brihaspati – and therefore, the
identity of the ‘brothers’ being so threadbare is precisely because they
were not seven now-forgotten deifics, but instead traits and
characteristics linked to the (Sky Father resonant) deific in the
relevant role.

Although with all of that in mind, it is nevertheless worthy of note
that even in the early 1890s, prior to the forcible extinguishment of
the flame of Kafiri faith – it would nevertheless seem that their
circumstances already had faded, the knowledge eroding over the years
even in the absence of such calamitous external pressure. Another
potential explanation would be that the Kafiri priest did not wish to
*disclose* such knowledge to Robertson – except why, then, should he
approach the British scholar precisely to disclose this Arom in the
first place if he had such reservations.

In any case, the series of complications surrounding all of this
demonstrates precisely why I find it so eye-roll inducing when people
vociferously declare that they hold the religions of the Kafiris /
Nuristanis / Kalasha to be some ‘uncorrupted’ and ‘pure’ ‘pre-Vedic’
Aryan religion. Because evidently, there are other things at play here.

Partially, this is the sustained loss of knowledge from what must have
been the original and archaic scope of the belief – even were we to
accept that these faith(s) come in direct line of descent from something
pre-Vedic, the significant size of the religious corpus visible amidst
the archaic Indo-Iranics via the portions which *also* survived in the
Iranic sphere and even under the Zoroastrians, demonstrates something of
what would have been lost here.

Partially, it is the potential ‘confusion’ which has gone on, or
syncreticismeither in memory or in lived practice, with other beliefs
from other spheres that have geographically intersected with these
mountain-dwelling groups at varying times over the past millennia.

But mostly it is because we are operating with such a limited
informational basis to even make such statements upon in the first
instance! There have only been a handful of individuals who’ve made the
arduous trek into the mountains to do the requisite fieldwork to obtain
these pictures, such as they are, of Kalasha and Kafiri / Nuristani
beliefs. The majority of these, particularly as applies the latter
sphere, were only able to do so *after* the religion in question had
already been suppressed by their neighbours and begun its painful fade
into the realm of memory. And we are unable to adequately determine
what, if anything, is definitively true when viewed via that most misty
prism – even *before* considering the not insignificant likelihood of
things being misapprehended by interlocutors with whom we are today (or
in yesteryear) dealing.

So as applies the commentary around a triple-aspected Imra / Imro – it
is most certainly not impossible, it is indeed in accordance with what
we might feasibly expect, given occurrences in other Indo-European
religious spheres. But in the absence of more hard attestation, it would
be rather risky to take it as ‘gospel’ from a man speaking several
decades after the religion in question’s passing – especially when the
context for the utterance is clearly and demonstrably one where
syncretic mashup or confusion with Arabic Muslim belief has occurred.

Further, to speak to that syncreticismwith non-Indo-European elements –
Xan, our interviewee, did not seem to suggest these were recent
developments; but rather, that they were of historic attestation, and
had been a part of the living understanding of the last generations of
Kafiris prior to Islam’s all-pervasive unfurling across their cultural
horizon with the conversions that sealed their heritage’s death-knell.
It is possible that he was mistaken in that detail with the entire thing
a creature of relatively recent re-imagining, but I do not think it
quite so likely to be *his* mistake if it was one. Instead, I suspect it
more strongly to be just exactly that – something that had *some*
previous currency in the living religion, although now beyond our grasp
for what, if anything, it might truly have connected to.

All up, we are left – once more – with fascinating lines of potential
speculative interrogation; yet which can only come to anything so much
as approaching a reasoned fruition via the light of the broader
Indo-European – and more specifically, Vedic / Hindu – sphere.
