+++
title = "The Sogdian Shiva Weshparkar of Panjikent – Arte-Facts #13"
date = "2021-08-11"
upstream_url = "https://aryaakasha.com/2021/08/11/the-sogdian-shiva-weshparkar-of-panjikent-arte-facts-13/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryaakasha.com/2021/08/11/the-sogdian-shiva-weshparkar-of-panjikent-arte-facts-13/).

![](https://aryaakasha.files.wordpress.com/2021/08/weshparkar-panjikent-shiva.png?w=680)

It is Wednesday – which, in the Northern European end of things, is
Woden’s Day. Therefore, as has become our custom … fine Shaivite
devotional (A)Art-i posting.

Now this beautiful depiction has been upon my mind for some weeks now –
because if you were asked to draw a fearsomely formidable Lord of the
Wind … well, there He is.

The figure has been tentatively identified as that of the Sogdian
Weshparkar / Veshparkar – a form, in their language, of an Iranic ritual
phrasing : found in Avestan as ‘Wayaos uparo kairyehe’ (also anglicized
as ‘Vayus uparo kairyo’).

What does this mean? Effectively, “Vayu the High-Working”, or Vayu the
Powerful/On High (it can also be interpreted rather less evocatively as
‘Possessing Superior Skill’). This refers to the Wind (Vayu) in the
upper atmosphere. And most certainly, the relevant deific ‘Uber Alles’.

Unfortunately, much of the detail of this and various other murals found
at the site in question – Panjikent, in modern-day Tajikistan – have
succumbed to the ravages of time and the elements, meaning that this
fragmentary rendition is about as clear as things get.

This naturally invites the question – how can we be so sure that this
God is, indeed, Lord Shiva?

Now I have covered at much greater length elsewhere the clear
theological reasoning why a Vayu figure encountered out there on the
Steppes is co-identified as Shiva; building from the standard Hindu
understanding found in the Shatapatha Brahmana which confirms the
matter, and our broader underlying Indo-European typology likewise. I
had also incorporated sustained analysis about the figure found amidst
the Kushans and Kushano-Sasanians as Oesho \[a likely rendering of
Ishvara – that is to say .. ‘God-Emperor’, a standard Shaivite epithet
and theonymic title\], and shall not seek to repeat all of that analysis
here.

Instead, let me simply state that across the Sogdian sphere at around
this time (and, for that matter, previous) – we find the similarly
arrayed figure. Wielding the Trishula \[Trident\], seated upon a Bull.
And, in the case of a figure of the deific encountered at Panjikent,
rather directly identified via inscription as ‘Wspr(kr)’.

This must have represented a truly magnificent figure both in the
imaginations of the Sogdians (and other such peoples of the
Indo-European Steppe sphere) and upon the wall in question; the
evocative flourishes depicted here are so striking that they persist
even in monochrome and fragment.

Fortunately, the worship of this deity has survived and thrived
elsewhere – and who knows, one day, may even be carried back out onto
the Central Asian Steppe once more.

Jai Ishvara !

ॐ नमः शिवाय !

हर हर महादेव !
