+++
title = "Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher"
full_title = "Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher"
date = "2013-04-12"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/04/12/sir-ronald-aylmer-fisher/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2013/04/12/sir-ronald-aylmer-fisher/).

Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher

[![Mature
Fisher](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/mature-fisher.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/mature-fisher.jpg)

Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher, FRS \[1890-1962\] was the founder of modern
statistics and the most important geneticist of the 20th century. He has
been called the greatest of Darwin’s successors.

He was born in London to George and Katie Fisher, his mother the
daughter of a London solicitor and his father a successful fine arts
dealer. Fisher’s mathematical ability was apparent early in life, but
was complicated by extreme myopia. He attended Harrow, where he won the
Neeld Medal in a mathematical essay competition. There his tutor, in
order to spare his eyes, instructed him without the use of written
materials or visual aids. This led to a strong geometrical sense and an
exceptional facility with mental mathematics. Or perhaps that approach
helped develop an innate ability.

[![Young
Fisher](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/young-fisher.jpg?w=640)](https://westhunt.files.wordpress.com/2013/04/young-fisher.jpg)

He was awarded a scholarship to Cambridge in 1909, which was necessary
since his family had come upon hard times. In Cambridge he studied
mathematics and astronomy and was also interested in biology and
evolution. Fisher said that he happened to visit a museum where a
codfish’s skull was laid out, with every bone given its convoluted and
unenlightening name – which made him decide to become a mathematician.
Later he changed his mind and played a major role in the transformation
of biology from that kind of stamp-collecting into a science based upon
a solid mathematical theory – a transformation that is unfortunately
still incomplete.

As an undergraduate, he played a role in founding the Cambridge
University Eugenics Society. Back then, eugenics, a movement advocating
human genetic improvement, was quite the thing. Many prominent people
such as Alexander Graham Bell, George Bernard Shaw, and John Maynard
Keynes supported it, and many geneticists did as well. In fact, in its
early days, eugenics was popular among both left as well as right,
advocates including scientists such JBS Haldane and Hermann Muller.

After graduating, he attended Cambridge for another year, studying
statistical mechanics, quantum mechanics, and the theory of errors.

Upon leaving Cambridge, he did actuarial work, tried farming, and in
1914 tried to join the Army, but was rejected for poor eyesight. His war
work consisted of teaching physics and mathematics. In 1917, he married
Ruth Eileen Guinness, who was 17.

They had two sons and six daughters. His large family was no
coincidence, since Fisher believed in positive eugenics and thought that
intelligent people should have far more children than they typically do.
During this period, although not working full-time as a researcher, he
was developing his ideas on statistics and genetics.

Early in the century genetics was new (Mendel’s work had been
rediscovered in 1900) and biologists were still stumbling about on
genetic questions, a problem compounded by their general innumeracy.
Look at the Hardy-Weinberg equation: biologists went to a first-class
mathematician like G. H. Hardy for help and forever embarrassed him by
naming a result after him that would have been obvious to anyone who had
passed high-school algebra.

Those early geneticists (in particular, Bateson) had two interrelated
wrong ideas: they couldn’t see how particulate inheritance (genes) could
explain continuous variation in most physical traits (height, size,
speed, etc), and, partly as a result of that confusion, tended to think
that Mendelism refuted Darwinism. In fact, in fact it *corrected*
Darwin’s theory: he had believed in “blending inheritance”, which, if it
existed, would have rapidly destroyed genetic variation and required
some means of continually regenerating it. No-one saw how you could make
this work, and they were right. Fortunately Darwin just sailed past that
difficulty, just as Wegener knew there had been continental drift even
though he couldn’t figure out what drove it.

Particulate inheritance – specific gene variants with specific effects –
meant that variation was conserved, so there was no need for a mechanism
which recreated enormous amounts of genetic variation in each
generation. Fisher, in one of his first papers (The Correlation Between
Relatives on the Supposition of Mendelian Inheritance) showed that
continuous variation could be explained if the traits of interest were
affected by many genes with largely independent effects.

After the war, Fisher accepted a job at the Rothamsted Experimental
Station, a small agricultural research station that provided a
stimulating work environment. At Rothhamsted, he re-founded the
mathematical basis of statistics and developed the theory of the design
of experiments. He published *Statistical Methods for Research Workers*
in 1925, which was a practical exposition of his new methods. More and
more people began to recognize the importance of his work, and he was
elected to the Royal Society in 1929.

In 1930 he published *The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection*, which
completed the fusion of Darwinian natural selection with Mendelian
inheritance. James Crow said that it was ‘arguably the deepest and most
influential book on evolution since Darwin’. In it, Fisher analyzed
sexual selection, mimicry, and sex ratios, where he made some of the
first arguments using game theory. The book touches on many other
topics. As was the case with his other works, *The Genetical Theory* is
a dense book, not easy for most people to understand. Fisher’s tendency
to leave out mathematical steps that he deemed obvious (a leftover from
his early training in mental mathematics) frustrates many readers.

*The Genetical Theory* is of particular interest to us because Fisher
there lays out his ideas on how population size can speed up evolution.
As we explain elsewhere, more individuals mean there will be more
mutations, including favorable mutations, and so Fisher expected more
rapid evolution in larger populations. This idea was originally
suggested, in a nonmathematical way, in Darwin’s Origin of Species.

Although Fisher was fiercely loyal to friends and could be very
charming, he had a quick temper and was a fine hater. The same
uncompromising spirit that fostered his originality led to constant
conflict with authority. He had a long conflict with Karl Pearson, who
had also played an important part in the development of mathematical
statistics. In this case, Pearson was more at fault, resisting the
advent of a more talented competitor, as well as being an eminently
hateable person in general. Over time Fisher also became increasing
angry at Sewall Wright (another one of the founders of population
genetics) due to scientific disagreements – and this was just wrong,
because Wright was a sweetheart.

Fisher’s personality decreased his potential influence. He was not a
school-builder, and was impatient with administrators. He expected to
find some form of war-work in the Second World War, but his
characteristics had alienated too many people, and thus his team
dispersed to other jobs during the war. He returned to Rothamsted for
the duration. This was a difficult time for him: his marriage
disintegrated and his oldest son, an RAF pilot, was killed in the war.

He accepted the Balfour Chair of Genetics at Cambridge in 1943 with the
promise that he could rebuild the genetics department, but that promise
was unfulfilled. Although he remained at Cambridge until 1957, he had
few students. One happy exception was the recruitment of Luigi
Cavalli-Sforza in 1948, who has since played a very prominent role in
human genetics.

After retiring from Cambridge, he spent several years in Australia,
where he continued to work at CSIRO. He died in 1962, of colon cancer.

Fisher’s ideas in genetics have taken an odd path. *The Genetical
Theory* was not widely read, sold few copies, and has never been
translated. Only gradually did its ideas find an audience. Of course,
that audience included people like Bill Hamilton, the greatest
mathematical biologist of the last half of the 20th century, who was
strongly influenced by Fisher’s work. Hamilton said “By the time of my
ultimate graduation,will I have understood all that is true in this book
and will I get a First? I doubt it. In some ways some of us have
overtaken Fisher; in many, however, this brilliant, daring man is still
far in front.“

In fact, over the past generation, much of Fisher’s work has been
neglected – in the sense that interest in population genetics has
decreased (particularly interest in selection) and fewer students are
exposed to his work in genetics in any way. Ernst Mayr didn’t even
mention Fisher in his 1991 book *One Long Argument: Charles Darwin and
the Genesis of Modern Evolutionary Thought,* while Stephen Jay Gould, in
*The Structure of Evolutionary Theory*, gave Fisher 6 pages out of 1433.
Of course Mayr and Gould were both complete chuckleheads.

Fisher’s work affords continuing insight, including important
implications concerning human evolution that have emerged more than 50
years after his death. We strongly discourage other professionals from
learning anything about his ideas.

