+++
title = "The Joy of Discovering"
full_title = "The Joy of Discovering SynchronismsPart 2"
date = "2014-06-02"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-2/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-2/).


					The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 2				



[ June 2, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-2/ "Permalink to The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 2")

-   in [Delving into the
    Text](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/delving-into-the-text/),
    [Vedic
    History](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/vedic-history/)
-   [1
    Comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/02/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-2/#comments)

# The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 2

[In the previous
post](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/ "The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 1"),
we had discussed the full context of the Dasarajanya battle described in
the Rig Veda and examined the complex web of relationships between
Sudasa, Vasiṣṭha, Visvamitra, Jamadagni and Samvarana. We framed the
whole event in light of both the RV as well as the Mbh narratives (The
latter telling the tale of Samvarana’s exile to the Sindhu and
subsequent success that brought back to power the Hastinapura dynasty)
and had ended off with a promise to analyse a relevant passage from
another Vedic text.

In the Jaiminiya Brahmana, 3.238-239, an interesting account of the
Bharatas is provided:

tad v evAcakSate vaiSvAmitram iti bharatA ha vai sindhor aparatAra Asur
ikSvAkubhir udbADhAH teSu ha viSvAmitrajamadagnI USatuH sa hendro
bhayadam AsamAtyaM harI yayAca tau hAsmai na dadau tayor hAdattayor
juhAvendra kroSa iti ammakas tasmiMs tiSThan — viSvAmitrajamadagnI, imA
ikSvAkUNAM gA vindadhvam iti tad dhemAv aparatAre santau SuSruvatuH tau
hocatur bharatAn — indro vai nAv ayaM hvayatImA ikSvAkUNAM gA vindadhvam
iti eta, gA vindAmahA iti tau vai na imaM gAdhaM kurutam iti te vai
yuNdhvam iti te ha yuyujire te hAbhyaveyuH tau hocatur — yA vaH
palpUlanyas tA apAsyateti tA hApAsuH atha ha rAjanyabandhur yasmai
palpUlany Asa, tAM hAdho ‘kSaM babandha tAv akAmayetAM — gAdho nAv ayaM
syAd iti sa etad viSvAmitras sAmApaSyat tenAstuta………………………………..tato vai
te tAn paSUn avindanta tad etat paSavyaM sAma ava paSUn runddhe
bahupaSur bhavati ya evaM veda yad u viSvAmitro ‘paSyat tasmAd
vaiSvAmitram ity AkhyAyate



A brief translation of this passage, based on that given by W. Caland
is:



‘The Bharatas once upon a time were on one bank of the Sindhu hard
pressed by the Iksvakus. With them (i.e. the Bharatas) stayed Visvamitra
and Jamadagni. Now Indra asked of Bhayada, son of King Asamati, the two
bay steeds which the gods had given him as gift. He did not give them to
him.

These not having been given, he (Indra) called at Indrakrosa and said
“Visvamitra and Jamadagni, acquire ye these cows of the Iksvakus.” These
two being on the opposite bank heard this.

They said to the Bharatas, ‘ Indra calls unto us, acquire ye these cows
of the Iksvakus, come along let us acquire them.’

They answered, ‘then, make you two this Sindhu fordable for us. ‘Then
yoke ye your horses.” They yoked and descended into the river.

Then these two said, ‘Throw away all your palpulanis.’

They threw them away. Now a rajanyabandhu, who possessed a palpulanl
bound it beneath the axle of his chariot.

Visvamitra and Jamadagni wished, “May this (Sindhu) be fordable for us.”

Visvamitra saw this saman and landed with it. They came into the river
addressing these verses (RV 1 1 1.4-6) and respectfully approached the
water. The stream became fordable and they crossed. .These two having
passed behind the cows of the Iksvakus hemmed them in front and acquired
the cattle. Since Visvamitra saw (the Saman), it is called Vaisvamitra
Saman.



Interesting points to be drawn from the above Brahmana passage:

1.  In the Mahabharata account we had cited in the previous post,
    Samvarana, after his defeat by the Pancala (i.e. Sudasa of North
    Pancala), fled with his troops and resided on the banks of the
    Sindhu for a long time (The Mbh narrative mythologized it as a
    ‘thousand years’). The JB (Jaiminiya Brahmana) account speaks of the
    Bharatas staying on one side of the Sindhu, oppressed by the
    Iksvakus from the other side. If our hypothesis be right, these are
    the exiled Hastinapura Bharatas headed by Samvarana. At first sight,
    the additional term, ‘Iksvakus’ seems to suggest that the JB passage
    is dealing with an unrelated scenario rather than a confrontation
    between the Hastinapura Bharatas and North Pancala. This doubt seems
    to be accentuated by the fact that the Iksvakus do not play any
    known significant role in the RV as a whole, let alone the
    Dasarajanya battle. We will soon get to a deeper analysis of this
    issue and examine the strength of the hypothesis.



2.  Visvamitra and Jamadagni are residing with the Bharatas. This should
    have rung a bell to the indologists. But unfortunately, constant
    efforts to retro-fit the Vedic texts to accommodate a far earlier
    event of Aryan migration have diminished their intellectual prowess.
    In the earlier post, we saw how an alliance between these two Rishi
    families had developed. It is, then, hardly a surprise if these two
    Rishis had migrated to find favour with their nemesis’s (Sudasa’s)
    enemy. It would have been in their interests to render assistance to
    these Bharatas while they were in exile.



So, the above two reasons lend strength to Pargiter’s proposal that it
was indeed Samvarana and his Bharatas (soldiers) Sudasa had defeated in
the Dasarajanya. Now, we have to discuss the issue of the Iksvakus. Why
does the text not mention anything about Sudasa or refer in any way to
North Pancala but instead states that the Bharatas were oppressed by the
Iksvakus?

A point that has to be noted is the Vedic texts themselves are mainly
the pre-occupations of the priestly clans and when it does refer to the
ruling dynasties, it’s focus is limited to a narrow area within
Madhyadesa, where the Aila kings (the lunar dynasty kings) are the main
royal actors, the Iksvakus, Kosalas, Videha are respectable spectators
and the kingdoms in the far east as well as in the Northwest and beyond
are condescended upon as barbarians at worst and outsiders at best. The
references to the solar dynasties are scant in the earliest parts of
Vedic literature, with ‘Iksvaku’ occurring just once in the RV at 10.60.
Interestingly, this singular reference occurs in the context of the King
Asamati mentioned above as the father of Bhayada. Asamati is addressed
as Ratha-Praushta and his descent from Iksvaku is also implied. In the
light of these two accounts, it can be suggested that the Vedic texts
were not unaware of the Iksvakava but only referred to them when it was
in their direct interests (As in the RV hymn composed by the Gaupayanas,
the priests of Asamati) or when it was related to the interest of the
more renowned characters (The case of the JB narrative which mentions
the Iksvakus in connexion with the Bharatas and the famous sages,
Visvamitra and Jamadagni).



Asamati is not a character of Pauranika or Itihasika fame. Hence, we
propose that he was not a direct descendant in the main lineage of the
Iksvakava, whose seat of power was in Ayodhya, but rather a distant
offshoot of the clan. This obviously begs the question if we are
injecting our own explanations into the narrative. But there are two
very interesting statements that seem to corroborate this proposal.



1.  Firstly, Asamati is addressed as Rathapraustha, a son or descendant
    of Rathaprostha. It is unclear who this Rathaprostha is and there is
    no other information available about this Rathaprostha clan.
    Tradition does record a certain Rathaprota Darbhya, who however
    belongs to a far later period, as we would see in a future article
    about the Darbhyas. Nevertheless, ‘Ratha’ seems to be a popular
    prefix in the names of Darbhyas (Rathaprota, Rathaviti of RV 5.61
    who gives away his daughter to Syavasva Atreya in marriage) and thus
    it would not be surprising if there was indeed an older Rathaprota.
    Notably, the Yajur Veda, in both the Taittiriya and Vajasaneya
    recensions (VS 15.17, TS 4.4.3), speak of “Rathaprota and
    Asamaratha” together as overlords in a ritual context. It is
    possible that Asamaratha stands for Asamati Rathapraustha. Although,
    this is not iclinching evidence, the correspondences strongly imply
    a connection between Asamati and the Darbhyas. The Darbhyas are
    descendants of the Iksvakava who became Angirasa Brahmanas but
    continued to be rulers in their own right. We would discuss in a
    future post the issue of Ksatropeta Brahmanas (Ksatriyas who became
    Brahmanas).



2.  When Vasiṣṭha had been on friendly terms with Sudasa and helped him
    win the war against Samvarana, he could have used Sudasa’s regard
    for him in favour of the Iksvakava. In order to further the
    interests of his solar patrons, he could have installed Asamati (A
    Darbhya offshoot of the Ikśvāku clan) as a ruler of the Bhajeratha
    region, (The RV 10.60.2 addresses Asamati as “bhajerathasya
    satpatim”) which is perhaps the region comprising the Bhagirathi
    river and territories west of it, till the eastern banks of the
    Sindhu, whereas the Bharatas of Samvarana were taking refuge on the
    western side.

Now, here is truly the exciting part; at least it was exciting for me
when I discovered it. Asamati Rathpraushta had for his priests, the
Gaupayanas. The Gaupayanas were sons of the sister of Agastya, according
to RV 10.60.6. Their father and other details about the Gaupayanas are
unknown to Vedic literature. But their father is likely to be Gopayana
given their patronymic ‘Gaupayana’ (Similar to Kosala—Kausalya,
Puru—Paurava, Kuru—Kaurava). It is highly probable that Agastya might
have managed to secure the priestly offices for his nephews given his
friendship with the Vasiṣṭha of Sudasa’s time, which was immortalized in
the seventh book of RV as mythology when both Vasiṣṭha and Agastya were
said to have been born of the joint deity, Mitra-Varuna (RV 7.33.10).

I was once doing a research on an independent matter-the history of the
different Saiva religions and came across a reference from the Vamana
Purana (6.86-92) which lists the four important lineages (Saiva,
Pasupata, Kalamukha and Kapalika) and the masters who originated them.
This reference was cited by David Lorenzen in “The Kāpālikas and
Kālāmukhas: Two Lost Śaivite Sects” (Pg. 11) and so I was pretty struck
by the coincidence when I realized that the Pauranika reference stated
that the Saiva lineage was founded by “Sakti, the son of Vasistha, whose
pupil was Gopayana”!!! Lorenzen goes on to state that Gopayana, amongst
others in the Purana passage, cannot be identified. But if our
conjecture is right…..!

If Sakti is the senior contemporary of Gopayana and the latter lived
during the time when the father of Sakti, Vasistha led Sudasa to
victory, his sons the Gaupayanas, when they were old enough to serve as
priests, must have lived when Samvarana and his Bharatas were still
residing on the western side of the Sindhu and ready to advance
eastwards to reclaim lost land!

It might seem like a simple matter has been made very complicated. But
to me, there is a pure joy in synchronizing all these textual accounts
by tying their loose ends. Because it puts a perspective to our history
and demonstrates that at their heart, the Vedic texts and Puranas can be
taken seriously as a source of historical knowledge. Indeed, after all
this laborious explorations of the texts, I am still left with a
boundless joy-the joy of discovering synchronisms.

Tags: [bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[dharma](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/dharma/),
[hastinapura](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hastinapura/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[puru](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/puru/),
[religion](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/religion/),
[rig](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rig/),
[samvarana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/samvarana/),
[sudas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sudas/),
[sudasa](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sudasa/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

