+++
title = "The Vasiṣṭha Dveṣinyah"
full_title = "The Vasiṣṭha Dveṣinyah"
date = "2014-06-12"
upstream_url = "https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/12/the-vasi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adha-dvesinyah/"

+++
Source: [here](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/12/the-vasi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adha-dvesinyah/).


					The Vasiṣṭha Dveṣinyah				



[ June 12, 2014 
](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/12/the-vasi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adha-dvesinyah/ "Permalink to The Vasiṣṭha Dveṣinyah")

-   in [Delving into the
    Text](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/category/delving-into-the-text/)
-   [Leave a
    comment](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/12/the-vasi%e1%b9%a3%e1%b9%adha-dvesinyah/#respond)

# The Vasiṣṭha Dveṣinyah

In my opinion, one of the rather endearing aspects of vaidikahistory is
the constant rivalry and tension between the different priestly
families, which, apart from the colourful episodes it gave us in the
texts, also shaped the evolution of ritual and liturgy. The vaidika
sūktāniwere useful not because it told a story of great historical
substance but because they could be instrumental to performing a ritual
act. As a result, despite the presence of possibly objectionable
content, the veda was always held in the highest esteem because of the
utility and inherent power of their words and even after thevaidika
rites fell largely into oblivion, it stood as the source and symbol of
unity amongbrāhmaṇa-s of whatever gotra they may hail from or whatever
siddhānta or sampradāyathey may adhere to.



In that light, it is certainly interesting to see how a particular
portion of a certain sūkta in the third maṇḍala of the ṛgvedawas
considered to be harmful for listening to or reciting by a specific
audience. That textual portion is RV 3.53.21-24 or what is popularly
designated as the Vasiṣṭha Dvesinyah, which the vasiṣṭhās were forbidden
from reciting or listening to. The third book of the RV is a Vaiśvāmitra
Mandala-i.e. composed by the viśvāmitras. Thus, the particular four
verses in question are known in tradition to bear testimony to the
well-known rivalry of Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha. However, in the process
of transforming historical narratives into mythology, the actors are
often reduced to a binary pair: The mythical Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha.
The Ramayana even transforms the two great sages into two fighting
birds! In reality, the conflict was obviously between their two namesake
priestly clans-the viśvāmitras and vasiṣṭhās. As we had explained in an
[earlier
posting](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/05/27/the-joy-of-discovering-synchronisms-part-1/ "The Joy of Discovering Synchronisms-Part 1"),
the replacement of “Viśvāmitra” (probably the head of all the
viśvāmitras) by Vasiṣṭha (who would have been the head of the vasiṣṭhās;
likely the father of Śakti ) as the priest of Sudāsa, triggered a bitter
rivalry between these two great men and their respective families. This
bitter rivalry would eventually culminate in the murder of Śakti
Vāsiṣṭha, the son of Vasiṣṭha and while the ruse of Viśvāmitra is held
by traditional commentators as the cause of death, it appears that in
the course of history, the Saudāsas, or the party of Sudāsa, were
remembered as the main culprits by the vasiṣṭhās themselves, as we see
in the following Śruti:

vásiṣṭho hatáputro ‘kāmayata vindéya prajā́m abhí saudāsā́n bhaveyam íti
sá etám ekasmānnapañcāśam apaśyat tám ā́harat ténāyajata táto vái só
‘vindata prajā́m abhí saudāsā́n abhavat TS 7.4.7 of the taittiriyakas

And very similarly,

vasiṣṭho akāmayata hata putraḥ prajāyena prajayā paśubhir abhi saudāsān
bhaveyam iti / (Vikṛtīṣṭayah) sa etam yajña kratum apaśyad vasiṣṭha
yajñam tena iṣṭvā prājāyata prajayā paśubhir abhi saudāsān abhavat of KB
4.6.7-9 of the kauśītakin-s in their brāhmaṇa

Both these statements mean that Vasiṣṭha, after his sons were slain,
performed a certain ritual to obtain a son who would help overcome the
saudāsas. Naturally, many young males of the vasiṣṭhās might have been
killed but some passages emphasize only the death of Śakti as he was the
son of the main “Vasiṣṭha”, the Vasiṣṭha who served as the priest of
King Sudāsa.

Coming back to the “vasiṣṭha dvesinyah”, although those four verses do
not mention vasiṣṭha or his sons or kinsmen by name, it seems likely
that the vasiṣṭhās themselves had collectively identified those verses
as hostile words directed against them and the tradition of avoiding any
sensory encounter with it, has been passed down generationally in an
institutionalized manner. Yāska wrote the nirukta as a commentary on the
nighaṇṭu, which itself was a categorized collection of words. At one
place in the nirukta (IV.14), Yāska cites a part of RV 3.53.23, “lodhaṃ
nayanti paśu manyamānāḥ” to explain the meaning of the word, ‘lodham’.
Durga, who was the commentator on Yāska, refuses to comment on the
particular verse as it is an imprecation against the vasiṣṭhās and he
belongs to the vasiṣṭhās, being of the kapisthala gotra. The bṛhaddevatā
by Śaunaka, a commentarial work that explains the context or stories
behind the sūktāni of the ṛgveda, has the following to say about these
last four verses of RV 3.53:

parāś catasro yās tvatra vasiṣṭha dveṣiṇyas smṛtāḥ

viśvāmitreṇa tāḥ proktāḥ abhiśāpā iti smṛtāḥ

dviṣaddveṣās tu tāḥ proktāḥ vidyāś caivābhicārikāḥ

vasiṣṭhās tānna sṛṇvanti tad ācāryakasammatam

kīrtanācchravaṇād vāpi mahadoṣaś ca jāyate

śatadhā bhidyate mūrdhā kīrtanena śrutena vā

teṣām bālāḥ pramīyante tasmāt tās tu na kīrtayet

“The four stanzas which follow are remebered as being hostile to the
vasiṣṭhās. They were pronounced by Viśvāmitra; they are remembered to be
‘imprecations’ (abhiśāpa). They are pronounced to be hostile to enemies
and magical (abhicārikaḥ) incantations. The vasiṣṭhās will not listen to
them. This is the unanimous opinion of their authorities (ācāryaka):
great guilt arises from repeating or listening (to them). By repeating
or hearing (them) one’s head is broken into a hundred fragments; the
children of those (who do so) perish. Therefore one should not repeat
them.”

Thus, the opinion of these stanzas being harmful to the vasiṣṭhās is an
agreed tradition among their authorities. Perhaps, this warning from
their own teachers is a testimony to the potency of that venomous
quartet. Indeed, those who are adept in Mantraśāstra would admit to
this. Let us give a background context to the hymn. Let us recall how we
had mentioned in a previous post the tale of the Viśvāmitras (Also known
as the Kuśikas) where the chief Viśvāmitra was forced to abdicate his
position after he, along with the rest of Viśvāmitras, was rendered
mindless by the power of Śakti. We had also cited the story of how they
were restored by the Sasarpari speech. It therefore makes sense to state
that these particular verses must have been composed after the loss of
Viśvāmitra’s priestly office.

However, the hymn itself as a whole could not have been composed at one
single point in time. We postulatethat the original hymn consisted of
just the first fourteen verses, RV 3.53.1-14, which were composed when
Visvamitra was still the head priest of Sudāsa. The hymn itself starts
off on a rather positive, celebratory note:

vītaṃ havyānyadhvareṣu devā vardhethāṃ ghīrbhīriḷayā madantā

“Enjoy the offerings at our sacrifices, Gods, waxed by the hymns,
delight in the food.”

Verses 9 and 11 refer to a time when Sudāsa was still a patron of
Viśvāmitra. (“viśvāmitro yadavahat sudāsamapriyāyata kuśikebhirindraḥ”
and “upa preta kuśikāścetayadhvamaśvaṃ rāye pra muñcatā sudāsaḥ”)

The first fourteen verses appear to be gloating over the victories of
Sudāsa during Viśvāmitra’s tenure as head priest. In contrast to this,
the last ten verses show a radical change in tone. The fifteenth and
sixteenth verses introduce Jamadagni and Sasarpari, which seem to have
no connection with the preceding portion of the hymn. Verse 17-20 pray
for the safety of the Viśvāmitras’ journey on the chariot and also prays
for the oxen and axle. Viśvāmitra in Verse 18 even asks for strength for
himself and his sons. Combining this with verse 16, which says new life
has been granted to them (Viśvāmitras) by the Sasarpari, it seems that
the Viśvāmitras were in distress at the time these particular verses
were composed. Sāyaṇācārya, when commenting on verse 17 even says that
Visvamitra was praying for a safe journey after he had left the
sacrifice of Sudāsa. This could be a reference to the exit of the
Viśvāmitras following the humiliating incident involving Śakti.

That the last decade of verses in this 24-versed hymn was an added layer
also becomes apparent by an interesting disparity in the distribution of
certain words between these two parts. The self-referential terms,
“Kuśikas” and “Viśvāmitras” are only found in what we called the
original portion of the hymn, in about six verses: 7, 9-13. Hence, in RV
3.53.1-14, the clan references occur in almost half of the 14 verses.
\[Footnote. 1\]

In contradistinction to this high frequency, such terms are not found at
all in the last ten verses. Not even once; this suggests that this part
of the hymn might have been a later addition.

Let us now analyse the vicious verses, one by one.



**indrotibhirbahulābhirno adya yācchreṣṭhābhirmaghavañchūra jinva \|**

**yo no dveṣṭyadharaḥ sas padīṣṭa yamu dviṣmastamu prāṇo jahātu \|\| RV
3.53.21**

**“Indra, with aids many, come to us today. With the excellent (aids),
Maghavan, hero, impel towards us! May he who hates us fall downward; him
whom we hate let breath depart!”**

This defines the nature of the following verses and sets an imprecative
mood for them. An interesting trope seems to be how a statement of
mutual hatred seems to be a common feature of imprecations. In the last
verse of the last anuvāka of namakam, it statesthis mutual hatred right
before the hymn to the awful god reaches its climax: yam dviṣmo yaśca no
dveśti tam vo jambhe dadhāmi. In any case, Viśvāmitra has invoked the
power of Indra to strike his unnamed nemesis.

****

**paraśuṃ cid vi tapati śimbalaṃ cid vi vṛścati \|**

**ukhā cid indra yeṣantī prayastā phenamasyati \|\| 3.53.22**

**“Like the axe that is heated, like a śimbala flower that is cut-off.
Like a cauldron, oh Indra, that has been struck and seethes, may he (the
enemy) vomit foam from his mouth.”**

This is a slightly difficult verse to interpret. Because of the
recurring “**cid**” in both half-verses, some have constructed the
translation to mean such that there are three metaphors for the enemy’s
death (The ‘heating of the axe’, the ‘cutting-off of the śimbala flower’
and the ‘seething of foam from the cauldron that has been struck’). This
does not really make sense as the ultimate prayer in this Rik is for the
enemy to foam and only the immediately preceding metaphor of the boiling
cauldron actually fits in aptly.

Therefore, the top half-verse has to be dealt with separately. Also, the
heating of the axe cannot be a suitable metaphor for the harm caused to
the enemy. Both the śimbala (Silk-Cotton) flower and the cauldron would
stand in as subtle references to the enemy’s body, his person. However
the axe, being primarily an equipment used for cutting, would be more
appropriate as a metaphor for an entity that actually inflicts harm. An
example of this can be found in the rakṣoghna sūkta (RV 7.104) of the
vasiṣṭhās in verse 21. (Whether this rakṣoghna sūkta was a response to
the assault by the Viśvāmitras is a topic for the future) Thus, this
half-verse is actually describing a single scenario, the likes of which
would be where the heated axe is used to cut off a mere, tender
Silk-Cotton flower.

In effect, Viśvāmitra was unleashing a disproportionately powerful curse
against the opponent. Ellison Banks Findly has pointed out in an
article, the Vasistha Dvesinyah is an example of sympathetic magic. In
sympathetic magic, the intended outcome is achieved, to put it rather
simply, by transference of effects from an object to the entity it
represents. The popular Hollywood meme of the Voodoo doll is one
instance of it. In this case, Viśvāmitra is probably using the Simbala
flower as the sympathetic object to represent his much-hated foe (i.e.
Śakti). And if we may take some liberty with the interpretation of the
verse and even then, not too far at that, we may hold that the burning
of Śakti to death might have been the fulfilment of the evocative
imagery of a red-hot axe striking a small flower.



**na sāyakasya cikite janāso lodhaṃ nayanti paśu manyamānāḥ \|**

**nāvājinaṃ vājinā hāsayanti na gardabhaṃ puro aśvān nayanti \|\|
3.53.23**

**“People do not know the missile. They bring the red (animal) thinking
him to be a (mere) beast. Men do not run a non-courser with a courser.
They do not lead an ass before the horse.”**

This is probably the hardest of the four verses to interpret. The word
‘Lodham’ is not easily translatable. Sāyaṇa derives it from ‘Lubdham’,
meaning ‘desirous’ and then adduces a legend to justify this. The legend
is: Viśvāmitra was once maintaining his silence as part of his
austerities. The vasiṣṭhās had seized him to drive him away. Yet,
Viśvāmitra, desirous of the fruits of his penance, had maintained the
silence. So, here, ‘Lodham’ refers to Viśvāmitra, the desirous sage.

Yāska (Nirukta IV.14) interprets this second half of the first
half-verse (lodhaṃ nayanti paśu manyamānāḥ) as referring to the enemy of
Viśvāmitra, where the greedy enemy is being driven away. Both Yāska and
Sayana have interpreted the ‘nayanti’ in the first half-verse as
‘driving away’.

Durga refuses to comment on this verse in Yāska, saying that he is a
Vasiṣṭha but briefly states: “Lodham ityetad anavagatam”, stating that
the meaning of ‘Lodham’ is not understood. My own take on this is that
the derivation of Lodham from Lubdham is far-fetched and does not make
sense in the context of the whole first half-verse. The ‘sāyaka’, the
missile, clearly refers to the destructive power invoked by Viśvāmitra.
The words, ‘cikite’ and ‘manyamānāḥ’ refer to knowing and thinking
respectively. Hence, the proper sense would be that “the people
(janāso), not knowing the (strength) of the missile, brought it,
thinking it merely to be a beast.” The “thinking of it to be a mere
beast” was an uninformed judgment. So, Yāska’sinterpretation of
‘lodham’ as the greedy enemy of Viśvāmitra is incorrect as Viśvāmitra
would have most probably concurred with such an opinion. Our opinion is
that the ‘lodham’ is a coded reference to the destructive, magical
missile itself. Rudolf von Roth hypothesized that it refers to some sort
of red animal. Interestingly, there are two statements from the
Taittiriya Samhita that can lend support to this.

1.  In the Taittiriya Samhita (TS) 5.6.16.1, a phrase “adhi lodha karna”
    is used to describe a certain type of cattle to be sacrificed to
    Viṣnu. The translation of the phrase would be “red-tipped ears” or
    “very red ears”.
2.  The idea behind Viśvāmitra invoking the imagery of a red beast in a
    verse that is clearly meant for imprecation has some basis in the TS
    as well. TS 2.1.7 states how someone who practices withcraft should
    offer a red animal to Rudra

While the second statement is less convincing (as there are numerous
prescriptions for what a practicioner of witchcraft should do), we still
find it admissible to postulate that ‘lodham’ is best translated as ‘red
animal’ and the half-verse refers to an unknown enemy-destroying
practice.

The second half verse beginning with “nāvājinaṃ…” is really separate, in
terms of meaning. We believe it links to the final verse, so we explain
this below.

****

**ima indra bharatasya putrā apapitvaṃ cikiturna prapitvam \|**

**hinvantyaśvamaraṇaṃ na nityaṃ jyāvājaṃ pari ṇayantyājau \|\| 3.53.24**

**“Oh Indra, these sons of Bharata know separation, not approachment.
They urge their steeds (against) the distant, the not-dear; they bear
the swift bow-string in war.”**

This verse too is slightly hard to interpret. The basic purpose of this
verse seems to be to (magically) instigate the Bharatas to attack the
intended enemy (or as suggested by the mitrayu, a “prototype” of
vidveṣaṇa\*).Thus Viśvāmitra was seeking from Indra that the warriors
of the Bharatas do not continue with their friendship with his enemies
but rather wage war against them.

In light of later tradition, we know that the saudāsas, who had employed
Vasiṣṭha in place of Viśvāmitra, had a fall-out with him for some reason
and this conflict escalated into violence, eventually climaxing at the
death of Śakti. This last verse seems to be laying out the modus
operandi for Viśvāmitra’s dangerous intentions: The intended violence
would be executed through means of the party of Sudāsa himself, thereby
exonerating him from any responsibility for what was to happen.

Going back to the second half-verse of the previous verse, the whole “a
non-courser does not race with a courser, an ass does not lead a horse”
statement is related to this very goal: To curse for hostilities to brew
between the saudāsas and the vasiṣṭhās. The non-courser (A horse that
does not course, i.e. does not speed) and the ass are both derogatory
references to Vasiṣṭha. Although, I have not gone deep into the
translation, it would suffice to note for now the translations offered
for ‘na nityam’ by Griffith (They urge their steeds as if they were
others’) or Wilson following Sāyaṇa (They urge their steeds against a
constant foe). Griffith’s does not make any sense. Why should the
Bharatās urge their horses as if they belonged to others? And Wilson,
following Sāyaṇa, transposes a later meaning of nityam (always,
constant) onto a much older work. I would add in a footnote \[Footnote.
2\] later to explain how nityam can be taken to mean ‘dear’ as in ‘dear
to oneself’.

This concludes the rather long-drawn article on the Vasiṣṭha Dvesinyah
and in the next post, I will write a [tribute to the memory of
Śakti](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/2014/06/19/a-tribute-to-sakti/ "A Tribute to Śakti"),
who is an ācāryain the Advaita Guru Parampara to which I bear
allegiance.



**Footnotes**

1\. Therefore, it is pretty unfortunate that a scholar like Sadāśiva
Ambadāsa should treat the hymn as one single composition and, neglecting
tradition to some extent, connects the first and second portions.

2\. This derivation of the third meaning of “nityam” occurs in “Vedic
Studies Vol. I” by A. Venkatasubbiah. The following paragraphs are worth
noting in full:

“This is a very familiar word that occurs aboutthirty-eight times in
the RV and veryfrequently in theother Vedic texts and in later
literature. The commentators, Indian as well as European, are one
ininterpreting this word as (1) svIya, sahaja, own, and (2)dhruva,
lasting, constant, perpetual, uninterrupted, imperishable,eternal, etc.
In assuming the second of theabove two meanings for this word in the
RV, the commentatorshave been no doubt guided by the circumstancethat
the word nitya has that meaning in later texts. Butas a matter of fact,
this latter meaning is not appropriateand does not yield good sense in
a number of passages.” (Pg. 1)

“The other meaning‘ own ‘is still less appropriatehere ; and it
therefore becomes clear that in these andother similar passages the
word nitya has a meaningdifferent from the two mentioned above.What
this meaning is, can be found out with thehelp of 1,66, 1; 1, 166, 2
and 10, 39, 14, all whichverses contain similes with nitya as tertium
comparationis.In the first of these verses it is said that Agni is
nitya asa son (sunu) ; in the second, that honey (madhu) is nityaas a
son (sunu) ; and in the third, that a hymn of praise  
(stoma) is nitya as a son (sunu). A comparison thereforeof the
adjectives which these words sunu, madhu,stoma and agni receive in the
RV, will show whatcharacteristics are common to the things denoted
bythem and will thus determine the sense of nitya.’ (pg. 2)

After comparing all the adjectives of these four words, an interesting
conclusion is derived by the author:

“Itwill be seen that the only adjective (besides nitya)common to the
three words sunu,madhuand stoma ispriya (in the case of stoma we find
instead of priya itssuperlative form prestha) and the only
characteristic thatis common to the things denoted by these words
is*priyatva.*” (pg. 2-3)

“Thus the only adjective (beside nitya whosemeaning we are engaged in
finding out) and the onlycharacteristic that are common to the
above-mentionedfour words and the things denoted by them, are priya
andpriyatva\* ; which makes it probable that nitya means  
priya in the above passages. The probability, in thisinstance, is
converted into certainty by the parallelism ofpriya and nitya in 1, 91,
6c : priyastotro vanaspatih andand 9, 12, 7 a : nityastotro
vanaspatih.nitya thus means priya, dear, pleasing, beloved,favourite.”
(pg. 3)

This gave us a huge insight in interpreting the word. But then
amazingly, Venkatasubbiah shocks us, by choosing to interpret nityam as
dear in almost all of the passages he goes on to discuss, with the sole
and sore exception of 3.53, where he interprets “na nityam” as “Not
one’s own (horse). We suspect that he might have not benefited from a
full appreciation of the status of those four stanzas as verses for
imprecation.







Tags: [advaita](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/advaita/),
[bharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharata/),
[bharatas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/bharatas/),
[brahmana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/brahmana/),
[brahmanas](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/brahmanas/),
[brahmins](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/brahmins/),
[chronology](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/chronology/),
[genealogy](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/genealogy/),
[guru](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/guru/),
[hindu](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hindu/),
[hinduism](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/hinduism/),
[history](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/history/),
[itihasa](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/itihasa/),
[mahabharata](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/mahabharata/),
[priest](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/priest/),
[purana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/purana/),
[ramayana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/ramayana/),
[rig](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rig/),
[rik](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rik/),
[rk](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/rk/),
[sage](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sage/),
[sages](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sages/),
[sakti](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sakti/),
[sayana](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/sayana/),
[seers](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/seers/),
[vasistha](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vasistha/),
[veda](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/veda/),
[vedic](https://aryanthought.wordpress.com/tag/vedic/)

