+++
title = "Too Darn Hot?"
full_title = "Too Darn Hot?"
date = "2012-07-14"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/14/too-darn-hot/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/14/too-darn-hot/).

Too Darn Hot?

Several recent papers give me the impression that there is regional
variation in mutational load. One can slice this a number of ways. A
recent Science article looked at mutations that knocked out genes –
loss-of-function or LOF mutations. Mutational load is the sum of all
deleterious mutations – LOF mutations are a clear-cut subset of total
mutational load.

Some of the LOF mutations they are found are common, and are presumably
neutral, maybe even beneficial, but most are rare and likely
deleterious. The kicker is that they found significantly more LOF
mutations in their African population sample than in their European and
East Asian samples – 25% higher. That was unexpected. Population
history (and mutation rate) determine the variation you expect to find
in neutral genes, but significantly deleterious mutations should be in
mutation-selection balance. A neutral variant might easily be a million
years old, but a deleterious variant will last, on average, 1/s
generations, when s is the decrease in fitness caused by that variant.
A mutation that decreases fitness by 1% should disappear in 100
generations or so, about 2500 years. Ancient bottlenecks should not
influence the frequency of such noticeably deleterious mutations.

Another related paper looked at a large set of coding genes, sequencing
many times (average depth of 111x) for high accuracy. As in the LOF
paper, they found that the average person carries many
probably-deleterious mutations, mutations which are individually rare.
Each person carried, on average, mutations expected to change function
(almost always for the worse, although usually only a little for the
worse) in 313 genes (out of the 15,585 they studied.

They looked at African-Americans and Americans of European descent,
about a thousand of each. They saw what what was seen in the LOF paper
did: there were significantly more probably-deleterious mutations in the
80%-African population. When they used a loose definition of functional
variation, about 20% more : with a more conservative definition, which
should have a higher fraction of truly deleterious genes, about 29%
more.

This African excess is similar in every category they examined: in
synonymous changes, in missense changes, in mutations that affect
splicing or that turn a protein into hash. Synonymous changes are
neutral (or close enough), and more neutral variants in Africans could
be a consequence of population history (a generally larger population
size over most of the last few tens of thousands of year). But that
kind of ancient population history can’t matter much when we’re talking
mutations that drop fitness by 1% or more, so what’s going on?  The
only *simple* explanation (that I can think of) is a higher mutation
rate.

