+++
title = "Fascinatin’ rhythm"
full_title = "Fascinatin’ rhythm"
date = "2012-07-10"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/10/fascinatin-rhythm/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2012/07/10/fascinatin-rhythm/).

Fascinatin’ rhythm

At the recent SMBE meeting in Dublin, there was an interesting talk
(judging from the abstract) about archaic genes in modern humans. The
authors were Sriram Sankararaman, Nick Patterson, Swapan Mallick,,
Svante Paabo, and David Reich. They believe that they can identify
regions of the genome that are of Neanderthal origin and are at high
frequency today, enough so that they were almost certainly favored by
natural selection. They say that they have found over 100 such regions.
 They mention one in particular – a Neanderthal-derived segment that
overlaps CLOCK, a key gene in regulating circadian rhythms. That
segment has a frequency of 85% in Europeans.

This was predictable, in that Henry and I (and John Hawks) predicted
it. To be exact, in our book, Henry and I predicted that at least some
people today would turn out to have Neanderthal admixture, that some
Neanderthal alleles would be favored by selection and be common, and
that genes in involved in circadian rhythm would be particularly likely
to experience such selection, since the Neanderthals had spent hundred
of thousands of years in Europe, where the length of day varies a lot,
while anatomically modern humans (AMH) had spent that time much closer
to the equator, where the length of day varies little.

It should be interesting to see what the function of those other
selected, Neanderthal-derived alleles will be. So far, the only other
published discussion of this topic has concerned Neanderthal-derived HLA
alleles – involved in disease defense, which we also thought a likely
category . A couple of (probably) Denisovan-derived HLA alleles have
also been found, as well as Denisovan versions of a couple of genes in
the innate immune system.

