+++
title = "Outliers"
full_title = "Outliers"
date = "2014-03-05"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/05/outliers/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/05/outliers/).

Outliers

If two populations have moderately different means for some
quantitative trait, for example differing by one standard deviation,
the fraction that exceeds a high threshold is very much larger in the
population with the higher mean.

I have mentioned this once or twice before, but it’s worth explaining in
some detail. It has some important consequences, and I have the feeling
that there are actually a fair fraction of Harvard graduates who aren’t
familiar with it. 

This is a natural consequence of the shape of the distribution function.
It certainly happens with a Gaussian distribution (and many traits are
roughly Gaussian), but it will be true for any distribution function
that declines more and more rapidly as you get farther from the mean.

In practice, this means that if population A is significantly taller
than population B, people from population A will account for a
surprisingly large fraction of people taller than 7 feet.  The effect
is particularly strong for the tallest people, the farthest outliers –
they may *all* be from group A, even when there are far fewer people in
A.

There are quite a few cases in which we care a lot about outliers. In
athletic competitions, you’re not really interested in the strong & the
fast – you’re interested in the fastest, the strongest. In research,
it helps to be able to solve puzzles that others can’t: being the
smartest, rather than just smart, improves your odds.

Because this effect is so strong at the highest levels, you can run it
backwards to come up with useful inferences. A priori, anything that
screwed up the brain enough to misdirect sexual orientation might well
decrease average intelligence as well: but the existence and
accomplishments of Alan Turing and G. H. Hardy strongly suggest that
this is not the case. Running it forwards, you would expect to see very
few, maybe zero, top-flight mathematicians (the top 1000) from
populations that have low average IQs – and that is the case. You would
also expect to see a vast over-representation in mathematics from a
population with a significantly higher-than-average IQ, such as the
Ashkenazi Jews – and again that is so.

In another application – if the average genetic IQ potential had
decreased by a standard deviation since Victorian times, the number of
individuals with the ability to develop new, difficult, and interesting
results in higher mathematics would have crashed, bring such
developments to a screeching halt.  Of course that has not happened.

At the limit, this means that *families* that score high on some
quantitative trait, who are from a group with high mean values of that
trait, live in a suitable environment, and whose high scores happen to
be almost entirely due to genetic factors rather than good developmental
luck, can be competitive, at the highest levels, with *entire
continental races*. For example, there’s the Bekele family, from
Bekoji, Ethiopia. Kenenisa Bekele holds the world record at 5,000 and
10,000 meters, while his little brother is the 3,000 meter world indoor
champion. That one family is competitive (in running) with China,
population 1.35 billion.

