+++
title = "Sperm competition"
full_title = "Sperm competition"
date = "2014-03-17"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/17/sperm-competition/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2014/03/17/sperm-competition/).

Sperm competition

Mostly, people are talking about competition between sperm produced by
different males. In humans, this means women that are into speed
dating.

The non-paternity rate is an upper limit to the rate of sperm
competition: in many, probably most cases of non-paternity, the woman
has not had sex with two different men in a short period of time. But
the non-paternity rate is low!

So classical sperm competition is insignificant in humans, at least in
every population we have any data for. There are those that
[argue](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_at_Dawn#Reception_from_experts_in_the_field)
that back in the stone age, things were far more crazy \[hunter
gatherers were highly promiscuous, they say\], but they’re utterly full
of shit.

Now if you go far back enough, a few million years, things were
different. Chimps *are* highly promiscuous, and have specific
adaptations for sperm competition, for example a protein that causes
ejaculate to form a plug. Humans have a non-working version of that
protein, which shows that sperm competition used to matter in our
ancient ancestors, but hasn’t for a long time.

Still, a number of genes involved with spermatogenesis evolve quite
rapidly. We know several ways in which selection might favor a lot of
change. One is that sperm cells from a given male compete with each
other. The other is sexual conflict: the sperm and the egg have
conflicting interests. An allele that increased a sperm’s chance of
being first to the egg would be favored. On the other hand, it is
absolutely vital that egg not be fertilized by more than *one* sperm, so
barriers to over-fertilization must exist. Sperm adapt to vault those
barriers more effectively, eggs evolve better barriers, etc. It’s a Red
Queen situation.

A lot of ink has been spilled about all the special physical and
psychological adaptations in humans driven by sperm competition of the
first kind. They don’t exist.

Baker and Bellis wrote a lot of nonsense along these lines back in the
90s, sprinkled with fascinating false facts like 20% rates of
non-paternity in Britain. Loons, both of them.

