+++
title = "The Language Sphere"
full_title = "The Language Sphere"
date = "2020-11-05"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/05/the-language-sphere/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/05/the-language-sphere/).

The Language Sphere

In this post, I want to share the theory that I am developing for my
dissertation project and I am so looking forward to suggestions!

It is well-known that South Indian religions are greatly multilingual.
However, I have not seen any methodology that deals with South Asian
religious multilingualism, in particular. Sheldon Pollock’s binary
opposition between Sanskrit and vernaculars (2006) is an influential
perspective for South and Southeast Asian multilingualism. Still, it
focuses on the political and literary aspects, not the religious
domain.

For my project, I am developing the concept of “the language sphere” or
“logosphere,” which can hopefully have widespread utility in South Asian
theism and beyond. This concept is informed by the translation theory of
Naoki Sakai (1992) and “the language order” of Andrew Ollett (2017).
However, my concept aims at overcoming the potential shortcomings of
these theories. Let me tell, first, about these scholars and their
ground-breaking concepts of languages.

Naoki Sakai proposes that language is a site of hybridity, always
context-specific, based on the social and literary evidence from
eighteenth-century Japanese context. The notion of a unified language is
constructed and has no empirical existence whatsoever. Sakai explains
that it is only in translation that a language is presented as “a unity”
that always and necessarily differentiates itself from the other
language unity. In translation, the two languages unities exist
symmetrically and mutually under “the schema of configuration.” Sakai’s
theory offers the possibility to view language unity and translation as
both conceptually made up.

Andrew Ollett applies Sakai’s representation of translation to the
investigation of languages in premodern India. He argues that Sanskrit
and Prakrit, as well as other languages in premodern India, can be
viewed under the framework of configuration, in which a language was
ordered into patterns and schemas based on its reference to other
languages within the same cultural and historical domain.The concept of
“language order” that Ollett derives from Sakai’s theory of language and
translation offers an interesting model for investigating premodern
South Asian multilingualism.

However, both Sakai and Ollett draw our attention to languages and their
interactions mainly at a micro-level without much attention to the agent
who uses the languages or the geographical and historical fluctuations
within a particular linguistic domain. Their concepts also tend to give
the impression that languages remain static at a certain point in time.

To better understand the dynamic interplay of languages, I propose the
concept of “the language sphere” or “logosphere” instead of “language
unity” or “language order.” The language sphere is a spatial
representation of the myriad and fluid movements within a language. Each
sphere is connected with many others, and South Asian multilingualism
can be considered the historically changing network of different but
overlapping logospheres that are in constant interrelations and
negotiations, disrupting the language order at times. Specifically, this
concept is constructed to comprehend the linguistic transformations in a
religious domain by highlighting the three main elements that play a
role in theological development and religious identification.

I picture the language sphere as being loosely demarcated by the three
elements. In constant reciprocal tension, the three elements hold
together to form each angle of a triangle within the language sphere, as
I illustrate here.

![**The Language
Sphere**](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2020/11/Screen-Shot-2020-11-05-at-1.40.41-AM-1024x802.png)

1\) Agency – In my project, the agency usually refers to an author of a
text and his or her cultural and intellectual background, like the
author’s location and education. When the author composes a text, he or
she broadens the angle of agency and sets this angle in relation to
normativity and expressibility.

2\) Normativity – This indicates both scriptural and theological
normativity constructed from scriptures, teachings, and literature.
Normativity places an influence and restriction on the author. However,
the author can also set a new norm through a new composition.

3\) Expressibility – What can be expressed or enunciated in a given
language at a given space and time. The expressibility is conditioned by
the other two elements, agency and normativity. It can either be
expanded or contracted according to those two elements. For example, a
certain linguistic domain like English may develop a subset of technical
terms, hermeneutical elements, or ideologies that belong specifically to
that domain and cannot be found in other linguistic domains. When an
author composes a text within this domain, he or she would have to
conform to the expressibility here. At the same time, the author can
choose to challenge or expand the boundary of expressibility in this
domain by introducing new linguistic elements or authorities, borrowing
terms and concepts from other languages, or creating a hybrid or
multilingual idiom.

Let us take the case of the Śrīvaiṣṇavas as my paradigmatic example.
Within the community, we see the spheres of Sanskrit, Tamil, and
Maṇipravāḷa. The early Śrīvaiṣṇavas regarded both the Sanskrit and Tamil
Veda as their authoritative scriptures and were engaged with the
Sanskrit and Tamil sphere. However, during this time, the Sanskrit
sphere and the Tamil one did remain relatively distinct since the
Sanskrit sphere did not explicitly include the Tamil scripture. In other
words, the Tamil scripture is rarely mentioned in the Sanskrit
composition. Then, the Maṇipravāḷa sphere was created when the
Śrīvaiṣṇava authors began to use Maṇipravāḷa in the composition. The
Śrīvaiṣṇava Maṇipravāḷa is a significant example of the functioning of
such language sphere. By bringing in both Sanskrit and Tamil, the author
or the agent of the Maṇipravāḷa sphere allows the Sanskrit and Tamil
scriptures to coexist and translate their expressibility into the same
sphere by blurring their boundaries. The newly created Maṇipravāḷa
sphere thus expands both normativity and expressibility of the spheres
of Sanskrit and Tamil and manages to transform the sometimes mutually
excluding two spheres.

By composing a new text, an author affects the previously existing
logosphere by changing, expanding and/or contracting, the boundaries of
its three angles, agency, normativity, and expressibility. This concept
zooms in on the tensions and changes each text encounters and creates
within the sphere in relation to previous texts of a given tradition.
Thus, I hope that this concept can better account for the diachronic
development of linguistic changes and negotiations in the history of
South Asian religions.

Special thanks to Daniele Cuneo for his insight and creativity.

**References**

Ollett, Andrew. *Language of the Snakes: Prakrit, Sanskrit, and the
Language Order of Premodern India*. Oakland, California: University of
California Press, 2017.

Sakai, Naoki.*Voices of the Past: The Status of Language in
Eighteenth-Century JapaneseDiscourse*. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1992.

Sheldon, Pollock.*The Language of the Gods in the World of Men:
Sanskrit, Culture, andPower in Premodern India.*Berkeley: University
of California Press, 2006.
