+++
title = "What is dharma during"
full_title = "What is dharma during the pandemic?"
date = "2020-11-13"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/13/4647/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/13/4647/).

What is dharma during the pandemic?

Speaking of dharma, one might think of **the*Bhagavadgītā****,*which
narrates Kṛṣṇa’s teaching to Arjuna before the beginning of the great
war at Kurukṣetra. Although Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna are not facing the
pandemic, the conversation between them is about life and death of
countless warriors and the wellness of the whole universe.

I am teaching a First-Year Writing Seminar for undergraduate students at
Cornell this Fall semester. My course focuses on the*Bhagavadgītā*and
its various perspectives like religious, philosophical, spiritual,
political, social, and so on. Some questions that students ask me in the
class are: **What is dharma during this pandemic? What is the right
thing to do? How can we protect ourselves and those we love?**

Re-reading the*Bhagavadgītā*with the students, I have understood that
one of its essential issues is how to make a decision. With the help of
Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is trying to decide if he should fight his relatives and
people he respects or not. The wellness of everyone and everything
involved is at stake. Now, the question is, how can one know what dharma
is in that situation?

One of the most common terms used to translate this word is “duty.” It
is also widely interpreted as **“detached action” (*niṣkāma*–*karma*)**
based on the translations and commentaries of influential people like
Mahatma Gandhi. One example of the key verses on detached actions
is*Bhagavadgītā*2.47. Here is Gandhi’s version of the verse in English
translation: “Action alone is thy province, never the fruits thereof;
let not thy motive be the fruit of action, nor shouldst thou desire to
avoid action” (2011, 19).

**However, how can we follow such a detached action? Does it mean
performing one’s own action regardless of the result? Is it all about
“doing your duty no matter what”? Or, should we care about the results
of what we are supposed to do?**

In this regard, I bring in **Sandeep Sreekumar’s “An Analysis of
Consequentialism and Deontology in the Normative Ethics of
the*Bhagavadgītā*” (2012)** to give us some ideas.

In his article, Sandeep Sreekumar proposes that Kṛṣṇa’s teaching of
dharma should not be reduced to a deontological theory which justifies a
duty regardless of its consequence. On the other hand, the teaching in
the*Bhagavadgītā*is intent on good consequences through detached
actions. Through the analysis of the text, Sreekumar characterizes the
teaching as rule-consequentialism based on the consequences of
liberation from the cycle of births (*mokṣa*) and the wellness of the
world (*lokasaṃgraha*). In other words, Kṛṣṇa, in his teaching,
highlights the consequences of Arjuna’s fighting, both the consequence
that is not directly related to Arjuna and the one that affects Arjuna
personally. The first consequence is the world’s wellness, which is
indirect or “agent-neutral” for Arjuna. The other one is liberation,
which is “agent-relative” since Arjuna is the one who would attain
liberation if he acts without attachment. The twin consequences can be
accomplished through the performance of dharma or “detached action”
according to Sreekumar(2012, 310):

Moreover, the two consequences of*lokasaṃgraha*and*mokṣa*can be
brought about only if the agent performs in a detached fashion the
particular duties assigned to him or her by the rules of the
caste-system: rules which are themselves justified by the fact that, if
they are performed in the right, detached fashion, they will bring
about, simultaneously and inevitably, the beneficial consequences both
of*lokasaṃgraha*for the world and*mokṣa*for the agent’s*ātman*.
This means that the theory assumed by the Argument from Detached Action
\[of Kṛṣṇa\] is a rule-consequentialism.

What I gather from Sreekumar’s argument is that our actions result in
consequences. If we perform our actions without detachment, they create
good consequences for ourselves and others. We are indeed living under
different rules, and to perform detached actions is not the same as in
Arjuna’s context. However, when in doubt, we may think about the
consequences of our actions. Without attachment, we can perhaps be aware
that our actions can bring about wellness for ourselves and the world
even in difficult circumstances and then decide what dharma is.

**Bibliography**

Gandhi, Mohandas. 2011.*The Bhagavad Gita According to
Gandhi.*Translated byMahadev Desai. Blacksburg, Wilder Publications,
Inc.

Sreekumar, Sandeep. 2012. “An Analysis of Consequentialism and
Deontology in the Normative Ethics of the Bhagavadgītā.”*Journal of
Indian Philosophy*40 (3): 277–315. doi:10.1007/s10781-012-9154-3.
