+++
title = "“Agents of Unending"
full_title = "“Agents of Unending Change A Buddhist Approach to Identity” by Jonathan C Gold, Princeton"
date = "2020-11-09"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/09/agents-of-unending-change-a-buddhist-approach-to-identity-by-jonathan-c-gold-princeton/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/09/agents-of-unending-change-a-buddhist-approach-to-identity-by-jonathan-c-gold-princeton/).

“Agents of Unending Change: A Buddhist Approach to Identity” by Jonathan C. Gold, Princeton

Hi all!

I want to invite you to a virtual talk, which I co-organized, by
**Jonathan C. Gold, Associate Professor of Religion at Princeton
University** on **Friday, 13 November 2020, 4:00 PM – 5:00 PMEST
(GMT-5)**

**Abstract:** Buddhist thought provides a meta-identity theory.
Doctrines such as dependent origination, emptiness, and karma can be
used to theorize the ethics of adopting and ascribing socio-cultural
identities. Professor Gold will argue in defense of a cultural reading
of the doctrine of karma, and a karmic reading of culture. The
cumulative, recursive, identity-forming nature of karmic causality under
this view helps us discern otherwise occluded ethical implications of
our actions. While we ordinarily think of ourselves as individual
“agents,” a karmic perspective helps to enliven the idea of an “agent”
as someone who “acts on behalf of” someone or something. It shows how,
in all of our thoughts and actions, we are working on behalf of cultural
forces that we often fail to see or understand. This provides a moral
motivation for critical historical/cultural studies, which entails the
exploration of the total assemblage of our karmic affordances and
potentials, our “storehouse” (ālaya) of identities.

This event is organized by **Society for Buddhist Studies, Cornell
University**, and funded by the GPSA and generously co-sponsored by the
Department of Asian Studies, the Department of Religious Studies, the
South Asia Program, and the Southeast Asia Program, Cornell University.

**All are welcome to attend, and a Zoom link will be available upon
registering. To register, click the link here:**
<http://cglink.me/r834499>
