+++
title = "4–7ys fellowships"
full_title = "4–7ys fellowships leading to permanent position at Oxford University!"
date = "2020-11-17"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/17/4-7ys-fellowships-leading-to-permanent-position-at-oxford-university/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/17/4-7ys-fellowships-leading-to-permanent-position-at-oxford-university/).

4–7ys fellowships leading to permanent position at Oxford University!

**Future Leaders Fellowships: Indian Philosophy and Mediaeval Islamic
Philosophy, University of Oxford**

**Call for expressions of interest**

The**Faculty of Philosophy at the University of Oxford**seeks
expressions of interest from potential applicants in the field of Indian
Philosophy, and in the field of Mediaeval Islamic Philosophy, to the
UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship scheme
(<https://www.ukri.org/opportunity/future-leaders-fellowships-round-6/>).
The Faculty hopes to support one or more applicants in these areas in
the current round of the scheme.

The Future Leaders Fellowship is of four years’ duration, it allows the
possibility of extension for up to a further three years, and it will
come with a college association. At the end of the fellowship, the
Faculty intends to create new permanent posts, with a corresponding Area
of Specialisation, which the holder of the Future Leaders Fellowship
will be eligible to apply for. The intended start date for the
Fellowships is October 2021.

The Faculty intends these Fellowships to play a key role in broadening
the areas of research and teaching currently pursued within philosophy
in Oxford, whilst retaining connection and dialogue with our existing
areas of strength in research and teaching
(<https://www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk/research>;<https://www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk/undergraduate/courses>).

Potential applicants should have an ambitious research programme in
Indian Philosophy or in Mediaeval Islamic Philosophy which is suitable
for development over four or more years, and they should have an
interest in developing their subject-area both in terms of research and
in teaching in Oxford.

Applicants should hold, or be close to completion of, a doctoral degree
(PhD or DPhil) in philosophy or a closely related subject. In addition
to outstanding potential for research in the relevant area, they should
either already have, or show evidence of the commitment and potential to
acquire during the course of the Fellowship, the ability to contribute
to elements of the core undergraduate philosophy curriculum in Oxford
(see<https://www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk/course-descriptions-first-public-examination-fpe>;<https://www.philosophy.ox.ac.uk/course-descriptions-finals#collapse390701>for
an outline of the curriculum).

We request expressions of interest by**Midday UK time (GMT) on Friday
27 November 2020**to<admin@philosophy.ox.ac.uk>.

Expressions of interest should contain**a full up-to-date CV (including
as relevant teaching experience and interests) and a brief outline
statement (no longer than 500 words) of the proposed programme of
research.****Please include links to your strongest piece, or pieces,
of research, published or otherwise, and if possible, please request a
referee (or referees) who is (are) able to comment on the strength of
your research to send a letter of reference by the same date**. We will
contact successful candidates no later than 4 December, in order to meet
the UKRI scheme’s initial deadline of 10 December. We will work with
successful candidates to develop their full application in time for the
final UKRI deadline of 19 January 2021.

If you have any questions, please contact the Chair of the Philosophy
Faculty Board, Professor Chris Timpson
(<christopher.timpson@bnc.ox.ac.uk>)
