+++
title = "Bultmann for Buddhists"
full_title = "Bultmann for Buddhists"
date = "2020-11-15"
upstream_url = "https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/15/bultmann-for-buddhists/"

+++
Source: [here](https://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/11/15/bultmann-for-buddhists/).

Bultmann for Buddhists

The world picture of the Buddhist Pali Canon is a mythical world
picture. The world is made up of 31 planes of existence, divided into a
formless realm, a fine material realm and a sensory realm. In the
formless realm dwell purely mental beings; in the fine material realm
dwell most of the *deva*s (gods, angels). Some *deva*s also inhabit the
higher planes of the sensory realm; we humans live in the middle planes;
and in the lower planes we find the hungry ghosts (*preta*s) and hell
dwellers. Life is a cosmic cycle of death and rebirth between these
planes, with movement upward and downward determined by the good or bad
nature of one’s actions within each plane. The results of these actions
affect not only the circumstances of our new birth, but also our actions
and mental states in the new life, which reflect the previous ones. All
of this takes place on a cyclical time scale of endless recurrence, of
decline followed by renewal and more decline: once upon a time human
beings lived for 80 000 years, and their lack of virtue slowly reduced
this, so that now their lifespan is merely a hundred, and it will
eventually decline to ten.

All of this is mythological talk, and the individual motifs may be
traced to the contemporary mythology of Jainism and the Upaniṣads.
Insofar as it is mythological talk it is incredible to men and women
today because for them the mythical world picture is a thing of the
past. Therefore, contemporary Buddhist proclamation is faced with the
question of whether, when it invites faith from men and women, it
expects them to acknowledge this mythical world picture of the past. If
this is impossible, it then has to face the question whether the Pali
Canon’s proclamation has a truth that is independent of the mythical
world picture, in which case it would be the task of Buddhist theology
to demythologize the Buddhist proclamation.

The words above are not mine. I have pulled these two paragraphs
directly from the beginning of *[New Testament and
Mythology](https://www.amazon.com/New-Testament-Mythology-Rudolf-Bultmann/dp/0800624424)*,
by the 20th-century German Protestant theologian Rudolf Bultmann, and
simply replaced what is specifically Christian with Buddhist concepts.
But I think Bultmann’s argument stands just as well when it is
transposed into a Buddhist key.

![Rudolf
Bultmann](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a0/Rudolf_Bultmann_Portrait.jpg)

I [referred to
Bultmann](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/naturalizing-buddhism-and-other-traditions/)
within my debate with Evan Thompson in order to explain why I am not a
“Buddhist exceptionalist” (and [Thompson accepted this
explanation](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/06/09/cherry-picking-the-bodhi-tree-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/)).
I believe the core teachings of Buddhism to be truer than those of
Christianity, but I do think that Buddhists face very similar issues to
Christians in defending our tradition in the modern world. And, overall,
I think the Christians have done a better job of this so far for the
simple reason that they’ve had a lot longer to think about it, living in
the places where modernity began. We Buddhists have a lot to learn from
the Bultmanns of the world.

Specifically, if we are to be Buddhists with open eyes, we need to
figure out how to deal with the elements in our tradition that are
plainly
[unscientific](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2010/10/from-supernatural-to-unscientific/).
Those elements are what Bultmann means by “myth”. He says he uses the
concept of myth “in the sense in which it is customarily used in the
science of history and of religion.” (In my experience in the 21st
century that is no longer the custom in religious studies, but perhaps
that is to the field’s detriment.) That is, for Bultmann, “Mythical
thinking is the opposite of scientific thinking”, for it is “the report
of an occurrence or an event in which supernatural, superhuman forces
are at work…” (“On the problem of demythologizing”, 95) But science, in
Greek terms, replaces *mythos* with *logos*; science provides rational
explanations, specifically explanations based on systematic examination
of evidence, and those explanations give us reason to no longer take
myths literally.

So what do we do about that? I don’t find as much to learn from in the
details of Bultmann’s applying his method, which are much more specific
to the New Testament and Christianity. And that’s probably a *good*
thing; Buddhism and Christianity are very different from each other, and
if we were going to say the same concrete things about each of their
messages, we’d run the risk of losing what is most important in both.
But I think there’s a lot to learn from in Bultmann’s method itself.
Especially: Bultmann is concerned to remain a Christian *theologian*
despite his commitment to scientific thinking. He wants to retain his
*faith*, [just as I
do](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/why-i-am-a-buddhist/). (It
is for that reason that I am happy to retain the terms “Buddhist
theology” and “theologian”, as put forth in the [2000
book](https://www.amazon.com/Buddhist-Theology-Critical-Reflections-Contemporary/dp/0700712038),
even though the literal meaning of “theology” is obviously inappropriate
for Buddhists.)

And so I find it valuable when Bultmann says his “criticism of the
biblical writings lies not in eliminating mythological statements but in
interpreting them; it is not a process of subtraction but a
hermeneutical method.” (99) It is this approach, of not eliminating but
interpreting, that is involved in the project of [naturalizing
karma](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/the-workings-of-karma-naturalized-and-otherwise/).
So I already [cited
Bultmann](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/naturalizing-buddhism-and-other-traditions/)
as a methodological exemplar in my debate with Evan Thompson on that
subject, but I have wanted to make it clearer what I’m drawing from him.
(Nishitani Keiji, [whom Thompson proclaims his sympathy
for](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/04/25/clarifying-why-i-am-not-a-buddhist-a-response-to-amod-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
also explicitly takes Bultmann as an inspiration.)

Bultmann was criticized by [Walter
Kaufmann](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter_Kaufmann_(philosopher)),
the Nietzsche scholar whose translations are still used today.
Kaufmann’s [The Faith of a
Heretic](https://muse.jhu.edu/book/46459#:~:text=Originally%20published%20in%201959%2C%20The,of%20his%20views%20on%20religion.)
has a chapter entitled “Against theology”, which specifically takes
Bultmann as its target. Kaufmann says, in italics, “*Where the heretic
would say No, the theologian interprets*” (114); he urges us instead to
“let one’s No be a No.” As I understand them, Thompson’s criticisms
align quite closely with Kaufmann’s: in Thompson’s eyes, what I am
advocating is [not really
karma](http://indianphilosophyblog.org/2020/08/11/losing-the-thread-a-response-to-lele-guest-post-by-evan-thompson/),
and therefore rather than claiming to interpret karma, I should just say
no to it.

I’ve previously tried to
[explain](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/05/naturalizing-buddhism-and-other-traditions/)
[the](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/09/when-does-karma-stop-being-karma/)
[continuities](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/09/is-the-eudaimonist-proposition-true/)
I see between my approach to karma and the traditional ones –the reason
why I do consider my approach an interpretation. But the point I want to
make here is about the method, the reason *why* one would seek to
interpret in such a continuous way – rather than taking the easier path
of simply saying No to the tradition, which Kaufmann and (I think)
Thompson urge. When one has reason to have faith –that is, when the
tradition’s authority has proved trustworthy in the past –one extends
that trust by trying to say No as little as possible. But one does not
want to do so blindly, in the face of scientific evidence or of one’s
other commitments. And so one interprets – one naturalizes.

I do suspect that the process of naturalizing may actually be somewhat
easier for Buddhists than for Christians. This is because I think
[cosmology is overall much less important to
Buddhism](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2017/12/whose-religion-which-science/)
than to Christianity; Buddhism’s focus, rather, is on psychology.
(Thompson might challenge me on that point, since it is indeed
*possible* to view karma as a cosmological concept; but I think I’ve
[made my case for an alternative
interpretation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/06/an-index-to-the-thompson-lele-correspondence/).)
The psychological focus does generate problems of its own, when
traditional Buddhist texts say things that *contradict* modern
psychology, but it seems to me that those cases may still be *easier* to
interpret in scientific terms than are the kinds of outlandish
cosmological claims with which I began this post and with which Bultmann
begins his book.

Relatedly, a significant concern about demythologizing should be that
the sort of liberal Christianity in which Bultmann’s demythologizing
figures [has not done very well for
itself](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2012/05/the-christianity-that-changes-is-the-one-that-dies/).
Once people have abandoned Christian myth, it seems, they are likely to
abandon Christianity entirely. So the question is a live and important
one: will the same thing happen to a demythologized, or naturalized,
Buddhism? Time will tell, of course. But it seems to me that the signs
for demythologized Buddhism might be more promising than they are for
demythologized Christianity. The massive [popularity of mindfulness
meditation](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2019/09/on-mindfulness/), in
particular, indicates what a powerful chord Buddhist teachings have
struck for people who have no inclination to believe in old Buddhist
cosmology in any literal sense.

[Cross-posted on Love of All
Wisdom.](http://loveofallwisdom.com/blog/2020/11/bultmann-for-buddhists)
