+++
title = "Federal University"
full_title = "Federal University"
date = "2016-03-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/03/30/federal-university/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/03/30/federal-university/).

Federal University

College costs – real costs, in constant dollars – are about 2.5 times
higher than they were were in 1965. And a higher fraction of those costs
are dumped on the students, which means that it’s easy to graduate with
a buttload of debt, which is particularly serious if your degree is not
economically valuable, which is all too common. Since a high fraction of
even those degrees that do get you hired are still useless, in terms of
increasing factor productivity, this is a big burden on society as a
whole.

If, as a pilot program, an example, the government set up a new
university, mindlessly copying a decent state school from that golden
era, like Berkeley or Wisconsin (or maybe from a bit earlier, since we
probably want to avoid riots too), I doubt if it would cost a lot more.
All those extra administrative personnel? Just don’t hire them. We could
manage this by making the project top secret (actually, special access)
– that lets you violate a lot of the useless bureaucratic rules, rather
like being Uber.

Some things might cost more. If you want a medical school, you have to
pay the professors competitive salaries (and MDs make much more than
they did back in those days). But then, we could used taped lectures,
online courses, etc.

It probably wouldn’t work for long, since politicians would be
irresistibly temped to add on useless crap, like preferential admission
for Skoptys, or whatever they’re called nowadays.

