+++
title = "Economics old and new"
full_title = "Economics old and new"
date = "2016-03-08"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/03/08/economics-old-and-new/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/03/08/economics-old-and-new/).

Economics old and new

When I reviewed *Hive Mind,* I mentioned that its thesis ‘IQ matters for
national prosperity’ was more true today than it had been in, say, 1970,
because of the fall of Communism, which was quite capable of making a
country – even a smarter-than-average country – a lot poorer than it
otherwise would have been. If you consider other circumstances, for
example far earlier times, IQ mattered even less. If you look at a
near-Malthusian society, one in which population size is near the
carrying capacity (as set by the current knowledge and available
resources), average IQ shouldn’t influence prosperity (in terms of food
availability) at all. A smarter society might have more elaborate forms
of entertainment, might have more sophisticated tools and crafts, but as
long as technological progress (that affecting food production) was
slower than population growth, no improvement. A higher standard of
living is a short-run outcome of disasters like the Black Death.

And other changes mattered as well. Today countries with no significant
natural resources can be very successful, if they have high human
capital. Sometimes they can achieve this by pursuing strategies that
don’t require much in terms of traditional natural resources –
insurance, finance, and software are good examples. In some cases,
countries with abundant human capital have found ways to fake up
effective equivalents for traditionally-necessary natural resources. The
most important example is the Haber-Bosch method of making ammonia:
another is the development of mass production of synthetic rubber by the
United States and Germany in WWII. This kind of substitution has become
increasing possible over time.

In a world where transportation costs are low, international trade is
fairly free (a function of political environment: not true in 1942!), a
country can develop industries that require natural resources that don’t
exist locally at all. So Japan could have a big steel industry, even
though Japan has only a little low-grade coal and no significant iron
ores. That is, it can if it has sufficient human capital. Japan does:
many countries don’t.

Although it once had little effect on living standards,average national
IQ now has a big influence. The world changed. Of course, it’s going to
change again.

