+++
title = "the Maxim gun"
full_title = "the Maxim gun"
date = "2016-03-30"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/03/30/the-maxim-gun/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2016/03/30/the-maxim-gun/).

the Maxim gun

Now and then I contemplate the possible outcomes if the United States
got really, really angry, say at jihadists, if they went too far and
struck a nerve. Crazed fury. Jihadists seem to think that enraging the
western powers is strategically sensible, but they might be wrong. I’m
not talking about little things like the invasion of Iraq or
Afghanistan: no, I mean *really* angry. You should picture Uncle Sam
turning green and bursting out of his Uncle Sam suit (fortunately he
wears highly stretchable purple undies).

There’s the old reliable, nuclear weapons. There wouldn’t be a lot left
of the Arab world, especially when you consider little tactical
enhancers like blowing up the Aswan Dam, or nuking a nuclear reactor.
You could simply drop enough medium-life-time radioactive dust to make a
region uninhabitable for months, or years, or decades, making the Haj
pretty difficult.

Even semi-conventional war could become lot more intense: we haven’t
done fire raids lately, but we still can (B52s can carry a huge
payload). It’s hard to make laser weapons work for most purposes
(atmospheric transmission) – but it’s easy to make ones that blind.
We’re working on smart bullets: right now you have to fire thousands per
hit, but that’s going to change.

Nerve gas? effective.

Germ warfare? Amazing things are now possible: we could probably tailor
agents to hit particular ethnic groups (there is always leakage: I’m not
saying that we wouldn’t get our hair mussed.) . They could kill –
swiftly, or agonizingly slowly, They might trigger Creuzfeldt-Jakob
disease: not just for cannibals, anymore. You might see agents that
cause insanity, or sterility, or damn-foolishness(hmmmmm). Once CRISPR
goes to war, you would see agents that cause germ-line genetic changes –
nasty changes with built-in genetic drive that spread to the whole
population.

