+++
title = "Podcast countdown to"
full_title = "Podcast countdown to 2021 day 1, Shadi Hamid"
date = "2020-12-26"
upstream_url = "https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-1-shadi"

+++
Source: [here](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-1-shadi).

Podcast countdown to 2021 - day 1, Shadi Hamid



![](https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/w_1456,c_limit,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F868ba08e-ac6e-4ffd-8cc9-b854325bd014_600x600.jpeg)

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

[Share](https://razib.substack.com/p/podcast-countdown-to-2021-day-1-shadi?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email&utm_content=share&action=share)

This past week I recorded two podcast episodes I'm particularly looking
forward to sharing with you.

First, I had a long chat with [Armand
Leroi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armand_Marie_Leroi). Any chance I
get to talk to him I come away wondering why he isn't everywhere, all
the time. Leroi’s [Mutants: On Genetic Variety and the Human
Body](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00AFYEM5U/geneexpressio-20)
is one of the most elegantly written works of scientific narrative from
the 2000’s. Even so, Iwas surprised to pick up his next book in the
2010’s and discover a beautifully illustrated, historically rich tome,
[The Lagoon: How Aristotle Invented
Science](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00INIXJL8/geneexpressio-20).
Armand has mad range. In the course of 1 hour and 20-minutes, we discuss
*C. elgans*, personal genomics, eugenics, race, the future directions of
Leroi’s scholarly work, and the intellectual and cultural climate of the
2020’s.

My other conversation was with the understandably very in-demand [Alina
Chan](https://twitter.com/Ayjchan?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor).
I've been asking Alina to carve out a little time for a chat for weeks
because she’s been at the center of the discussion of [an important
scientific
topic](https://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/2020/09/09/alina-chan-broad-institute-coronavirus/)
over the last six months, the origin of SARS-CoV-2. Alina downplays her
bravery, but her relentless commitment to uncovering the verifiable
truth, whether it be good, bad, inconvenient, or ugly, really sets her
apart in 2020. She's well [worth a
follow](https://twitter.com/Ayjchan?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor)
and I look forward to seeing how her career unfolds. Her spirit gives me
hope.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As this year winds down, I'm counting my blessings, including the chance
to have logged hundreds of podcasts over the past few years with
fascinating people in a huge range of fields. Many of these
conversations are just as relevant and compelling as they were when they
first went live. With that in mind, **I'm going to count down to the new
year here by re-releasing a favorite past episode from the archives of
my other podcast homes each day until 2021.** Hope you'll discover a
memorable voice or two you might have missed before.

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Today, I bring you a conversation I had with [Shadi
Hamid](https://twitter.com/shadihamid) in March of 2019 for the [Brown
Pundits](https://www.brownpundits.com/) podcast**. The world is so
unimaginably different a year and a half later so I was gratified to
find it’s still a fresh listen. In the 1 hour and 45-minute
conversation, Shadi talks about his background (Egyptian, Muslim,
American), his professional interests (the Middle East), and his status
as a mildly non-woke American-of-color.

Despite our political difference (Shadi’s left to my right) and
opposition on religious views (Shadi’s Islam to my atheism), we have
always gotten along and been able to have a conversation because of our
commitment to the pluralism of views. Shadi is an adherent to a very
old-fashioned cultural liberalism predicated on the marketplace of
ideas. You may disagree with him on something, and I do on many topics,
but he is always open to engagement. He takes on all comers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

And if you missed them in the busy runup to the holidays, here is my
series of five quick pieces from this past week

[The Age of Genetic Engineering
Begins](https://razib.substack.com/p/the-age-of-genetic-engineering-begins)

[The Original Chinese
Man](https://razib.substack.com/p/3000-years-of-chinese-history)

[Applying IQ to IQ](https://razib.substack.com/p/applying-iq-to-iq)

[Your Roots are
Showing](https://razib.substack.com/p/your-roots-are-showing)

[In Gods We Trusted](https://razib.substack.com/p/in-god-we-trusted)

*One reason I shared this sampler of my writing was to leave those
considering a [subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?)
plenty of time to grab one at Substack’s lowest rates b**efore I adjust
the pricing upward in the new year.***

**Subscribe**

[Give a gift
subscription](https://razib.substack.com/subscribe?&gift=true)

