+++
title = "How to be different"
full_title = "How to be different"
date = "2017-12-19"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/12/19/how-to-be-different/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2017/12/19/how-to-be-different/).

How to be different

Lewontin argued that there is more genetic variation within human
populations than between them, so they can’t really be very different.
Of course that’s bullshit: humans have the second-largest morphological
variation of any mammal, behind only dogs. How do you get significant
phenotypic differences between populations when there isn’t much Fst
between them?

One way (at the extreme) is to have a single allele, one that does a
lot, vary strongly between populations: at the limit, be fixed in one
and nonexistent in the other. There are not a lot of alleles like this
in humans, but it happens. EDAR 370A is almost fixed in Northeast Asia,
almost nonexistent in Europe and Africa: it results in thicker scalp
hair, more numerous sweat glands, smaller breasts, funny teeth, and
changes in the shape of the ears and chin. Just one allele: it would not
show up noticeably in Fst.

The way at the other extreme consists of small, systematic differences
in the frequencies of many alleles that affect a particular trait.
Suppose that 100 alleles influence height – there are plus and minus
versions of those alleles, with the plus versions slightly increasing
height while the minus versions slightly decreasing height. A
systematic, smallish increase in the fraction of plus variants would
make a population average taller: quite possibly a lot taller. But this
only involves differences in a tiny fraction of the entire genome – the
GWAS hits for height – so again, no noticeable change in Fst. You get
these correlated changes from natural selection. For that matter, sweeps
like EDAR 370A are also products of natural selection.

According to Lewontin’s argument, Pygmies couldn’t really be hugely
shorter than most other human populations. Yet they are short (five or
six stds shorter), while Lewontin’s Fst argument is simply wrong. In
fact the existence of Pygmies automatically disproved Lewontin’s
argument, whether we understood the exact genetic basis or not.
Counterexamples do that.

Understanding the genetic basis of the phenotypic differences between
populations can often tell us something about the causes of those
differences – for example the time frame.. You’d expect that the main
lactose-tolerance alleles aren’t terribly old, since domestication of
milk-giving animals happened relatively recently (within the last 10,000
years or so) . And they’re not terribly old. On the other hand,
adaptations to cold and high altitude might be very old, even going back
to archaic humans – and some are. Of course the phenotypic differences
exist (and sometimes matter) even if we don’t understand the past
selective pressures that created them.

