+++
title = "Notes from the class"
full_title = "Notes from the class struggle"
date = "2018-08-14"
upstream_url = "https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/14/notes-from-the-class-struggle/"

+++
Source: [here](https://westhunt.wordpress.com/2018/08/14/notes-from-the-class-struggle/).

Notes from the class struggle

Suppose that 90% of people are farmers, and 10% are in other
occupations, occupations that on the whole have greater prestige and
remuneration. Like being a tailor, or a banker, or a king.

There is reason to think that those upper classes , in most societies
have somewhat higher intelligence – and somewhat higher genetic
potential for intelligence. More complex jobs.

If we were examining the family background of people of unusual
intelligence – say prominent mathematicians – we might notice that the
upper 10% was over-represented among their parents. Partly, this would
be because those more prosperous people were able to pay for books,
higher education, etc. But their average higher genetic potential for
intelligence also mattered.

Since the fraction of individuals that exceed a high standard drops off
rapidly as the cutoff increases, it is even possible for the upper class
to produce more people exceeding the cutoff than than the bottom 90% of
the population, if the cutoff is high enough. So, the typical
world-class European mathematician was likely to have a pretty bourgeois
background, even though those bourgeois were a small fraction of the
population. It was partly educational advantage from more money, but it
wasn’t just that.

Consider running ability: a small population with higher average running
ability may produce runners better than the best from a very large
population ( one village in Ethiopia vs all of China).

Gauss was anomalous – about as anomalous as a kid two feet taller than
his parents.







